* 0921685
* Instrumental and Experimental Analysis of Scottish Gaelic (Gaidhlig; gla)  Sound Structures
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Michael Hammond, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 08/31/2012
* USD 287,741.00

As many as 20 million Americans claim to be of Scottish or Scots/Irish descent.
One of the primary heritage languages of this community is Scottish Gaelic. This
language is the medium for a rich culture of literature, song, poetry, history
and indigenous knowledge-systems. It also provides an important window into the
world-view and culture of the ancestors of the Scottish-American community.
Sadly, the Scottish Gaelic language is severely endangered. There are no
monolingual speakers and, in Scotland, the number of speakers who use the
language everyday has dropped more than a third in the past 30 years. At this
rate, the language will no longer be viable within a generation. The potential
loss to our understanding of the culture and background of so many Scots and
Scottish Americans is of great concern. The Scottish Gaelic language is also of
interest to linguists who study the structure of language. The sound system of
Gaelic is very different from that of English. It has particular sounds and
patterns of sound combinations that are rare or unique in the world's languages.
Because linguists seek to understand the fundamental patterns that hold of
languages in general it is necessary to look to languages like Scottish
Gaelic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interests of Scottish Gaelic speakers and
scientific linguists intersect in this domain. In order for linguists to
properly understand the sound system of a language, they have to use
instrumental measures of how speakers articulate sounds and use psycholinguistic
experiments to measure how speakers understand and use the patterns of sounds.
The patterns in commonly spoken languages like English and Spanish has been
relatively well studied but the sound systems of lesser spoken languages with
rare sounds, such as Gaelic, are less often addressed. On the other side of the
coin, for the speakers of the language, one of the first steps towards building
a stable linguistic community is to develop language teaching materials in and
about the language for use by the community, both in the USA and in Scotland.
Using modern linguistic instrumental and psycholinguistic techniques. Profs.
Andrew Carnie, Mike Hammond, Diana Archangeli and Natasha Warner along with
Scottish Gaelic native speaker Muriel Fisher will investigate the articulation,
patterning and perception of certain unique properties of the Gaelic sound
system. For example, using an ultrasound placed under the chin, they will
measure the position of the tongue during the pronunciation of certain
consonants and vowels. Similarly, they will ask speakers to speak while wearing
a special mask that measures how much air is coming through their nose and
mouth. The output of this research will be a description of the Gaelic sounds
structures which will help complete an on-going description of the language. In
addition, in doing this research graduate students will be trained in the
techniques of sound analysis of an endangered language. This training will allow
the students to do similar work on other endangered heritage languages. This
work has important implications for documenting and preserving the linguistic
traditions of the Scottish and Scottish-American communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;