* 0921449
* "LiT":  Regulation of 5-Aminolevulinic Acid Biosynthesis in the Bacterium Rhodobacter sphaeroides
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2009,09/30/2013
* George Bullerjahn, Bowling Green State University
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 09/30/2013
* USD 470,250.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-15).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
merit&lt;br/&gt;Tetrapyrroles are essential biomolecules required for metabolism
in all organisms. They form the basis of heme moieties, which act in energy-
generating electron transfer reactions, and they also form the core of
chlorophylls, which perform the major light harvesting function in
photosynthesis. Thus, tetrapyrroles are indispensable for energy transformations
in living systems. The proposed research investigates an important step in
tetrapyrrole biosynthesis, the biosynthesis of the precursor molecule
5-aminolevulinic acid (ALA). The activity and regulation of two ALA synthase
genes, hemA and hemT will be studied in the bacterium Rhodobacter sphaeroides,
which is capable of harvesting both chemical and light energy and can fix both
carbon and nitrogen, all processes which require tetrapyrroles. The ability to
grow using distinct metabolic programs allows this organism to optimally utilize
environmental resources, and not surprisingly its metabolism is exquisitely
regulated in response to the environment. The proposed research will investigate
regulation of hemA and hemT, including the role of novel sigma factor SigT,
which is involved in hemT transcription. The significance of the presence of
these two different ALA synthases as they relate to growth conditions will be
tested. Experiments involve basic bacterial molecular genetics and biochemistry.
The proposed studies will provide new insights into how organisms use genetic
flexibility to adapt to different environments. In addition, fundamental
information will be gained about regulation of gene expression and metabolism of
a pathway that no doubt has been critical to the evolution of life on
earth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The difference in color of
R. sphaeroides growing aerobically vs. photosynthetically provides an
extraordinarily convincing demonstration of specific gene regulation. These
visually observable metabolic changes in response to the environment continue to
pique the curiosity and interest students. Over 38 students, the vast majority
of whom are women, have worked in the lab where they have learned first-hand why
basic research is important and worthwhile; nearly all have remained in science,
leaving no doubt of the broader outcomes that can emerge from the proposed
investigations. Support for this research will remain a cornerstone to quality
classroom and lab instruction; students have self-reported being acquainted with
state-of-the-art science made them more competitive for graduate and
professional programs. ALA has agricultural and medical uses. Its economical
production by anoxygenic phototrophic organisms has been of interest throughout
the world for many years. A clearer understanding of its regulated formation and
the enzymes involved, as well as energy metabolism in these cells, has and will
continue to remove existing impediments to improvements in its production.