* 0922997
* MRI: Acquisition of a Physical Property Measurement System for Materials Science Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2011
* John Philip, Catholic University of America
* Standard Grant
* Sean Jones
* 09/30/2011
* USD 401,201.00

0922997 Philip Catholic U.

Technical Abstract

The Catholic University of America (CUA) will acquire a new Physical property
measurement system (PPMS) with AC magnetometry and vibrating sample magnetometer
options to be shared with researchers at Howard University and Virginia
Commonwealth University. The PPMS will be able to measure a variety of physical
properties, over a range of temperatures from 2.0 - 400 K, and with magnetic
fields up to 7 Tesla. The EverCool dewar completely avoids the need for liquid
He transfers and to minimize helium loss from the PPMS under most operating
conditions. There is automatic control of the He gas input to replenish what is
lost over time and to automatically maintain optimal liquid helium levels in the
dewar. The instrument provides for measurement of the magnetic moment, AC
susceptibility, electrical transport, magnetoresistance and Hall effect. The
acquisition of this instrument will enable: the investigation of spin injection
and detection in semiconducting channels such as Si and Ge as well as the
effects of interfaces on efficient spin transfer into these channels; the
investigation of the large spin-dependent transport properties observed in Si-
based nanowires; the study of ferromagnetic nanowires composed of FeGa for a
wide range of defense and industrial applications as transducers and sensors;
understanding the fundamental physics of the magnetite at the nanoscale;
characterizing new spin crossover complexes that are of great interest as
molecular memory devices or switches; and the development of ferromagnetic
bioceramics for new bioimplants especially for bone and also for treating
various diseases and delivering drugs. The acquisition of this instrument will
greatly enhance our present capabilities and add a new dimension to materials
research at CUA. It will also have an impact on the new initiatives in nano-
biomaterials and in materials science. This new facility will bring together
researchers from different areas, leading to an exchange of ideas and new joint
research projects and will serve as a catalyst for further expansion in CUA?s
science and engineering programs and greater collaboration with Universities in
and around the District of Columbia.

Non-technical Abstract

The advancement and understanding of materials properties are critical for
developing novel next generation electronic, magnetic and spin electronic
devices. The medical field also now depends greatly on innovative and nanoscale
materials and devices for bioimplants, drug delivery and newer treatment
options. Researchers at the Catholic University of America are actively involved
in investigating the electronic and magneto-transport properties of nanoscale
devices, nanoparticles, biomaterials and inorganic complexes. The acquisition of
a Physical Property Measurement System with AC magnetometry and Vibrating Sample
Magnetometer options will allow multiple users within the science and
engineering departments to have access to electrical, magnetic and magneto-
transport measurements of materials and devices. Understanding the material and
the nanoscale device properties are crucial for advanced technologies that will
drive our future economy. This instrument is an essential tool used to study,
characterize and evaluate materials with a wide range of properties. It will be
used to guide the scientists at the Catholic University in their efforts to
design new nanoscale devices that will employ electron spin states to store and
process information, which will pave a foundation for a dramatic improvement in
computing and a new generation of low power consuming, highly dense and fast
electronic circuits. Also understanding the fundamental physics at the nanoscale
of certain magnetic materials (oxides of iron) are vital for new technological
advances in the biomedical industry especially for bioimplants and drug
delivery. It will also help researchers to investigate new materials called spin
crossover complexes, which are of great interest as molecular memory devices or
switches and when fully understood could lead to significant advances in the
miniaturization of electronic and computer components. This instrument will
provide the foundation for collaborative efforts among greater Washington area
universities such as Catholic, Howard and Virginia Commonwealth University. It
will be also used to train future generations of scientists through
undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral research. The new capability will also
help to expand our efforts in training minority and under-represented high
school students from DC metro area.