* 0922929
* MRI: Acquisition of an Ultrafast Laser System for Terahertz Spectroscopy and Sub-Picosecond Dynamics
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Elisabeth Papazoglou, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 09/30/2012
* USD 332,291.00

0922929&lt;br/&gt;Baxter&lt;br/&gt;Drexel U.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary: THz radiation (0.1?10 x1012 Hz, ë~30µm?3mm) bridges the gap between
electronics and visible/infrared optics and is a frontier region of scientific
inquiry in physics, chemistry, biology, medicine, materials science, and
engineering. However, there is a significant barrier to entry into THz science
because of the required expertise and capital equipment. Accessible user
facilities would transform THz science by enabling all new investigators to
quickly acquire data without the need for specialized collaborations or access
to accelerators. Toward that end, the PIs propose to acquire an ultrafast laser
system for research and education in terahertz spectroscopy and sub-picosecond
dynamics. The laser system will be housed in Drexel University?s Centralized
Research Facilities, and it will be operated as the first bench-scale THz user
facility in the nation. This laser system provides a combination of (1) access
to THz radiation, (2) spectroscopy with sub-picosecond time resolution, and (3)
a continuously tunable pulsed light source from UV to mid-IR. The laser source
will be combined with different detection systems to enable terahertz time
domain spectroscopy (THz-TDS), time-resolved terahertz spectroscopy (TRTS), and
UV/Visible/IR transient absorption (TA). The system will provide critical data
for multidisciplinary projects in many areas of national interest, including
renewable energy, high-speed electronics, sensors, and medical diagnostics. The
PIs? major projects include investigation of: (1) Electron transport and
interfacial electron transfer in nanostructured semiconductors for solar cell
applications, (2) THz detection via collective excitation of confined charge,
(3) Complex oxide nanostructures and the role of molecular adsorbates, (4)
Energy transfer in asymmetrically functionalized nanoparticles, and (5)
Photophysics of quantum dots for medical diagnostics. The instrumentation will
be used in the interdisciplinary education and training of the next generation
of ultrafast and terahertz scientists. This facility will also strengthen
existing outreach programs at Drexel, providing unique learning opportunities to
diverse populations including underrepresented groups, undergraduate students,
and K-12 teachers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Layman Summary: This project will
enable the first bench-scale Terahertz (THz) user facility in the nation through
the acquisition of an ultrafast laser system that will be housed in Drexel
University?s Centralized Research Facilities. The THz frequency region (0.1?10
x1012 Hz) of the electromagnetic spectrum lies at the interface between the
infrared and the microwave regions, and it is ideal for investigating many
different materials, including semiconductors, nanomaterials, proteins, DNA, and
gas phase molecules. Improved understanding of these materials is important to
diverse applications of national interest, including renewable energy, high-
speed electronics, pharmaceuticals, medical diagnostics, and homeland security.
However, THz radiation is difficult to generate and detect, and until now few
scientists have had the facilities and experience to carry out THz experiments.
The proposed user facility will significantly broaden participation in terahertz
research, which will lead to many new and potentially transformative discoveries
and will deepen understanding in a variety of fields. Society will benefit in
many ways from the advances in technology resulting from use of the this
instrument, with initial studies focused on efficient solar cells, faster
computing, security screening, and medical diagnostics. Furthermore, the
instrumentation will be used in the interdisciplinary education and training of
the next generation of scientists, helping the U.S. to remain a leader in
cutting-edge science and technology. This facility will also strengthen existing
outreach programs at Drexel, providing unique learning opportunities to diverse
populations including underrepresented groups, undergraduate students, and K-12
teachers.