* 0922818
* MRI: Acquisition of a Mass Spectrometry Facility for Research, Education and Outreach on Drinking and Ground Water Quality
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Kevin Masarik, University of Wisconsin-Stevens Point
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 07/31/2011
* USD 448,835.00

0922818 McGinley

This proposal is for a mass spectrometry instrument cluster for advancing
drinking and ground water research, education and outreach at the Center for
Watershed Science and Education (CWSE) at the University of Wisconsin-Stevens
Point. Two analytical instruments are requested for this cluster: an Inductively
Coupled Plasma / Mass Spectrometer (ICP/MS) and a Liquid Chromatograph / Mass
Spectrometer (LC/MS). Together, they will allow important advances in inorganic,
and organic contaminant detection, quantification and tracing through hydrologic
systems.

The requested instrument cluster will be a critical addition to a laboratory
that already serves as a regional center for research and analysis on drinking
and ground water contaminant occurrence, and for outreach on linking the impacts
of land use to ground water quality.

The specific research focus for this instrument cluster is characterizing and
understanding the occurrence of a variety of anthropogenic and geochemical
drinking water contaminants in ground water. The instrumentation is necessary to
meet the demands for: 1) lower quantification limits; 2) identification of new
and emerging contaminants; and, 3) incorporation of anthropogenic tracers into
hydrologic pathway evaluation.

The instrument cluster described in the MRI proposal will provide a modern
platform for teaching and outreach. The direct link between these instruments
and improved teaching and outreach ensure that there are important broader
impacts of this instrumentation grant. The equipment will replace older
analytical instruments that have been in the CWSE for more than a decade. The
instrument cluster will be used directly in two courses at one of the largest
natural resource colleges in the U.S. It will become part of undergraduate
research in a laboratory that already emphasizes student use of complex
analytical instrumentation. In addition, the improved analytical capability will
assist an outreach effort that reaches thousands of private well owners annually
with the University of Wisconsin-Extension, and will be important to maintaining
current and building new partnerships with agency and research organizations.