* 0922805
* MRI:   Acquisition of a Libra 120 transmission electron microscope for research enhancement at Skidmore College
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Bernard Possidente, Skidmore College
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 07/31/2013
* USD 664,737.00

The Skidmore Microscopy Imaging Center (SMIC), an institution-wide technology
center, serves multiple research, teaching and outreach initiatives across the
Sciences at Skidmore College. This project provides funding for the purchase of
a new transmission electron microscope (TEM) for SMIC. The new instrument, a
Zeiss Libra 120 TEM, provides enhanced resolution/contrast through its energy
filter system, 3-dimensional analysis through its electron tomography
capabilities, elemental analysis via EELS and rapid digital image capture and
analysis. This instrument enhances research opportunities for Skidmore College
faculty and students, expands teaching and outreach opportunities, establishes a
new collaborative network with Albany Medical College, and builds upon a
collaborative infrastructure with other consortium institutions within the
greater Capital District of New York. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This instrument also
provides significantly enhanced research opportunities for undergraduates in
such areas as plant biology, protistology, microbiology, animal developmental
biology and neuroscience as well paleogeology and physics. This project also
supplements national and international collaborations already established by the
researchers and establishes new and dynamic links between an undergraduate
institution, the regional medical college and other partnering entities in the
Capital District of New York. This instrumentation provides our S3M students
(NSF S-STEM Program) with critical training on state-of-the-art technology as
well as facilitates research competitiveness and opportunities for advanced
training under Skidmore's recently funded NSF ADVANCE Grant. The project also
enhances outreach activities, many of which are focused on educational
enhancement at the K-12 levels in economically disadvantaged schools in Albany,
New York and the Upper Hudson River region. Research supported by this
instrument and derivative teaching materials are made available to the public
via numerous faculty-student presentations at regional and national meetings and
publications as well as the Skidmore College "SMIC" website.