* 0922325
* Incomplete Contracts, Reference Points, and Firms
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2015
* Oliver Hart, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2015
* USD 238,860.00

This award funds work in contract theory. The PI continues his research in the
economic theory of contracts. Lawyers and economists have traditionally thought
of a contract as providing parties with rights and obligations. The PI is
developing a complementary idea: contracts provide reference points that create
a sense of entitlement in each of the contracting parties. A flexible contract
is good in that it allows parties to adjust to an observable but unverifiable
state of the world. However, a flexible contract is bad because it may create
argument about what outcome has occurred. Argument leads to aggrievement, which
causes parties to shirk on non-contractible effort, leading to a loss of
efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI has already used this approach to
analyze the employment relationship and the costs and benefits of vertical
organization. This approach also yields new and more general insight into
internal organization of firms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research can help to
explain why much negotiation inside an organization focuses on working
conditions rather than wages. It also provides new perspectives on the motives
for corporate merges and sheds light on the rules that courts should use to
interpret contracts that are deliberately left incomplete by the contracting
parties.&lt;br/&gt;