* 0922184
* Multiple Systems in Theory of Mind Development
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Alan Leslie, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Laura Namy
* 08/31/2013
* USD 489,289.00

As a species, human beings are distinguished by an advanced social intelligence.
We perceive in ourselves and in others an inner life of goals, fears, hopes,
beliefs, imaginings, and longings. By sharing our inner lives, we cooperate,
compete, and communicate in ways that are impossible for any other species and
that remain a distant dream for even the most advanced computer systems.
Although central to human nature, the ability to share our inner lives only
began to be studied by cognitive psychologists in the 1980's and by
neuroscientists in the 1990's. Many advances have been made since then in
understanding the cognitive and brain bases of what is called our "theory of
mind" ability. Theory-of-mind abilities can be experimentally demonstrated in
typically developing 4-year-old children, while older and otherwise capable
children and adolescents with autism are unable to pass the same tasks. The
severe social and communicative impairments in autism may stem from a failure of
theory of mind to develop in the brain. Although typically developing children
do not generally demonstrate theory-of-mind abilities using traditional tasks
until age four (with younger children failing such tasks), recent evidence
demonstrates that infants show some aspects of this ability when measured with
nonverbal tasks. These seemingly discrepant findings suggest that typically
developing babies may have an unconscious and intuitive version of theory-of-
mind abilities previously associated only with four-year-olds. If so, typical
social development may depend upon the unfolding of a natural theory-of-mind
'instinct' that is expressed first at an intuitive, unconscious, and non-verbal
level in the brain. Failure of developing brain systems to express this early
'instinct' may characterize autistic spectrum disorders. This project
investigates these ideas by using a variety of experimental methods some of
which probe spontaneous, intuitive (or "implicit") responses to social scenarios
such as eye-gaze and looking behaviors, as well as traditional, more
deliberative (or "explicit") measures such as answers to verbal questions about
similar scenarios. Neurologically typical children will be studied in several
age groups, from infants to older preschoolers, as well as children with autism.
Through a multi-population, multi-method approach the project will reveal how
multiple theory-of-mind systems interact in developing brain systems and how
unconscious cognition gradually comes to connect with conscious verbal
knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project integrates research with teaching
and service to the broader community. Post-doctoral, graduate, and undergraduate
students, including minorities and individuals from developing nations, are
fully involved each year. Findings are disseminated not only through scholarly
publications and meetings, but also through public lectures and through old and
new media, including the internet. The project will help uncover the deep roots
of human sociality and, by revealing how it develops, will enrich understanding
of the foundations of human culture, the capacity for education and law, the
social transmission of knowledge, children's and adults' intuitive social sense,
and the nature of autistic spectrum disorders.