* 0922973
* MRI: Acquisition of a 500 MHz NMR Spectrometer to Enhance Faculty and Student Research
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Amy Wilstermann, Calvin University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2012
* USD 487,470.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award from the Major Research
Instrumentation (MRI) program, Chad Tatko and colleagues Eric J. Arnoys, David
E. Benson and Amy Wilstermann from Calvin College will acquire a 500 MHz NMR
spectrometer. This instrument will support research in 1) biocatalysts based on
peptide structural scaffolds for organic transformations, with the goal of
expanding the applicability of enzymatic efficiency to new synthetic
conversions; 2) epitope mapping of ligands for topoisomerase II, to aid in
understanding at an atomic level the sources of protein binding; 3)
identification of the formation and function of cross-linked protein derived
cofactors, to determine their role in protein reduction/oxidation activities;
and 4) exploration of the role of structural dynamics in Galectin-3's cellular
pathways to understand the effect of structural flexibility on nuclear
transport.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is
one of the most powerful tools available to chemists for the elucidation of the
structure of molecules. It is used to identify unknown substances, to
characterize specific arrangements of atoms within molecules, and to study the
dynamics of interactions between molecules in solution. Access to state-of-the-
art NMR spectrometers is essential to chemists who are carrying out frontier
research. The results from these NMR studies will have an impact in synthetic
organic chemistry and biochemistry. This instrument will be an integral part of
teaching as well as research.