* 0922864
* SCREMS: Visualization of Complex Spatio-Temporal Multiscale Fluid Dynamic Phenomena
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2010
* Juan Lopez, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 07/31/2010
* USD 113,890.00

In recent years, the fluid dynamics community at ASU has been developing robust
and efficient numerical codes for fluid dynamics simulations that span from
basic fundamental problems concerned with instabilities and transitions to
turbulence, and the control of such transitions, in geometrically simple
geometries, to large scale oceanographic and atmospheric flow simulations at the
micro, meso and global scales and developing strategies to intermesh the
different levels. ASU has made a serious commitment to high performance
computing with the establishment of the High Performance Computing Initiative
(HPCI). While our compute-server needs are presently being met by the ASU HPCI
facility, a serious bottleneck to our taking full advantage of this resource is
our lack of facilities to interactively visualize and analyze the large data
sets that result from our turbulent flow simulations. This is to be addressed
with the acquisition of an interactive visualization cluster. The integration of
interactive graphical interrogation and analysis of large complex spatio-
temporal data sets into the high-performance computing paradigm will lead to a
transformation in the way turbulent flows are studied. The visualization cluster
will allow us, in a very accessible fashion, to augment the traditional
statistical mechanics analyses of the flow fields, which rely on measures
involving spatial and temporal averages, with direct analysis of how turbulent
coherent structures evolve and interact. The analysis of such 4D data sets (3D
spatial plus time) of not only velocity and temperature fields, but also
vorticity and other relevant flow quantities such as helicity, is presently only
available from large-scale direct numerical simulations. The visual
interrogation and analysis of 4D simulation data will play a critical role in
transforming our understanding of complex spatio-temporal
flows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interdisciplinary training of graduate students
by mentors who have decades of interdisciplinary research experience between
them is a core objective of this proposal. Our REU involvement will be continued
by the CSUMS (Computational Science Training for Undergraduates in the
Mathematical Sciences) program at ASU, where aspects of the various individual
projects described in this proposal will be isolated into projects suitable for
undergraduates. For the broader community, our proposed visualization cluster
and how we will be utilizing it will provide a paradigm model for interactive
graphical visualization and analysis of large spatio-temporal data sets.