* 0922883
* MRI: Acquisition of a Liquid Chromatography-Tandem Mass Spectrometry Instrument for Research and Teaching in the Sciences at Union College
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Steven Rice, Union College
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2012
* USD 259,992.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) program, the
Department of Chemistry at Union College will acquire a Liquid Chromatography-
Triple Quadrupole Mass Spectrometry instrument (LC-MS/MS) to enable
sophisticated analysis of a variety of nonvolatile organic chemicals and
biomolecules, which will advance multiple areas of current research, primarily
in the Departments of Chemistry and Biology, as well as in the Biochemistry and
Environmental Studies programs. A variety of research projects will be pursued
including: 1) studies of the environmental fate, transport, and bioaccumulation
of ultraviolet filter chemicals, perfluorochemicals, and other emerging
environmental contaminants; 2) molecular recognition investigations of
biological macromolecules; 3) the identification of isolated natural products;
4) the structural identification of cell wall polysaccharides to study the
relationship between net photosynthesis and polyuronic acid production in moss
species; and 5) identification of potentially novel antifungal compounds
produced by bacteria.

Mass spectrometry (MS) is an analytical technique used to identify the chemical
composition of a sample and to determine its purity by measuring the mass of the
molecular constituents in the sample. Liquid chromatography is a separation
technique that precedes the mass spectrometry analysis. It separates a mixture
into its several constituent chemicals which are then analyzed and identified by
the mass spectrometer. It is one of the fastest growing and most widely used
analytical instrumentation techniques. Because of this, it is important for
undergraduate students to be trained in the technique. In addition to enhancing
research projects, the acquisition of an LC-MS/MS will transform several
undergraduate laboratories, as it will be incorporated into Organic Chemistry,
Quantitative Analysis, Chemical Instrumentation, Forensic Chemistry, and
Biochemistry laboratories