* 0922216
* Collaborative Research:   Molecular-genetic Basis of Parallel Adaptation Driven by Coevolutionary Interactions
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Edmund Brodie, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 07/31/2014
* USD 437,401.00

Newts defend themselves from predators such as snakes by secreting a potent
nerve poison, tetrodotoxin (TTX), but some populations and species of garter
snakes have evolved resistance to TTX. The molecular mechanism for this
resistance is known, as is one of the genes involved, providing an excellent
opportunity to investigate the evolutionary genetics of a trait that has a clear
adaptive value. The studies will include a survey of the genetic differences
underlying the variation in resistance to TTX in different populations and
species of garter snakes and a molecular genetic evaluation of the role of
natural selection in the evolution of resistance. Several factors could underlie
the presence of resistance in multiple populations. These are multiple episodes
of independent evolution, spread across populations, or shared ancestry; these
alternatives will be tested with molecular genetic analyses. The research will
result in disentangling the role of novel mutations, recombination, and gene
flow in explaining the geographic patterns of phenotypic diversity.

This project will help to support graduate and undergraduate education in
behavioral and molecular genetics. The PIs will promote the participation of
minorities and women in science careers through the Utash State University NSF
ADVANCE program, the USU Multicultural Research Fellowship Program, and the
Mountain Lake Biological Station REU program. The snake-newt system will
continue to be developed as a model to illustrate the evolutionary process to
the general public through outreach education (similar to the recent PBS-TV
material and articles in popular media) and exhibits in museums.