* 0922305
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Ocean Oxidation and the Biosphere During Neoproterozoic Glaciation
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Susannah Porter, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 08/31/2013
* USD 214,813.00

Collaborative Research: Ocean Oxidation and the Biosphere during Neoproterozoic
Glaciation

Susannah Porter (Lead PI); EAR-0922305 University of California Santa Barbara

Matthew Hurtgen; EAR-0921913 Northwestern University

ARRA Statement: "This proposal will be awarded using funds made available by the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).

ABSTRACT An increase in Earth surface oxygen levels has long been invoked as a
driver of biological innovation at the end of the Neoproterozoic Era (1000 to
~541 million years ago), when diverse macroscopic life, including animals, first
flourished. Recent work suggests that a pulse in ocean oxygenation ~580 million
years ago may have permitted the evolution of animals, but almost no
consideration has been paid to the relationship between biology and fluctuating
oxygen levels earlier in the Neoproterozoic, in particular spanning the
Cryogenian (a.k.a. ?snowball Earth?) glaciations ~720 to 635 million years ago,
when Earth may have been entombed in ice. The aim of this project is two-fold:
(1) reconstruct oxygen levels and biology during the Cryogenian glacial
interval; and (2) test the hypothesis that fluctuating oxygen levels are linked
to changes in the diversity and composition of biological communities observed
during this time. To address these goals, the PIs will undertake
micropaleontological, geochemical, and geochronologic analyses of shales
collected from successions in Svalbard, an archipelago north of Norway, and in
four separate basins in Australia. Collectively, these units span the entire
interval of Cryogenian glaciation. Samples from Svalbard have already been
collected; samples from Australia will be collected during two field seasons,
one in Tasmania, the other on the Australian mainland. All analyses will be
performed on the same suite of stratigraphically well-defined samples, allowing
records of life and oxygen availability to be unambiguously linked and placed
within the context of Neoproterozoic climate change.