* 0922995
* MRI:   Acquisition of Conservation Geographic Information Systems (GIS) Instrumentation
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Pati Vitt, Chicago Horticultural Society
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2013
* USD 305,389.00

The Chicago Botanic Garden has obtained Major Research Instrumentation (MRI)
funding to equip a state-of-the-art Conservation Geographic Information System
(GIS) laboratory in support of research and conservation, as well as secondary,
post-secondary and graduate education and citizen science programs. GIS has been
the greatest technological advance in the handling of geographic and spatial
data since the invention of the map. These technologies will greatly enhance
fundamental and applied research and training programs at the Chicago Botanic
Garden. With climate change and invasive species at the forefront of
conservation concerns, GIS technology provides the tools necessary to elucidate
the spatial ecology of plant populations, how they are predicted to move in
response to a changing climate, and whether fragmented landscapes are connected
enough to allow this to happen. Understanding the spatial ecology of native and
invasive organisms in the context of human-impacted landscapes is crucial to
conserving native landscapes and the valuable ecosystem services they provide.
This equipment will streamline research efforts, helping Garden scientists
(including citizen scientists and students) advance plant conservation science
and our understanding of topics as diverse as the global and regional
distribution of plants and associated soil organisms, the spatial genetics of
fragmented populations, predictions of species range shifts under climate
change, dispersal of invasive species, and the climatic and habitat requirements
for reintroduced species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Garden's Center for Teaching
and Learning has partnerships with many local K-12 schools and envisions adding
a geographic element to existing science education offerings. Spatial thinking
and research skills will help future scientists and decision makers succeed in
an increasingly technology-driven world. Research results will be widely and
effectively disseminated to the public through active participation in
scientific and conservation groups. Additionally, the Garden hosts over 750,000
visitors per year, and the general public will have an opportunity to view the
laboratory facilities and learn about research activities through exhibits
outside of the laboratory.