* 0922987
* MRI: Acquisition of a High-Pulse-Energy Ultrafast Laser System for Interdisciplinary Research
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Andrew Weiner, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2012
* USD 485,790.00

0922987&lt;br/&gt;Lucht&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funds for the purchase of an advanced ultrafast
laser system for nonlinear spectroscopy are requested. The system that specified
is a Spectra-Physics Spitfire Pro 40F-5W ultrafast laser system. The pulse
length of the fundamental output of the system is &lt;40 femtoseconds (fs). The
system can be operated at two different repetition rates, 1 kHz or 5 kHz. At the
repetition rate of 5 kHz, the output pulse energy is &gt;1 mJ; for the
repetition rate of 1 kHz, the output pulse energy is &gt; 5mJ. A state-of-the-
art pulse shaper based on multiphoton intrapulse interference phase scan (MIIPS)
is also requested. The MIIPS pulse shaper will be very useful for phase
correction of Fourier-transform-limited pulses or for accurate phase-shaping
using input phase functions. This ultrafast laser system user facility will be a
resource for a wide range of interdisciplinary research. At present there is no
comparable laser system at Purdue University. Consequently Purdue researchers
are at a serious disadvantage in proposing research in emerging new fields such
as diagnostic applications of femtosecond lasers, X-ray generation, and
attosecond spectroscopy. Applications of the new laser system are proposed in
biomedical spectroscopy, diagnostics in turbulent reacting flows, coherent
phonon spectroscopy in the solid state, multiphoton spectroscopy for proton
structure studies, soft X-ray generation, and attosecond spectroscopy.