* 0922644
* MRI: Acquisition of a High Performance Computer Cluster Supporting Computational Science Research and Learning
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Stefan Robila, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2013
* USD 208,975.00

Proposal #: CNS 09-22644&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Robila, Stefan
A.&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Montclair State University &lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI/Acq.:
High Performance Computer Cluster Supporting Computational Science Research and
Learning&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This project,
acquiring a high performance computer cluster, aims to expand interdisciplinary
projects in three departments (CS, Math Science, and Linguistics) and enable
collaboration with a research intensive university (Syracuse). These projects
require significant computation power and describe problems where the size of
the data sets continues to grow. The work involves novel approaches for parallel
image and signal processing, and in particular spectral imaging. The approach
includes design of parallel algorithms and the development of theories on how to
parallelize the general data processing steps. Other projects use parallel
processing for phylogenetic modeling, use dynamic systems for disease modeling,
parallelization techniques for the use of scattering theory, and the cross-
lingual morphosyntactic tagging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This
project helps to attract more students to hands-on multidisciplinary research
and to establish and strengthen a cross-institutional research partnership
between an undergraduate-serving teaching institution and a research university.
The research on spectral imaging parallel applications allows for the use of
spectral sensors in new applications improving the timeliness and accuracy of
results. In terms of dynamic systems, computer modeling and computational
analysis of disease dynamics might contribute to determine the best policy for a
given epidemic situation. Applications and contributions of scattering theory to
science include deep earth seismology, exploration of underground resources,
engineering, mine detection, and other military applications. In phylogeny, the
ability to reconstruct optimal evolutionary trees based on objective criteria
impacts directly the understanding of the relationships among organisms, human
evolution, and spread of infectious disease.