* 0922306
* Collaborative Research:  MSB:  Links Between Soil Biogeochemistry and Microbial Community Dynamics Along Recently Deglaciated Chronosequences
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Cory Cleveland, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 08/31/2014
* USD 176,434.00

Studies of how plant communities assemble and shift on landscapes created by
receding glaciers have been integral in developing the theoretical bases of
nutrient cycling, organismal interactions, and community dynamics in the face of
environmental change. Indeed, the relative simplicity of these 'young'
(geologically speaking) systems has revealed patterns in ecosystem structure and
function that often also apply across a wide range of older, more complex
environments. Although soil microorganisms regulate nutrient cycling reactions
with regional to global importance, there is no parallel understanding of how
these communities come together and change through time. This work will address
three hypotheses which relate microbial community structure and soil nutrient
status across newly deglaciated sites in three geographically, geologically and
climatically disparate locations (Alaska, Peru and Montana). An array of
techniques, including newly developed methods in high-throughput DNA sequencing
and bioinformatics, microbial process measurements, and field manipulations will
be replicated at the three different sites, and are designed to reveal broadly
applicable patterns that govern early microbial community development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will support three graduate and two
undergraduate students, including broadening participation from Native Alaskans
at the University of Alaska, Southeast. Additionally, ecosystem science learning
will be extended to a high school that serves "at risk" students, and students
from underrepresented groups in science, by developing a new course using
recently deglaciated soils as model systems for students to understand the
relationships between nutrient cycling and biodiversity. The PIs will also work
closely with the United States Forest Service staff at the Mendenhall Visitor
Center to integrate the results of this project into interpretive programs and
displays.