* 0922400
* MRI: Acquisition of an AFM System for Imaging and Characterization of Synthetic Nanostructures and Native Biological Macromolecules
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Claire Ting, Williams College
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 09/30/2013
* USD 303,300.00

0922400&lt;br/&gt;Park&lt;br/&gt;Williams College&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This
award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public
Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary: AFM?s ability to image and
characterize surface topography, identify nanoscale regions of samples via phase
or force imaging, and even alter surfaces, has made it an indispensable tool in
research on systems with nano- and micro-scale features. Several research
programs at Williams (in chemistry, physics, biology, computer science) require
these capabilities. The Park group focuses on the design of polymeric materials
which will self- organize (based on hydrocarbon-fluorocarbon interactions within
the polymer chain, as well as interactions with chemically
patterned&lt;br/&gt;&gt; surfaces) to give films with internal architectures for
enhanced performance in organic photovoltaic devices; AFM will be used to
characterize the polymer films, the surfaces on which they will be cast, and to
pattern substrates via DPN. Using the imaging capabilities of AFM at elevated
temperatures, Lopes? group studies the evolution of defect structure in diblock
copolymer films. From ?movies? gathered in situ, the group studies the defect
dynamics and kinetics as a function of temperature to better understand the
self-assembly processes in such materials. The Ting group studies photosynthesis
and related processes in marine microorganisms that have a major role in global
carbon cycles. AFM will be used to characterize the architecture of the
photosynthetic apparatus in native membranes and to study how alterations in the
organization and stoichiometry of these protein complexes within a bilayer will
affect photosynthesis. AFM will also be used by several other researchers at
Williams, including the Goh group, which studies the design of biopolymer-based
targeted drug delivery vehicles with improved biocompatibility and tenability of
drug release. Goh will use imaging to characterize the location of differing
materials within triblock copolymer structures and force curve measurements to
aid in structure determination. The Banta group is exploring the function of
virulence proteins in the soil bacterium A. tumefaciens; AFM will be used to
study the mode of binding of these Vir proteins to DNA and, thus, the role these
proteins play in promoting T-DNA delivery to host plant cells. McGuire?s work
will use topographical information from AFM of surfaces to improve models for
describing light scattering off of surfaces in computer graphics and to search
for models of scattering from surfaces which will improve ray tracing and reduce
their computational load. The AFM at Williams will be incorporated into an
existing microscopy facility, which includes a TEM and SEM, and is an integral
component of research and educational programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Layman
Summary: Scanning probe techniques, in which a sharp tip is brought extremely
close to a sample and information about the sample is gathered by dragging the
tip across a surface, have become indispensable tools for the scientific
community. One example is Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM), which can generate
images of features on surfaces as well as maps of variation in materials
properties across surfaces with extremely high (~nm) resolution. Many on-going
research projects at Williams College require the use of an AFM. These include
studies of the patterns which form in synthetic polymers which can be used to
generate nanoscale features (smaller than features attainable through
conventional photolithography in computer chip design), or which could be used
for polymer-based solar cells and polymer-based drug delivery vehicles; research
on the structure and organization of proteins in native biological membranes
critical for photosynthesis in ecologically important organisms; studies of
proteins involved in delivery of DNA into cells; and research on surfaces and
comparison with light scattering experiments to improve techniques used in
computer graphics.