* 0922054
* THE WINNESHIEK LAGERSTÄTTE, STRATIGRAPHY AND DEPOSITIONAL ENVIRONMENTS OF THE LOWER PORTION OF THE ST. PETER SANDSTONE
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2015
* Derek Briggs, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 03/31/2015
* USD 99,908.00

THE WINNESHIEK LAGERSTÄTTE, STRATIGRAPHY AND DEPOSITIONAL ENVIRONMENTS OF THE
LOWER PORTION OF THE ST. PETER SANDSTONE&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Huaibao P. Lui,
Robert M. McKay, and Brian Witzke&lt;br/&gt;Iowa Department of Natural
Resources&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0921245&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Derek Briggs&lt;br/&gt;Yale
University&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0922054&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;A
remarkably preserved Middle Ordovician fossil fauna, the Winneshiek fauna, was
recently discovered in a localized shale unit in the lower St. Peter Sandstone
in northeast Iowa. Known from a single locality, the fauna displays exceptional
fossil preservation, including soft tissues (a Konservat-Lagerstätte), and
contains a variety of vertebrate and invertebrate fossils. The fauna, preserved
in finely laminated dark shale, was deposited in a previously unknown Ordovician
environment within an isolated basin along the margin of the tropical Laurentian
seaway. There are few Ordovician Lagerstätten identified worldwide, and the
Winneshiek fauna (the oldest known) has been recognized as one of the most
important recent discoveries in Ordovician paleontology. The preservation,
archiving, and study of these exceptional fossils are needed to ensure the
scientific and paleontologic heritage of this unique and significant discovery.
The fauna contains a variety of rare and poorly known taxa, including conodonts
(many natural assemblages, some associated with soft-tissues), articulated
jawless fish (among the rarest of Ordovician fossils), eurypterids and other
chelicerates (among the oldest known), early phyllocarid crustaceans (many with
soft-bodied preservation), ostracods, linguloid brachiopods, mollusks, and a
variety of problematic organisms (especially ?worm-like? vermiforms). The
exceptional preservation of the fauna will enable detailed studies of the
anatomy and phylogenetic relationships of several poorly known groups early in
their evolutionary history, particularly within the arthropods (chelicerates,
crustaceans) and vertebrates (conodonts and stem gnathostomes). The funded
research will study and describe the taxonomy and evolutionary relationships of
the fauna, the sedimentology and taphonomy of the fossil occurrences, and the
paleoenvironmental setting of this unique deposit.