* 0922109
* Analysis of Affiliation, Entry, and Bidding in First-Price Auctions with Heterogeneous Bidders
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Tong LI, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2011
* USD 79,290.00

This award funds research to develop new statistical methods for analyzing data
on how individuals behave in strategic situations. The major focus is to develop
new econometric techniques for analyzing bidder behavior in auctions. The
principal investigator develops a method that can be applied to test new
theories about why and when new bidders enter an auction with an initial bid
when entry behavior is observed, bidders' private values and entry costs are
affiliated, and potential bidders are asymmetric. This test is intuitive and
uses a recently developed simulation method that may also be useful in a variety
of other applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second goal of this project is
developing a structural econometric model that can be used for situations with
affiliated and asymmetric bidders. The structural approach adopted in this
research overcomes a number of difficulties with previous methods. The PI
illustrates the advantages of the new method by using it to analyze data from
timber auctions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has broader impact in two
ways. The approach developed here can also be used to develop new statistical
techniques for analyzing data on other kinds of strategic decision making. The
specific results of the timber auction data analysis will help state and Federal
policymakers who must decide the procedures for using natural resources.