* 0922776
* MRI: Acquisition of a High-Resolution Analytical Transmission Electron Microscope
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Shuming Nie, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 09/30/2012
* USD 1,232,289.00

0922776 Wang GA Tech Research Corporation - GIT

Technical Summary: Science and technology in the 21st century will rely heavily
on the development of new materials with properties that can be tailored
according to performance requirements. The development of smart materials will
undoubtedly contribute to a revolution in many fields of science and technology
such as information science, microelectronics, computer science, medical
analysis, life sciences, energy, transportation, safety engineering and military
technologies. A key piece of infrastructure for nanotechnology and materials
science is a first class imaging and analysis facility, which is capable of
providing sub-Angstrom resolution imaging and atom-column localized chemical
information. The objective of this proposal is to acquire a state-of-the-art 300
keV field emission transmission/scanning electron microscope (TEM/STEM) with a
0.19 nm point-to-point image resolution and 0.2 nm diameter high-brightness
nanoprobe, a high stability specimen stage (<1 Ã… drift/min-1), a high collection
efficiency solid state x-ray detector(s), beam scanning capabilities (for x-ray
mapping), and a sub-eV energy resolution electron energy-loss spectrometer. The
TEM/STEM is designed to meet the needs of a large research community of more
than 500 per year in nanotechnology and materials science at the Georgia
Institute of Technology. The most powerful application of an advanced TEM is its
super-high resolution for imaging the atomic structure of materials at a
resolution of ~0.1-0.2 nm. Combined with electron diffraction, TEM is unique in
determining the defect, interface and domain structures of materials.
Complimenting this powerful imaging capability, X-ray energy-dispersive
spectrometry (EDS) and electron energy-loss spectroscopy (EELS) by far the most
rapid and convenient method for measuring the composition of a specimen in the
TEM at a spatial resolution approximately the size of the electron probe. By
using a high-coherence, high-brightness electron probe, a spatial resolution of
~0.2 nm can be achieved for thin samples. EDS represents the most powerful
technique for quantifying the composition of elements as light as nitrogen.

Layman Summary: The development of smart materials continues to be a revolution
in many fields of science and technology such as information science,
microelectronics, computer science, medical analysis, life sciences, energy,
transportation, safety engineering and military technologies. Materials
development in the future, therefore, should be directed toward creation of
hyperfunctional materials which may surpass even biological organs in some
aspects. A key challenge is to correlate the material's structure with its
properties in order to fully control structural and compositional evolution for
achieving superior performance. Electron microscopy and associated analysis
techniques have proven to be one of the most powerful techniques for exploring
the nanoscopic world associated with a variety of materials and devices. The
proposed HRTEM will represent strategic equipment for all of the nano- and bio-
research programs at Georgia Tech. This will impact numerous programs
distributed over 10 units, campus-wide, including but not limited to: advanced
catalysis, photovoltaic materials, energy storage and generation, biosensing,
bioimaging, drug delivery, composite materials, electronic packaging and
interconnects. The proposed TEM will produce over 500 research articles per
year. It will also impact local industry in the Atlanta area. It will make huge
contribution to the education and training of undergraduate students, graduate
students and postdoctoral fellows.