* 0922652
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Restructuring Phonetic Space in Second Language Acquisition
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Keith Johnson, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 08/31/2010
* USD 2,630.00

Early research in second language (L2) acquisition found that late L2 learners
pronounce L2 differently from native speakers. Learners' pronunciation shows
influence from the sounds of their first language (L1); this is the phenomenon
of "foreign accent". Recent studies have suggested that cross-language influence
is not limited to the effect of L1 on L2; rather, the pronunciation of L1 sounds
can also change under the influence of L2 sounds learned later in life.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With NSF support, Mr. Chang will conduct a longitudinal
phonetic study addressing the following two research questions about the
earliest stages of L2 acquisition. First, how is adult acquisition of L2 sounds
hindered by the L1 sound system? Second, how long does it take for the learning
and use of L2 sounds to affect the pronunciation of L1 sounds? The proposed
dissertation project will track 20 native English speakers learning Korean over
the course of an intensive language program to examine the time course and
limits of their L2 production and perception abilities. The study focuses in
particular on their learning of the Korean laryngeal contrast (English has 'b'
vs. 'p', whereas Korean has no 'b' and instead three kinds of 'p'). Three
different methodologies will be used to benchmark learners' progress during the
language program: imitation, reading, and identification. Responses in the first
two tasks will be analyzed acoustically, while responses in the third task will
be analyzed for perceptual boundaries between sounds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By
examining the early stages of how a non-English L2 is learned, this dissertation
will contribute to a better understanding of how the mental representations of
new sounds develop, and how new L2 sounds are connected to old L1 sounds. Thus,
the findings have implications for the theory of linguistic competence as well
as the practice of pronunciation teaching.