* 0922122
* Geomorphic Evolution and Heterogeneity of Holocene Carbonate Tidal Sand Shoals
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2010,02/28/2014
* Eugene Rankey, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 02/28/2014
* USD 236,804.00

Geomorphic Evolution and Heterogeneity of Holocene Carbonate Tidal Sand Shoals

Gene Rankey, University of Kansas

The archive of change on the Earth's surface is contained in its stratigraphic
record. Deposits of ooids (spherical concentrically laminated grains) in
particular have provided key insights into physical and chemical variability in
the ocean over billions of years. On-going research has illustrated how variable
bedrock configurations, tides and waves lead to different geometries (tidal
deltas, tidal sand ridges, parabolic bars, sigmoidal bars) in tidally dominated
oolitic sand shoals that are active today. This study will expand on those
insights, exploring the hypothesis that these variable processes impart a
distinct and unique stratigraphic record to each shoal geometry. To address
these questions and test the hypothesis, this study will utilize high-resolution
subbottom geophysical profiling, coring, and age dating from a suite of Holocene
Bahamian shoals characterized by different processes and landforms. In comparing
the thicknesses, the elevation of the bedrock beneath the shoals, and
sedimentologic trends within the shoals, the results of this study will lead to
enhanced understanding of evolution of these oolitic systems, and to tidal sand
shoals in general. Furthermore, precise age dating of the oolitic sediments will
reveal the rates of geomorphic change, information difficult to ascertain in
siliciclastic systems. Collectively, these data will provide key insights to
better constrain interpretation of the planet's history in response to global
change, to predict the distribution and variability of oolitic sedimentary rocks
in the subsurface (e.g., in water or hydrocarbon reservoirs), and to understand
possible rates of recovery from sand mining. This proposal will fund development
of mix of lecture, hands-on lab, and field experiences on ooid shoals for
Bahamian and international students, offered by the PI and student for several
semesters, at the Island School on Eleuthera Island in The Bahamas.