* 0922551
* Why are Recessions Good for Your Health? Understanding Pro-cyclical Mortality
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Marianne Page, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2013
* USD 380,310.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

A series of influential papers by Christopher Ruhm document that recessions are
good for your health or more specifically that state-level mortality rates are
pro-cyclical. The magnitude of the correlation is economically meaningful: a
typical estimate from the literature suggests that a one percentage point
increase in the unemployment rate of a state is associated with a 0.54%
reduction in the mortality rate of that state, which would translate into about
12,000 fewer deaths per year. This provocative finding immediately raises the
question of what mechanisms are behind the relationship. Possibilities include:
direct negative effects of employment such as occupational injuries or stress,
changes in the opportunity cost of time associated with medical appointments or
other time-intensive health promoting behaviors, changes in the consumption of
goods that have negative health consequences, externalities associated with the
business cycle, such as changes in pollution or traffic fatalities, and
selective migration. At the same time, research linking individual job
displacements to individuals own mortality finds that individuals who experience
a job loss have higher probabilities of dying. These results would seem to be at
odds with those based on state-level analyses, unless the increase in state
level mortality rates that corresponds to improvements in the economy is mostly
driven by factors external to changes in individuals own health behaviors. The
intellectual merit of this project is that it improves our understanding of the
mechanisms that lead to pro-cyclical mortality. Particular emphasis is placed on
disentangling effects that result from an individuals own behavior from changes
that are related to externalities associated with economic fluctuations. This
provides a key link to reconciling estimates produced by state-level and
individual analyses. The broader impacts of the project lies in its implications
for public policy: changes in the health of individuals that result from changes
in their own behavior have different associated policy prescriptions than
changes that result from external factors. In addition, the literature on the
effects of job loss is rapidly expanding, and it is increasingly understood that
the impact of job loss reaches much further than its impact on individuals own
income. This project substantively advances the literature on job loss. A third
broad impact of the project is that it adds to recent efforts to understand and
measure the welfare costs of business cycle fluctuations. It investigates these
mechanisms by 1) estimating detailed mortality-unemployment rate correlations by
age and cause of death, 2) estimating the effect of own group vs aggregate
unemployment on group mortality, and 3) looking at cyclical changes in the
quality and quantity of health care. In addition, it investigates the
possibility that non-random migration plays a role in the connection between
mortality and the business cycle, either by inducing mis-measurement of
population denominators, or by generating compositional changes in the health
distribution of states. Because the preliminary analyses suggest that most of
the pro-cyclical relationship is driven by deaths among the elderly, the project
focuses on understanding the cyclical nature of health care choices among the
elderly (for example choosing to live at home vs. choosing nursing home care).