* 0922269
* MRI:   Acquisition of Robotics Instrumentation for Crystallization of Biomacromolecules
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Ann West, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 07/31/2013
* USD 359,381.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will allow structural
biologists at the University of Oklahoma-Norman campus to establish an automated
Macromolecular Crystallization Core Facility that will enable researchers
throughout the State and regionally to accelerate the pace at which diffraction-
quality crystals are obtained for X-ray crystallographic studies. This core
facility will enhance structural biology research and promote collaborations. In
addition to the five research groups at OU, research groups at seven other
institutions in Oklahoma seek atomic level insight into the conformational
changes associated with macromolecules that regulate cellular biology. Three of
these institutions are primarily undergraduate institutions with limited
resources for research. This new technology will allow structural biologists in
Oklahoma to maintain competitive research programs and educate the next
generation of scientists. The new instrumentation will help to reduce the
barriers to initiating structural approaches to biological questions and
encourage research groups who would otherwise find the initial costs associated
with starting crystallization trials for biomacromolecules prohibitively high.
This core facility will serve as a focal point for organizing an annual
symposium and hosting workshops aimed at enhancing the overall educational and
research experiences of undergraduate and graduate students in Oklahoma. A
significant number of potential users of the equipment have primarily teaching
responsibilities, and the use of this equipment will be incorporated into the
undergraduate and graduate biochemistry curriculum. Crystallography is a
critical component of interdisciplinary approaches to understanding how changes
in structure translate into a change in function. The fluid handling and
automated imaging instrumentation that will be acquired with this funding will
ease the more difficult and time consuming steps in the discovery process. These
instruments will allow researchers to explore more quickly and efficiently many
more possible crystallization conditions and thus allow more time to focus
effort on interpreting structure-function relationships and designing
experiments to test new ideas and hypotheses generated by new crystal
structures. These structural biology research efforts will provide new insights
into the molecular signals governing enzyme function, metabolism, gene
regulation, and cellular responses to environmental change. Proteins and nucleic
acids often alter their conformation when binding small molecule substrates such
as maltose, adenosine triphosphate, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide, nitric
oxide, or glutathione. For example, researchers will explore how adding a
phosphoryl group to a protein or inserting a uracil in an mRNA can change the
shape of the biopolymer and thus regulate the timing of its function. When only
small amounts of biological samples are available, such as carbohydrate-modified
proteins, the new small-volume fluid handling technology will open doors to
structural biology inquiries. Results from these studies will be published in
peer reviewed journals.