* 0922714
* Cultural Cognition of Synthetic Biology Risks
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Dan Kahan, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 07/31/2013
* USD 398,990.00

Synthetic biology is an emerging technology that permits scientists to design
living organisms unlike any found in nature. Such organisms, it is hoped, might
be put to myriad beneficial uses, including the treatment of disease, the
elimination of environmental pollutants, and the production of new sources of
energy. At the same time, scientists recognize that engineered life forms could
pose risks to the environment and to human health. Exactly what those hazards
are, and how they might be contained, cannot be fully determined independently
of the very research necessary to perfect development of synthetic biology. Will
the public resist the advent of a science the risks and benefits of which remain
attended by this degree of uncertainty? And how might that reaction be
influenced by the public?s moral and emotional responses to the prospect of
substituting human agency for the subtle processes of nature in determining what
shapes life takes on our planet? What should researchers and risk communicators
do to assure that such reactions do not prevent the best available science from
informing public deliberations?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use the
cultural cognition of risk to help answer these questions. The ?cultural
cognition of risk? refers to the tendency of individuals to fit their factual
beliefs about putatively dangerous activities to their cultural evaluations of
those activities. Past research has established the role of cultural cognition
in public conflicts over diverse environmental risks. Some of these disputes
relate to well established technologies, such as nuclear power; others relate to
relatively novel ones, such as nanotechnology. The current project will use
cultural cognition to identify potential sources of conflict over synthetic
biology risks, and techniques for mitigating them. In addition, the project will
make synthetic biology the focus of how another important mechanism of risk
perception?numeracy, or the facility of individuals with quantitative
information?interacts with cultural cognition. In this way, the project will
extend scientific knowledge of the dynamics of risk perception generally at the
same time that it promotes society?s interest in anticipating public reactions
to one, singularly important new technology.