* 0922951
* MRI:  Development of an Improved Scanned Light Sheet Microscope for Rapid, High-Volume, Three-Dimensional Fluorescence and Dark-Field Microscopies
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,11/30/2013
* Raghuveer Parthasarathy, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 11/30/2013
* USD 458,500.00

Imaging the complete three-dimensional architecture of living, growing organisms
with sub-cellular resolution and sufficient speed to capture cellular dynamics
has long been an unattainable goal. Traditional approaches are sufficient for a
few hundred cells, but are too slow and cause too much photodamage to probe
larger systems, such as whole embryos. Recently, researchers have developed a
new methodology, "light sheet microscopy" (LSM), in which illumination by a
scanned sheet of light that excites fluorescent probes allows rapid, high
resolution 3D imaging with minimal photodamage. This technique can acquire 3D
images of entire developing zebrafish embryos with sub-cellular resolution for
over 24 hours, creating one embryo-spanning 3D image every 60-90 seconds. This
approach promises to revolutionize biological imaging.

This award is supporting a project with two main goals. The first goal aims to
build a light sheet microscope at the University of Oregon, the first of its
kind in the United States. This instrument will be invaluable to researchers
studying zebrafish and other models of biological phenomena. It will illuminate
the connections between cell migration and skeletal development in early
embryogenesis; allow organism-wide mapping of interactions between bacterial
populations and host immune cells, a key factor in normal as well as diseased
physiology; enable studies of how particular mutations affect the development of
the enteric nervous system over large length and time scales; and more. The
second goal aims to extend the capabilities of light sheet microscopy, creating
the next generation of light sheet microscopes. This project will develop (1) an
instrument capable of 3D dark-field imaging, which will be especially important
for visualizing non-fluorescent nanoparticle distributions in whole, living
organisms, crucial to addressing concerns about nanotechnological toxicology;
and (2) an instrument capable of combined fluorescence LSM and differential
interference contrast microscopy, which will reveal the local context in which
cells expressing particular fluorescent proteins act.

The broader impacts of this proposal have three facets. First, rapid 3D imaging
will enable unprecedented advances in fields spanning the biological sciences,
as noted above, and also the physical sciences, for example the structure and
dynamics of soft materials. Second, the project will provide valuable cross-
disciplinary training for postdoctoral researchers, graduate students, and
undergraduates. Third, the visually striking nature of the 3D data resulting
from LSM imaging are ideally suited to education and outreach, as they transform
the illustration of topics like embryogenesis and self-assembly from static or
schematic cartoons to vibrant and "real" 3D movies. Data from the proposed
project will be incorporated into a new course on biophysics for non-science-
major college undergraduates and a week-long day camp for socioeconomically
disadvantaged high school students.

The project outcome-a functional light sheet microscope with dark-field and
differential interference contrast imaging capabilities-will be available at the
University of Oregon (Eugene, OR).