* 0922408
* Monetary and Macro Economics
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Randall Wright, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Niloy Bose
* 08/31/2012
* USD 266,517.00

Intellectual Merit The PI's proposed and past NSF research studies monetary
economics using search theory, other applications of search, macro-labor models,
and related topics in theory and quantitative analysis. Monetary economics
constitutes much of the work. This research has had an impact, helping start a
new subfield one might call "search-theoretic monetary economics" or "macro with
microfoundations for money." It has recently grown rapidly: the bibliography on
the PI's website listing only work that uses the approach introduced in his two
recent NSF grants will include over 100 papers by the next update. His own
publications indicate that the research is having an impact in the journals. He
also has many current and former Ph.D. students working in the area. Broader
Impacts The PI's proposed and past NSF research not only has had an impact in
the academic community, it is being recognized as relevant for policy discussion
in many circles. In recent years, several conferences, seminars, and week long
workshops were devoted to the approach at the Federal Reserve Banks of
Cleveland, Chicago and Philadelphia, the Bank of Canada, the IMF, and similar
institutions. The PI is in the process of developing a new undergraduate course
on "Market with Frictions" that presents this material to college seniors, and
he taught an experimental version last semester.