* 0922903
* MRI: Acquisition of a multi-pocket e-beam evaporator for nano/micro facility at CCNY
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2011
* David Crouse, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2011
* USD 234,400.00

Program Abstract

This proposal requests funding to acquire a multi-pocket electron-beam
evaporator at the City College of New York (CCNY). The system will be configured
to provide a high level of capability and maximum flexibility for use in a
shared facility environment. A multi-pocket electron beam evaporator will
provide a capability of depositing six different metals/dielectrics in a high
vacuum for smooth and precise interface between them. The acquisition of an
e-beam evaporator with the nano/micro facility at CCNY will enhance the quality
and scope of the research training and education by incorporating hands-on
experience in the class materials and also foster the integration of research
and education by offering new research opportunities for both undergraduate and
graduate students. The research conducted using the proposed equipment is
interdisciplinary and involves the collaborative efforts from various
departments. This will be a great opportunity for our students to obtain
interdisciplinary knowledge and research experience through participating in
these research activities. CCNY is committed to providing a high-quality
education to its predominant Hispanic American, African-American, and female
students. Research opportunities resulting from the acquisition of the e-beam
evaporator system will promote more underrepresented minority groups to pursue
in advanced degrees in science and engineering at CCNY and better prepare them
for the industry and graduate studies in nano/micro technology areas upon their
graduation. The proposed equipment will fulfill a critical and growing need for
both the education and research on nano/micro technology at the City College of
New York.