* 0922772
* US - Egypt Cooperative Research:  Studying Air Quality Dynamics in Cairo, Egypt Using A Linear Genetic Programming Approach Over Remotely Sensed Atmospheric Parameters
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Menas Kafatos, Chapman University
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 08/31/2012
* USD 59,880.00

This collaborative research project is being undertaken by Dr. Hesham El-Askary,
Chapman University, and Dr. Ahmad Mahmoud, Cairo University, Egypt, to identify
the sources of atmospheric aerosol pollutants that frequently settle over the
Egyptian City of Cairo and its surrounding Greater Nile Delta
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
(IPCC) report emphasizes the impacts of urban pollution on the surface energy
budget. Cairo, Egypt is a highly populated urban area characterized by rapid
land use and land cover changes, activities that affect the local climate.
Traditional statistical and signal processing techniques applied to satellite
derived observations over Cairo have shown varying degrees of natural and
anthropogenic pollution. Excess aerosol episodes (namely dust storms and
pollution) of varying magnitude have been found to occur over Cairo and other
cities in the Greater Nile Delta region concurrently on the same months of April
and October for the years under investigation. Among the data observed, there is
an upward trend of water vapor content, confirming a potential aerosol
contribution to localized climate change. The PI plans to use various aerosol
derived satellite parameters over an extended time period. These parameters will
be coupled with linear genetic programming (LGP) technology to achieve better
climate modeling for the purpose of understanding the effects of different air
pollution episodes over Cairo. Such coupling will provide insight into the
microphysics of the air dynamics and enhance the understanding of the role and
degree of contribution or the level of impact of different atmospheric
parameters under investigation. The obtained output can be utilized for the
identification and control of pollution sources to provide first hand corrective
actions, proper management and policy recommendations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative research project involves international
research opportunities for a junior scientist at Chapman University. Further, it
will enhance international collaborative efforts at the university, as well as
the international content of undergraduate courses taught by the
PI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is funded under the US-Egypt Joint Fund
Program, which provides grants to scientists and engineers in both countries to
undertake cooperative research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;