* 0922671
* MRI: Acquisition of Videogrammetry and Thermal Imaging Equipment
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Joseph Blandino, Virginia Military Institute Research Laboratories
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 07/31/2012
* USD 334,789.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of
2009&lt;br/&gt;(Public Law 111-5)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Aerospace Structures
Laboratory in the Department of Mechanical Engineering at the Virginia Military
Institute (VMI) is actively engaging undergraduates in meaningful research
projects in the area of Membrane and Inflatable Structures. The laboratory was
established in 1999 at James Madison University as part of the Infrared
Development and Thermal Structures Laboratory and moved to VMI in 2007. Over the
past ten years the laboratory has produced a dozen journal articles and
conference proceedings authored or co-authored by undergraduate researchers. The
thermal imager and videogrammetry equipment to be acquired under this award will
support continued undergraduate research investigating the coupled thermal and
structural response of membrane and inflatable structures. The relevance and
complexity of the projects that can be undertaken in the laboratory will be
enhanced with the purchase this equipment. Specifically, the videogrammetry
system is well suited to obtaining dynamic shape data from hundreds of moving
targets simultaneously. This allows for rapid data collection over large areas.
Videogrammetry lacks the high sampling rates of laser vibrometers, but because
membrane and inflatable structures are low-mass and lack stiffness, they have
low fundamental frequencies. The acquisition of a thermal imager will add a non-
contact temperature measurement capability that is not currently available in
the laboratory. This capability is critical for obtaining temperatures from low-
mass structures as traditional instruments such as thermocouples add mass and
thermal capacitance that alters the thermal response of the structure. The
videogrammetry and thermal imaging systems will allow simultaneous collection of
shape, vibration, and temperature data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of this award is that it will lead to a better understanding of the
thermal-structural interactions and dynamic response of membrane and inflatable
structures, specifically deployable booms and membrane optics. It will allow the
evaluation of the coupled, thermal-structural performance of membrane reflectors
that may be used as orbiting antenna or optical systems. In addition, the
requested equipment will foster a better understanding of the structural
performance of deployable composite booms, allowing for the development of
larger and more complex space-based systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact of this award is the practical experiences that will be gained by
undergraduate students through the collaborations and research that it will
support. Undergraduate students will participate in relevant and meaningful
research on low mass, flexible structures. The instrumentation will allow the
laboratory to be competitive in future proposals and externally funded projects.
These projects will motivate undergraduate to continue their education and
better prepare them for graduate studies. The projects undertaken with the
requested instrumentation will provide the future engineers necessary to
maintain the competitiveness of the U.S. Aerospace Industry.