* 0922678
* Analysis of Radial Patterning in Arabidopsis
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Frans Tax, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Amy Litt
* 08/31/2013
* USD 300,000.00

PI: Frans E. Tax &lt;br/&gt;Proposal number: IOS-0922678&lt;br/&gt;Title:
Analysis of Radial Patterning in
Arabidopsis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Radial patterning is a fundamental process in the
development of all plants. Roots, stems, and flowers exhibit a radial pattern of
organization, and this pattern is formed in the early embryo. The goal of this
project is to understand how plant tissues become organized as concentric layers
of cells. Since the generation of layers of cells is expected to require
communication between cells, mutants in receptors would be predicted to affect
radial pattern in embryos, when layers of cells are first established. Double
mutants for two receptors in the model plant Arabidopsis were found to change
outer cell types to inner cell types in the embryo. In this project, the
hypothesis that the outer layer of the embryo acts as an organizer and regulates
the identity of inner layers will be tested. Using genetic and biochemical
approaches, candidate signals for these receptors and proteins that these
receptors act on will be characterized. This project will provide a framework
for understanding the signaling mechanisms responsible for radial patterning in
plants, which is currently not well understood. The results from this project
can be applied to regulating important traits such as stem size, root growth and
male sterility in crop plants. This project will contribute to the training of
graduate students, undergraduates and high school students and teachers in plant
development, genetics and genomics. A teacher will be recruited the first summer
to develop a plant genetics or genomics-based unit, will implement the unit
during the school year, and refine it during a second summer.