* 0922855
* MRI: Acquisition of Laser Ablation for ICP-MS and a Handheld XRF for the W.M. Keck Center for Instrumental and Biochemical Comparative Archaeology, Millsaps College
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* George Bey, Millsaps College
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/2012
* USD 384,535.00

This award permits Drs. Michael Galaty, George Bey and Timothy Ward to add a
laser ablation capability to an extant Varian 820 inductively coupled plasma
mass spectrometer and to purchase a handheld XRF spectrometer which can be used
in field research. Both instruments will be housed in Millsap College's W. M.
Keck Center for Instrumental and Biochemical Comparative Archaeology. The goal
of the laboratory is to support interdisciplinary teams of faculty and
undergraduate students in addressing complex archaeological questions using
modern analytical instrumentation. The focus of the team's current research is
to use biochemical and archaeometric science to provide new insight into
comparative archaeology by developing new diachronic models of state formation
in two Old and New World cultural systems: the Bronze-Age Illyrians of Albania
(200 BC - AD 0) and the Formative Mayan cultures of Yucatan, Mexico (900 BC - AD
250). Because a systematic and interdisciplinary comparison of such Old and New
World cultures has not yet been attempted, the research has the potential to
yield significant contributions to understanding the development of complex
societies. The question of when and why "states" formed in some places but not
others, at some times but not others, is of broad scientific interest. One
approach - the one taken here - is to compare factors affecting social
complexity in two different regions, thereby enlightening the study of both. The
requested instrumentation, in addition to that already in hand will provide a
set of valuable analytic tools. It will, for example, be possible to
characterize the basic chemical composition of a range of archaeological
material such as pottery, chipped and ground stone and metal and also to
determine trace-residues. This will allow the use of specific artifacts to be
determined and their movement traced over space from source area to
archaeological site. This will make it possible to reconstruct trade and related
economic systems and thus determine a range of social factors commonly believed
to be implicated in the rise of social complexity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The W.
M. Keck Center serves an entirely undergraduate population at a small college
that emphasizes engaged, "hands-on" learning. It has the potential to introduce
large numbers of undergraduate students to the power of interdisciplinary field
and laboratory research and the laboratory offers followships to further this
goal. The instrumentation will improve the effectiveness of both research and
education.