* 0922638
* Scientific Conference on Casualty Recording and Estimation on May 28-30, 2009 at the Carnegie Mellon University Pittsburgh, PA.
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2011
* Jay Aronson, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 05/31/2011
* USD 69,086.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recording casualties is essential to
any functioning society. Creating such records honors those who have suffered.
It provides a foundation for understanding the processes that caused the
casualties, for providing services that facilitate survivors? recovery, and for
increasing the chances that perpetrators pay for their crimes. Armed conflicts,
and the attendant breakdown of social institutions, greatly complicate the
challenges of creating trustworthy records of individual casualties. In their
absence, inferential methods must be used to generate estimates of the overall
toll. Those who do the work of recording and estimation not only face difficult
technical problems, but often operate in perilous conditions, pressured by those
affected by their conclusions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the stakes riding on
these records and estimates, it is essential that the work be performed to the
highest possible scientific standard. To this end, Carnegie Mellon University
and the University of Pittsburgh will convene an interdisciplinary and
international Conference on Casualty Recording and Estimation. It will bring
together leading researchers in order to identify the state of the science,
including its uncertainties and controversies. The resulting papers and
proceedings will be published in a form accessible to practitioners, including
human rights advocates, humanitarian aid workers, and transitional justice
specialists. It will also contribute to the emerging field of human rights
science, dedicated to producing sound solutions to these intellectually
demanding problems.