* 0922355
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics:  The Effect of Unionization on the Distribution of Wages
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2010
* Joshua Angrist, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2010
* USD 15,000.00

The objective of the research is to estimate the causal effect of unionization
on the distribution of wages. A fundamental obstacle to measuring the effect of
unionization on wages is selection bias: wages within unionized plants may
differ for reasons other than the fact that workers there are represented by a
union. Differences in either worker or plant characteristics could give rise to
an observed difference between the distribution of wages inside and outside of
the unionized sector, confounding the true effect of unionization. This study
seeks to overcome these selection issues by using a regression discontinuity
(RD) research design. The critical feature of the design in this context is that
in order for a union to represent workers at a plant, a majority of the workers
must vote for it in a certification election. If plants and workers where the
union barely won the election are comparable to plants and workers where the
union barely lost, then the effect of unionization on the distribution of wages
can be estimated. The research implements a newly developed methodology to
estimate distributional effects using the RD design. The methodology allows for
unionization to have heterogeneous effects, and allows for selection effects in
union status. The estimates produced by this methodology are consistent for the
effect of unionization on the distribution of wages for plants that were close
to the election share cutoff of 50 percent. In order to measure the effect of
unionization on the distribution of workers' wages, the research uses
individual-level wage data from the U.S. Census Bureau's Longitudinal Employer-
Household Dynamics (LEHD) program. The Employment History File (EHF) contains
quarterly records of individuals' UI-covered earnings. This project uses the
LEHD's Unit-to-Worker imputation to merge individual wage data with plant-level
NLRB union certification election data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The role of unions
in the labor market and their effect on the distribution of wages have long been
an important topic in labor economics, but especially over the past three
decades, as the decline in unionization rates may be a contributing factor to
the increasing inequality observed in the US income distribution. Research to
date has tended to focus on average effects because of available econometric
techniques. A number of recent studies (e.g., DiNardo and Lee, 2004) have
introduced quasi-experimental methods, including RD to estimate the causal
effect of unions on economic outcomes. This is a promising approach to overcome
the classical selection bias. Many studies have also considered the effect of
unions on inequality, but none to date have combined quasi-experimental methods
with a focus on distributional effects. The intellectual merit of this study
lies in the application of new econometric techniques to estimate using a quasi-
experimental design, the distributional effect of unionization, and in the use
of large administrative datasets that are likely to provide better accuracy and
statistical power than survey data used in many previous
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The causal effect of unionization
on the distribution of wages is important to to discussions of inequality, both
in policy and academic circles. The broader impact of the research includes
informing policy debates around the role of unions in the labor market (for
example, the Card Check Bill recently introduced in Congress), as well as the
academic debate about the relative importance of institutional change versus
skill-biased technological change. Another broader impact is the creation of a
single dataset with merged administrative data on both individual workers and
plants which will of value to future researchers.&lt;br/&gt;