* 0922125
* Collaborative Research:  Reputational Bargaining with Two-Sided Asymmetric Information About Fundamentals
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Dilip Abreu, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2014
* USD 160,758.00

Most of the models economists use to predict outcomes of bilateral bargaining
assume symmetric information: the two bargainers know everything they need to
know about one another. But bargaining in the real world is usually conducted
under two-sided asymmetric information: both parties wish they knew more about
the other side's goals, priorities, strengths and weaknesses. These situations
have eluded economists' grasp for many decades.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
funds work on a new approach to modeling bilateral bargaining with two-sided
asymmetric information. It borrows heavily from the reputation formation
literature initiated twenty-five years ago and first used to study entry into
previously monopolized markets. The idea is that recognizing bargainer's
incentives to form reputations (for being stubborn, or retaliatory, and so on)
not only enriches the analysis, but also gives clearer results. The hope is to
better understand how bargainers in these rich informational environments
behave.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The kinds of bargaining problems to be studied
arise between countries, between regulators and firms, between suppliers and
producers, and between firms and unions. A better understanding of bargaining
will provide valuable insights for the formulation of labor law, international
law, and regulatory policy, among many other applications.