* 0922924
* MRI: Acquisition of a System for Novel Synthesis of Glasses in Extreme Environments
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2010
* Steven Feller, Coe College
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 09/30/2010
* USD 144,450.00

0922924&lt;br/&gt;Affatigato&lt;br/&gt;Coe
College&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant
will allow the Coe College glass research groups to enhance their glass making
capabilities through the addition of a laser beam heated aerodynamic levitation
system. This system will enable them to extend the compositional range of
several technologically important glass families; to study novel glassy
materials; and to train undergraduate students in cutting-edge materials
development. It will also allow the Coe groups to grow their abilities in the
preparation of exotic oxide glasses and glasses at compositional extremes. The
instrumentation will be initially used for the study of new glass forming
systems, including pure oxide glassformers like TeO2 and Sb2O3 and binaries like
Na2O-Bi2O3.; for the study of fragility in lead- and alkali-aluminate systems;
and to investigate polyamorphism in borate glasses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
advantages of the laser-beam-heated levitation system in novel synthesis are
many. It can attain sample temperatures from about 500 to 3000 K, much higher
than traditional furnaces. It avoids heterogeneous crystallization (and hence
enhances glass formation) by providing a containerless processing environment
that completely eliminates contact with surfaces. It ensures the purity of the
final sample by avoiding possible crucible contamination, regardless of the
reactivity (corrosion) of the melt. A cadre of undergraduate students will be
trained in the operation of the levitation system, exposing them to a state-of-
the-art manufacturing technique.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Layman?s
summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently the nation needs new materials for a
variety of challenges in the field of energy, medicine, national security, and
the environment. These new applications often require the development of novel
materials beyond what is available through normal manufacturing methods, as well
as groups of scientists with the know-how of the materials?
production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research to be carried out under this grant
will enable Coe College scientists, together with their undergraduate students,
to make glasses under extreme conditions. Namely, they will use a laser-heating
and levitation setup to melt and then float, in mid-air, a pellet of glass. By
using this ?containerless? processing, they will be able to make new glasses and
traditional glasses at unheard-of chemical compositions. They will also look at
the differences in the structures of glasses as a function of cooling rates and
other factors. In the process they will train a cadre of young scientists on the
skills required to manufacture cutting-edge amorphous materials, readying them
for future challenges in their careers. The students will get their training
primarily through the research work?a significant boost for undergraduate
researchers?but also through the use of the instrument in selected physics
courses.