* 0922938
* MRI: Acquisition of a Nanomill for Preparing Highest-Quality TEM Specimens
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Arthur Heuer, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 09/30/2012
* USD 158,000.00

0922938 Ernst Case Western

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

Technical Abstract

We request funds for a Nanomill, a novel ultra-low-energy concentrated ion beam
system for preparing highest-quality specimens for transmission electron
microscopy. Designed to perform the final polishing step on specimens that have
been pre-prepared by conventional techniques or by a focused ion beam (FIB)
system, this instrument is capable of entirely removing the amorphous damaged
layers that usually degrade high- resolution TEM images and often obscure
important details of the true specimen structure. The instrument is for the
Swagelok Center for Surface Analysis of Materials at Case Western Reserve
University, one of the best centers of its kind in the USA. The total number of
academic users per year always exceeds 100 and includes undergraduate students,
graduate students, post- doctoral researchers, and faculty. The Center also
plays an important role in the CWRU materials science curriculum as well as for
demonstrations to middle school students. Among the most powerful and expensive
pieces of equipment are two state-of-the-art transmission electron microscopes
(total cost: $3.6 Million). However, we can presently not really exploit the
superior abilities of these instruments because our equipment for specimen
preparation is not adequate. The proposed Nanomill will close this critical gap
and enable major advances in a variety of materials research projects, including
a major research program involving 4 faculty and more than 10 graduate students
and post-doctoral researchers at CWRU, aiming to understand and develop novel
approaches to surface alloying with interstitial solutes (e.g. ?colossal
supersaturation?) that provide alloy surfaces with exceptional hardness and
corrosion resistance.

Non-Technical Abstract

We request funds for a Nanomill, a novel instrument for preparing highest-
quality specimens for transmission electron microscopy. The instrument is for
the Swagelok Center for Surface Analysis of Materials at Case Western Reserve
University, one of the best centers of its kind in the USA. The total number of
academic users per year always exceeds 100 and includes undergraduate students,
graduate students, post-doctoral researchers, and faculty. The Center also plays
an important role in the CWRU materials science curriculum as well as for
demonstrations to middle school students. Among the most powerful and expensive
pieces of equipment are two state-of-the-art transmission electron microscopes
(total cost: $3.6 Million). However, we can presently not really exploit the
superior abilities of these instruments because our equipment for specimen
preparation is not adequate. The proposed Nanomill will close this critical gap
and enable major advances in a variety of materials research projects.