* 0922393
* MRI:Acquisition of a 500 MHz NMR to Support Teaching and Research with Undergraduates
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Mary Hatcher, Claremont McKenna College
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2012
* USD 483,521.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) program, Mary
Hatcher and colleagues Thomas Poon, Anna Wenzel and Burke S. Williams from
Claremont McKenna College will acquire a 500 MHz NMR spectrometer to support
research from investigators at this college as well as some from Pitzer and
Scripps Colleges and Harvey Mudd and Pomona Colleges. Some of the research
projects that will be supported by this spectrometer include 1) the study of
dynamics of DNA oligomers to better understand the role of DNA dynamics in
protein-DNA recognition events and the effects of cytosine methylation, 2)
studies of how titanium complexes of chiral amino-alcohol ligands catalyze the
asymmetric catalytic hydroamination of aminoallenes to give chiral alpha-vinyl
pyrrolidine products, 3) determination of structures of natural product
antibiotics, 4) study of hydrogen bonding in carbohydrates, 5) chacterization of
the stereocontrol of reactions involving singlet oxygen, 6) mimicking biological
reaction pathways in the construction of the complex natural products
(+)-davanone and endiandric acid and to study the selectivity of these
biomimetic cyclizations, 7) investigation of asymmetric methodologies for the
preparation of chiral small molecules, and 8) investigation of hybridization
effects on carbon-carbon (C-C) bond formation reactions and the characterization
of unusual C-C sigma-agostic complexes.

Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools
available to chemists for the elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is
used to identify unknown substances, to characterize specific arrangements of
atoms within molecules, and to study the dynamics of interactions between
molecules in solution. Access to state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential
to chemists who are carrying out frontier research. The results from these NMR
studies will have an impact in synthetic organic/inorganic chemistry and
biochemistry. This instrument will be an integral part of teaching as well as
research.