* 0922461
* Optimal Lending and Investment with Default Risk
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Hugo Hopenhayn, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 07/31/2013
* USD 243,750.00

Intellectual merit&lt;br/&gt;There is growing concern about the risk of default
and its implications for the structuring of lending contracts. Default and
breach of contract appear to be quite pervasive and costly in a wide variety of
situations ranging from firm lending, sovereign debt and opportunistic quit
behavior. In all these cases, the financing agents (lenders, firms) may fail to
share returns to the investments to cover their costs while the borrower/worker
may find alternative uses for their capital and resources. How should contracts
be&lt;br/&gt;designed in the presence of default risk? How does the risk of
default constrain lending and investment? These are the main questions addressed
in this proposal. More specifically, the purpose of this proposal is to consider
optimal financing in dynamic settings in the presence of default risk. We
consider an environment where default/inefficient separations occur with
positive probability under the optimal contract. Financing is constrained by
voluntary repayment: the borrower can, at any moment, walk away for some outside
opportunity. The value of the outside opportunity is random and private
information. This is the key difference with the existing literature and implies
that default actually occurs with positive probability as part of the optimal
contract. Our approach thus provides contract theoretic foundations for
endogenous default and implications for the time profile of borrowing
constraints and investment. We place no ad hoc assumptions on contracting, but
impose the constraints arising from the agent's private information and lack of
commitment. Our model allows for a few different economic interpretations. The
most obvious is the financing of a firm, where the lender is an entrepreneur
undertaking an investment project and the borrower is a bank seeking to finance
this project. Alternatively, one can apply the model to human capital
investments and on-the-job training. The borrower in this case is a worker
accumulating skills while working at a firm. The firm helps finance this
investment but is concerned about retaining the worker. Or similarly, a
researcher in an R&amp;D lab that may quit benefiting elsewhere from ideas
developed in the lab. Finally, the model can be applied to an international
context by interpreting the borrower as a sovereign government seeking to
finance its government spending, including public investments, from foreign
investors. In all these situations, the risk of default/separation constrains
the possibilities of investment. In turn, the&lt;br/&gt;accumulation of capital
is likely to have an impact on outside opportunities and consequently on default
risk. An optimal dynamic contract considers this optimal tradeoff over time. The
approach we propose has the additional advantage of providing a very tractable
framework. The optimal dynamic contract is the solution to a problem that can be
easily characterized for simple cases and very easily computed more generally.
This contrasts with existing dynamic models of default that are extensively used
in the sovereign debt literature- that are very difficult to characterize and
carry a very high computational burden.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact&lt;br/&gt;The
research proposed provides a novel and very tractable framework to study
problems of lending and investment with default risk. There is a large
literature ranging from Finance, consumer theory, labor economics and
international economics to which the model applies. Our research will thus
provide a theoretical framework to look at evidence in this area. Moreover, it
will help better understand the structuring of contracts to mitigate default
risk while taking advantage of investment opportunities. From a methodological
point of view, the modeling approach (continuous time/Poisson arrivals) is also
quite novel in the dynamic contracts literature and proved to have considerable
advantages over the standard (discrete time) approach. Future research in this
area will find this approach useful.