* 0922464
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Technologically-Assisted Later Motherhood in Israel
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,02/28/2011
* Susan Mckinnon, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 02/28/2011
* USD 14,373.00

University of Virginia doctoral student Jennie C. Doberne, supervised by Dr.
Susan McKinnon, will undertake research on how technologically-assisted later
motherhood, which is increasingly common in many countries, affects commonly
accepted understandings of family, generation, science, and nation. The research
will be carried out in Israel, where female citizens have unparalleled access to
assisted reproductive technologies enabling pregnancy at advanced (40-51 years)
maternal age.

Doberne will conduct twelve months of ethnographic research in Tel Aviv, the hub
of Israeli fertility medicine. Data collection will include participant
observation in a fertility clinic and a hospital maternity unit; semi-structured
interviews with patients, medical practitioners and relevant professionals;
direct observations of medical conferences and online patient support groups;
and analysis of popular representations of reproduction in media and other
public sources.

This research examines the changing intersections of gender, technology, family,
and aging, a site of emerging public health issues as women in many countries
delay childbearing. By focusing particularly on later motherhood, this study
will elucidate the wider effects of assisted reproductive technologies on such
culturally-specific concepts of kinship and family. The researcher also will
examine how accepting risk for pronatalist goals affects the meaning of
technology in the context of nation-building. Finally, funding this research
supports the training of a social scientist.