* 0922108
* Mechanisms of Iron Oxidation during Banded Iron Formation Deposition 3.26 Billion Years Ago
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Heath Mills, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2012
* USD 330,926.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This project?s objective is to identify the source of oxidized iron minerals in
the 3.26-billion-year-old Manzimnyama Jaspillite Member of South Africa, one of
the oldest well-preserved examples of a class of rocks called banded iron
formations. Banded iron formations provide a record of iron oxidation occurring
in the Earth?s oceans from >3.7- to 1.8-billion-years-ago. One of the first
hypotheses explaining the origins of these rocks suggested that oxygen produced
by photosynthetic bacteria growing in shallow water reacted with dissolved iron
supplied from the deep ocean, producing oxidized iron minerals which settled to
the sea floor. Banded iron formations were therefore thought to provide evidence
for the very early evolution of oxygen-producing photosynthetic bacteria.
However, later hypotheses have provided alternative explanations for early iron
oxidation. In some circumstances, exposure to ultraviolet light can rapidly
oxidize dissolved iron, so it is possible that some early banded iron formations
may have been formed without the action of living organisms. It is now also
known that some photosynthetic bacteria can oxidize iron directly without
producing oxygen. Since non-oxygen-producing photosynthesis evolved before
oxygen-producing photosynthesis, it is possible that early banded iron
formations formed in this way. At present, there is no known way to determine
which hypothesis is correct for any particular banded iron formation.
Successfully testing these hypotheses will provide important new evidence about
the evolution of photosynthesis and the early biosphere.

Our approach exploits characteristics of two naturally occurring metals,
manganese and cerium, both of which oxidize in the presence of oxygen.
Critically, neither should be oxidized as rapidly as iron by ultraviolet light
or at all by iron-oxidizing photosynthetic bacteria. Our predictions are that

1. banded iron formations formed in the presence of oxygen would contain
oxidized manganese and cerium; 2. banded iron formations formed primarily from
ultraviolet promoted iron oxidation would contain some oxidized manganese and
cerium but much less than those formed in the presence of oxygen; 3. and that
banded iron formations formed by iron-oxidizing (non-oxygen-producing)
photosynthetic bacteria would not contain any oxidized manganese and cerium.

We will test this hypothesis by conducting metal oxidation experiments with
ultraviolet light, oxygen-producing photosynthetic bacteria, and iron-oxidizing
photosynthetic bacteria to measure the relative oxidation rates of iron,
manganese, and cerium under these three conditions. We will simultaneously test
for variations in relative iron, manganese, and cerium sedimentation rates in
the Manzimnyama Jaspillite Member and the 3.42-billion-year-old Buck Reef Chert,
an iron-rich unit showing no evidence for iron oxidation. Geological results
will be compared with experimental results to infer the major process
responsible for iron oxidation during deposition of a 3.26-billion-year-old
banded iron formation.

Broader Impacts: All research will be conducted by a graduate student supervised
by the PI and co-PI. In addition, experimental work will be aided by an
undergraduate student, potentially for an undergraduate honors thesis. Results
and specific experiments will be incorporated into a graduate level geobiology
course taught by the PI and an undergraduate course in astrobiology and early
life to be developed by the PI and co-PI. The undergraduate course will be
organized so as to take advantage of long-distance learning web technology to
serve undergraduates throughout the Texas A&M University System, including
campuses with high populations of underrepresented minorities.

