* 0922850
* MRI: Acquisition of an Ultrahigh Analytical Thermal Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope for Research and Education
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Xiao Li, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2011
* USD 478,800.00

MRI Proposal No. 0922850&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MRI: Acquisition of an Ultrahigh
Analytical Thermal Filed Emission Scanning Electron Microscope for Research and
Education&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This award is funded under the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5)"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This MRI proposal
requests to acquire a high resolution scanning electron microscope (HRSEM) for
interdisciplinary research and education at the University of South Florida
(USF). The HRSEM instrument with ultrahigh-resolution and optimized analytical
functionality will provide much-needed improvement to the research
infrastructure at the USF. This proposal, in different ways, affects many on-
going research activities and the proposed equipment will provide the
opportunity to conduct high-quality research and will also allow the development
and creative partnership with industry. Numerous new scientific investigations
will be enabled with the new equipment. The proposed research projects cover a
broad area of research related to synthesis and characterization of high-
performance materials for manufacturing applications and a HRSEM will provide an
opportunity to conduct high-quality research to understand the microstructural
properties of the materials. Establishment of a HRSEM capability to support
these activities will leverage current and future funded programs.
&lt;br/&gt;This project is expected to have significant impact on research,
education, research training, and infrastructure building at the USF. This
research will train students in emerging cross-disciplinary areas. The results
of the research will be widely disseminated through inclusion in courses and
modules developed by PIs, demonstrations and outreach to community colleges.
Apart from providing hands-on experience and the obvious preparation for
graduate studies, the proposed research will provide a unique opportunity for
the students to be involved in interdisciplinary research - a must for future
success. Results of the project will be disseminated by paper presentation in
regional and national conferences, and published in journal.