* 0922996
* MRI: Development of A Versatile Service-Oriented Wireless Mesh Network for Disaster Relief And Environmental Monitoring in Puerto Rico
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Domingo Rodriguez, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2012
* USD 412,979.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Proposal #: CNS 09-22996 PI(s): Lu, Kejie; Rodriguez, Domingo Institution:
University of Puerto Rico - Mayaguez Title: MRI/Dev.: Versatile Service-Oriented
Wireless Mesh Network for Disaster Relief & Environmental Monitoring

Project Proposed: This project, developing a versatile service-oriented wireless
mesh network (WMN), VESO-MESH, that can be quickly built to respond to natural
disaster, establishes a data intensive environmental monitoring application
specifically addressing hurricanes and earthquakes. The VESO-MESH architecture
aims to - Integrate distributed processes and storage devices into the network
so as to provide effective data process and access inside the network, -
Construct high-throughput backbone in WMN emphasizing the transmission of a
larger volume of data, and - Design and implement a set of service-oriented
protocols to efficiently provide services to users inside the network and
effectively utilize the network resources in terms of energy, processing,
storage, etc.

Broader Impacts: The work promises to enable high-throughput data applications
in disaster relief and environmental monitoring scenarios. It also plays a
critical role in improving recruitment and retention of minorities at a large
minority-serving institution with a high focus in engineering and a large
enrollment of women. Curriculum materials will be developed and disseminated.
The project provides educational and training opportunities for students at all
levels in an EPSCoR jurisdiction.