* 0922748
* MRI: Acquisition of a Computing Cluster for Astrophysics and Nuclear Physics Research at the University of Richmond
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Gerard Gilfoyle, University of Richmond
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2012
* USD 161,912.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support a 15-node
computing cluster and 6 TByte of storage to support co-operating research
programs in astrophysics and nuclear physics at the University of Richmond,
making faculty more productive and helping train students in modern data mining
techniques, simulation, and high-performance computing. The NSF-funded
astrophysics research led by PI Bunn focuses on simulations of MBI/BRAIN, a new
cosmic microwave background polarimeter being built by researchers at Brown
University and the University of Wisconsin, in collaboration with a European
group centered at the Universite de Paris. This instrument is a technology
pathfinder for a planned future satellite-borne telescope, with the ultimate
goal of detecting the signature of gravitational waves produced by inflation in
the very early Universe. The nuclear physics research centers on unraveling the
structure of the nucleon and the nature of quark confinement. This project
involves extracting the distribution of charge and current in the neutron, and
measuring the properties of the nuclear force via the breakup of the simplest
nucleus, the deuteron.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The equipment obtained with this
award will enhance the engagement of undergraduates in these cutting-edge
projects, by reducing the extended processing times that are a barrier to
learning and meaningful undergraduate student research involvement. It will also
give students experience with the design and execution of large-scale projects.