* 0922604
* Epigenetic Landscapes and Transcriptomes in Two Maize Inbred Lines and Their Heterotic Hybrids
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Xing-Wang Deng, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 08/31/2013
* USD 500,000.00

Heterosis (or hybrid vigor) is the phenomenon where the progeny of diverse
inbred parents within a species have superior biomass, stature and/or fertility
compared to either of the inbred parental lines. Although heterosis is commonly
exploited in crop production, the molecular basis is largely unknown. This
proposal will address whether small RNAs and epigenetic modifications (such as
histone modifications and DNA methylation) are involved in regulation of
heterosis in maize. This project will employ next-generation sequencing to
provide genome-wide profiling of messenger RNA and small RNA transcriptomes and
selected epigenetic modifications in two inbred lines and their reciprocal
hybrid offspring. A systematic analysis of these data will provide genome-wide
maps of DNA methylation, histone modification patterns, sequence polymorphisms,
small RNA abundance, and gene expression levels in the maize inbred lines and
their reciprocal hybrids. This in-depth analysis of a selected model pair of
maize lines will aid in achieving the long-term goal of understanding the
molecular mechanisms of heterosis in maize. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding
the molecular events underlying heterosis has the potential to improve crop and
livestock breeding programs. In addition, because heterosis is potentially a
driving evolutionary force, elucidating its molecular basis will contribute to
our understanding of the evolution of species. This project will provide
training to young researchers at the postdoctoral, graduate, and undergraduate
levels. In addition, the project will support an outreach program that couples
undergraduate summer research projects with undergraduate classes and projects
during the academic year. This project will be integrated into undergraduate
bioinformatics and molecular biology curricula through class assignments and
project-based lessons. Project personnel will also participate in various
outreach events targeting younger students. A website
(http://plantgenomics.biology.yale.edu) will be developed to provide public
access to the data and provide a summary of the project. All datasets will be
deposited at the NIH GEO repository (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo) and the
Plant Gene Expression database (PLEXdb) at http://plexdb.org.