* 0922946
* MRI: Acquisition of an Atomic Force Microscope and a Tunable Infrared Laser for Advanced Interface Engineering and Interrogation
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Karen Vardanyan, Rutgers University Camden
* Standard Grant
* Gary Fischman
* 07/31/2012
* USD 396,275.00

This award is for the acquisition of laser systems and an atomic force
microscope to pursue novel work in the engineering and characterization of
interfaces. Each of the three investigators brings a unique knowledge base and
experience, and the equipment will allow special collaborative opportunities to
develop. The research that will be performed with these tools includes laser
deposition of polymer films, the characterization of fungal-plant interfaces,
and liquid crystal diffraction grating research. While the pairing of two
physicists and a biologist may seem unusual, it is precisely this type of
interaction that will allow for the advancement of knowledge across disciplinary
boundaries. An example of this work is the nanomechanical characterization of
the plant-fungi interface and the subsequent capture and interrogation of the
vapors emitted by competing species of fungi. It would not be likely that we
could pursue this research as individual investigators and the equipment will
allow us to thoroughly capitalize on our mutual interests. Other research that
will be pursued involves the deposition and characterization of liquid crystal
nanocomposite films and the resonant desorption of analyte compounds to
facilitate the detection of explosives and other chemicals of interest.

The broader impacts of the award begin with the fact that it is intrinsically
multidisciplinary (as noted above) and therefore affords the participation by a
wide group of students drawn from each of the three science departments.
Rutgers-Camden is located adjacent to Philadelphia in the city of Camden, NJ. It
draws a very diverse pool of students from an area that has been historically
recognized as one of the most troubled cities in America (Camden). However,
Camden borders on Moorestown and Cherry Hill, which are nationally known as some
of the best suburban towns to live in. Since most of our students come from the
surrounding counties, the student body greatly resembles the populace. As part
of Rutgers-The State University of New Jersey, we have institutional resources
that are greater than most schools of our size, yet the distinct character of
this campus is rooted in and informed by a commitment to undergraduate education
with an emphasis on student participation in research. The acquisition of this
equipment will greatly enhance both education and practical training through
laboratory curricula and advanced research projects. Finally, each of the
investigators will forge new directions in their respective research programs.