* 0922142
* Some Issues in Analytic Inference from Complex Surveys
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Jay Breidt, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2013
* USD 447,887.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Surveys represent a key source of data
in a wide range of scientific disciplines, and are often an important input in
public and corporate decision-making processes. While the primary use of survey
data is to describe the population from which the sample was drawn, analysts are
increasingly using those data to make inference about statistical models. This
use of survey data in model estimation and analysis is referred to as analytic
inference for survey data. Survey data producing organizations usually recommend
that survey weights be used in all model fitting with survey data, in order to
account for the sampling design and the post-sampling adjustments. This often
significantly complicates the work of data analysts, in large part because the
effect of survey weighting in analytic inference is still incompletely
understood. This research will explore some long-standing open issues in
analytic inference for surveys. First, within the survey-weighted mode of
inference, the PIs will investigate improved variance estimation methods and
distributional theory. Second, they will evaluate a number of alternatives to
survey weighting in model fitting and inference. This research will advance the
state of knowledge in how to properly conduct analytic inference for survey data
by bringing together concepts, methods and approaches from survey statistics and
other areas of statistics. Ultimately, it will enhance the ability of data
analysts to conduct perform analytic inference for survey data. Because of the
importance of survey data collection and analysis in so many disciplines, the
results of the proposed research will be widely applicable.