* 0922493
* Elucidating the Genetic Architecture of ProVitamin A and Vitamin E Biosynthesis in Seed
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2010,05/31/2016
* Torbert Rocheford, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* thomas okita
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,399,384.00

PI: Dean DellaPenna (Michigan State University)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CoPIs: C.
Robin Buell (Michigan State University), Edward S. Buckler (Cornell
University/USDA-ARS), and Torbert R. Rocheford (Purdue
University)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Key Collaborators: Michael A. Gore (University
of Arizona/USDA-ARS) and Jianbing Yan (CIMMYT,
Mexico)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Senior Personnel: Dick Johnson (University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign) and Theresa M. Fulton (Cornell
University)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Carotenoids are a group of several hundred
distinct chemical compounds that are essential for vision and immune system
function and as natural colorants in fresh and processed foods. Some carotenoids
(betacarotene, alpha-carotene and beta-cryptoxanthin) are the major provitamin A
compounds in the human diet while others such as lutein and lycopene play a role
in decreasing the incidence and severity of macular degeneration or prostate
cancer, respectively. The goal of this project is to identify the genes and
their most useful variants (alleles) in maize that determine the levels and
compositions of carotenoids and vitamin E in maize seed. Using information
obtained using the model plant Arabidopsis, maize genes corresponding to those
responsible for the biosynthesis of carotenoids and vitamin E will be
identified. Knowledge of the natural variation in the content and composition of
these compounds in maize seed will be combined with the recently published
genome sequence of maize and detailed analysis of gene expression during maize
seed development to determine which specific alleles of these genes contribute
the most to beneficial levels of these compounds in maize seed. The alleles
identified can then be used in maize breeding programs to increase the levels of
these compounds to enhance the quality of food and feed derived from maize. This
same approach will also enable the identification of new and novel genes that
play significant roles in determining the levels of carotenoids and vitamin E in
maize. The combined information obtained will provide a road map for generating
similar changes for these and other vitamins in other agricultural crops that
serve as major food and feed sources for humanity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the molecular genetic basis of biochemical
traits in agricultural seed crops that are essential for nutrition in humans and
animals is a key component of meeting future global food and feed needs. The
research will provide a comprehensive genetic assessment of natural variation in
two such biochemical pathways and will serve as a model for genome scale
integrative analysis of other areas of plant metabolism in maize and other
agricultural plant species. The large body of publically available gene
expression data generated in this study will provide an unparalleled resource
that will greatly impact the maize research community. The research will provide
a unique environment for educating the next generation of scientists through
engagement of high school, undergraduate, and graduate students as well as
postdoctoral associates in research at interfaces of plant genetics, genomics,
quantitative genetics and plant biochemistry. The researchers will engage under-
represented groups in plant scientific research through targeted recruitment of
Hispanic undergraduates to the research programs at all three universities. This
outreach will include educating preschool children, K-12 students, and
undergraduates in the concepts of genetics, plant breeding, biochemistry,
nutrition, food sources and their relevance to diet and health. As vitamin
deficiencies are a pervasive global health issue, a practical outcome of this
research will be to provide the basis for more expedient and cost effective
marker-assisted selection programs in maize for enhanced dietary levels of
carotenoids and vitamin E in the US and developing countries. Toward this end,
the project have established a network with researchers at CIMMYT (Mexico) and
IITA (Nigeria) to facilitate seamless transfer of relevant results into active
international breeding programs targeting developing countries. All data
generated through this project will be available at the project website
(http://www.maizegenomics.plantbiology.msu.edu) and through long-term data
repositories that include the NCBI GEO (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/) and
Short Read Archive (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Traces/sra/sra.cgi), MaizeGDB
(http://www.maizegdb.org/) and TAIR (http://www.arabidopsis.org/).