* 0922338
* Liquidity in Fragmented Markets
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2015
* Pierre-Olivier Weill, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 06/30/2015
* USD 291,144.00

Intellectual Merit. The objective of this project is to study liquidity in
fragmented financial markets, where trading and asset price formation occurs
within subgroup of investors. The first part of the project, based on joint work
with Bruno Biais, is a theoretical study of limit order trading. The largest
equity and derivative markets around the world operate according to that model
because it is thought to mitigate fragmentation and improve liquidity. Indeed,
limit orders represent investors? trading need while they are absent from the
market. This paper will be the first to study limit order trading in the search
paradigm initiated by Duffie, Garleanu, and Pedersen (2005, 2007). The PI's will
analyze how a theoretical limit order book responds to liquidity shocks, under
the search assumption that investors&lt;br/&gt;can only submit and cancel orders
infrequently. They will show how prices react and adjust; explain the dynamic of
liquidity supply and demand and the corresponding evolution of the order book,
trading volume, and transactions costs; describe investors' optimal trading
strategies and the patterns of order submission that they generate. The proposal
describes the basic framework, preliminary theoretical results and empirical
implications that can be confronted to existing evidence. The PI's also propose
additional directions of research, including a quantitative analysis and an
extension of the model allowing a broader set of orders and
contracts.&lt;br/&gt;The second part of the project is based on joint work.
While most of the PI's research explains the impact of market fragmentation in
specific market contexts, this proposal wants to adopt a macro perspective and
study whether such frictions matter in the aggregate. To that end, the PI
proposes a tractable consumption-based model with many fragmented financial
markets that has simple and intuitive aggregate asset pricing implications.
Equipped with this model, the proposal seeks to ask how a collection of possibly
small fragmentation friction (such as search frictions) cumulates in the
aggregate, and whether they add up to a quantitatively significant macro
friction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. The recent financial market
turmoils and the subsequent macro economic disruptions highlight our need to
better understand market liquidity, and liquidity-improving trading mechanisms.
The project contributes to this agenda by providing coherent dynamic equilibrium
models which are explicit about the trading frictions preventing unfettered
participation in markets. The first model in this project will constitute a
simple platform for studying the welfare impact of alternative market
arrangements, as well as policy interventions. The second model is a first step
in assessing the quantitative aggregate significance of the above mentioned
trading frictions. The findings may be of independent interest to financial
economists, macro-economists, and policy makers alike.