* 0922230
* NSWP:  Poynting and Kinetic-Energy Flux Derived from the FAST Satellite: an Empirical Model
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2009,11/30/2013
* Russell Cosgrove, SRI International
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 11/30/2013
* USD 315,106.00

The primary purpose of this project is to develop improved models of the energy
input from the magnetosphere to the thermosphere at high latitudes using five
years of data from the Fast Auroral Snapshot Explorer (FAST) satellite. Such
information is important for accurate modeling and specification of the
thermospheric neutral densities and circulation and is a necessary input for
space weather models. The methodology involves fitting a model directly to
measurements of the energy input derived from FAST satellite observations with
good time and space resolution. More than 20,000 satellite orbits are available
for analysis. The data will be binned according to geophysical parameters. An
analytical model based on a low order spherical harmonic expansion will then be
fit to the binned data. The model will provide spatial maps of the average
energy input and predictions of the energy input as a function of scale size in
two dimensions for particular values of model parameters. The energy arriving
from the magnetosphere is mostly in the form of Poynting flux traveling along
magnetic field lines and partially converted to kinetic energy in the auroral
acceleration region. Separate models of the relative spatial distribution of
kinetic energy and Poynting flux below the auroral acceleration region will also
be produced. The particular science question being addressed is whether the
localization of energy inputs in the auroral region is imposed by the
magnetosphere or is affected by the auroral acceleration region. If the latter
mechanism is important, investigation will be made of whether the auroral
acceleration region broadens the spatial extent of the region of greatest energy
input. The project has several broader impacts: The models produced will
quantify the energy budget for solar-wind-driven heating of the thermosphere, in
both the spatial and spatial frequency domains. Energy convergence and
conversion in the auroral acceleration region will be quantified using in-situ
measurements. The models will be made available to the community and can be used
to drive models of the global temperature, circulation, and density of the
thermosphere, the specification of which is a key goal of the National Space
Weather Program. A large part of the research will be performed by senior
undergraduate students from Worcester Polytechnic Institute.