* 0922599
* MRI: Acquisition of a Liquid Chromatograph Time of Flight Mass Spectrometer to Enhance Research at Washington and Lee University and Virginia Military Institute
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Lisa Alty, Washington and Lee University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2012
* USD 282,226.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) program, the
Department of Chemistry at Washington and Lee University will acquire a Liquid
Chromatograph Electrospray Ionization Time-of-Flight Mass Spectrometer (ESI/MS)
for teaching and research at Washington and Lee University (W&amp;L) and
Virginia Military Institute (VMI). The ESI/MS will facilitate and impact
research in the following areas: 1) Synthesis of Catalysts for Asymmetric
Synthesis; 2) Synthesis and Characterization of Polyamide Macrocycles and their
Complexes; 3) Separation and Quantitation of Plant Antioxidants; 4) Isolation
and Quantitation of Flavonoids and Flavonoid Glycosides in Alliaria Petiolata;
5) Arthropod Exocrine Chemistry; 6) Mechanism and Regulation of Protein
Phosphatases; 7) Characterization of Vinamidinium Salts; and 8) Mesogens and
Metallomesogens from Flavonoids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mass spectrometry (MS) is
employed to identify the chemical composition of a sample and determine its
purity by measuring the mass of the molecular constituents in the sample after
they are ionized and detected by the mass spectrometer. Liquid chromatography is
a separation technique that precedes the mass spectrometry analysis. It
separates a mixture into its several constituent chemicals which are then
vaporized, analyzed and identified by the mass spectrometer. Electrospray is a
technique used to vaporize and produce the ions from the sample to be studied in
the mass spectrometer. Mass spectrometry is widely used as an analytical tool by
chemists and biochemists. Undergraduate students will be trained in the use of
this important tool preparing them for graduate school, jobs in industry and the
military, and for careers in science teaching. Besides the use by students in
research at both institutions, the ESI/MS will be incorporated into three
courses in the W&amp;L chemistry major's curriculum and one biology course. It
will be used in the Women in Technology and Science Program, in which female
W&amp;L science students mentor middle school girls.