* 0922603
* MRI:   Acquisition of Instrumentation for a Molecular Ecology and Biosystematics Laboratory
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Daniela Shebitz, Kean University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2012
* USD 291,690.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Kean University has been awarded funds
from the NSF to acquire equipment that will establish a core, multi-user DNA
sequencing facility called Molecular Ecology and Biosystematics Laboratory
(MEBL). The instrumentation includes: (1) an Applied Biosystems, four-capillary
AB3130 Genetic Analyzer, with Sequencher 4.2 software workstation; (2) BioRad
DNA Engine Peltier Thermal Cycler + Chromo-4 Real-Time PCR Detection System; (3)
Eppendorf Refrigerated Microcentrifuge (Model 5417R); (4) Eppendorf Mastercyler
Thermal Gradient Cycler (Model E5331000 045); (5) Fisher Scientific Isotemp
Ultralow-Temperature Freezer (Model 13-990-32); (6) Perkin Elmer LAMBDA 950
Spectrophotometer w/ UV/VIS/NIR capabilities; and (7) Percival Scientific P-99
Walk-in Plant Growth Chamber with Advanced Intellius Controller and H-12
Relative Humidity Control Option. The equipment will be used by faculty and
undergraduate students in research centered on the use of DNA sequence
information. The research will address a broad range of questions related to the
molecular ecology and biosystematics of: (1) plant-associated microfungi, (2)
marine macroalgae, (3) melanthiaceous angiosperms and (4) hymenopteran insects
in urban ecosystems. The instruments will be used for undergraduate student
training, especially gender and ethnically underrepresented individuals who are
interested in a career in the sciences. Kean University is ideally suited for
this effort because of its focus on undergraduate education and its highly
diverse and non-traditional student body, and because of its proximity to
leading pharmaceutical and biotech industries in northern New Jersey. The MEBL
will serve as a catalyst for the recruitment and subsequent employment of
underrepresented student groups into the life sciences, in addition to forging
cross-disciplinary ties between Biology, Chemistry and Computer Science
Departments within the University. Additionally, the MEBL will serve as a
foundation for the strengthening of pre-existing curricula, as well as the
development of a set of new curricula specifically focused on the acquisition
and analysis of DNA sequence information. Results from studies conducted with
the new molecular ecology equipment will be published in peer-reviewed journals
and disseminated through student and faculty presentations at regional or
national meetings.