* 0922567
* Social Networks and Decision-Making for Sustainable Agriculture:  Cooperation or Innovation?
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Mark Lubell, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 07/31/2013
* USD 375,874.00

Social networks are an important influence on decision making for both
innovation and cooperation. But what happens when a decision requires assessing
both private benefits associated with innovation and the social benefits of
cooperation? This research examines the role of social networks in sustainable
agriculture by distinguishing between growers' information and cooperation
networks, and analyzing which network structures have a more important influence
on adoption behavior. The sustainable agriculture decisions of California
winegrape growers provide a critical research site because the cooperation
problems of environmental protection and regional reputation are particularly
strong. Furthermore, many viticulture regions have local partnerships in place
designed to change the structure of social networks and encourage the adoption
of sustainable practices. The researchers will use a survey of winegrape growers
in three regions of California (Lodi, Central Coast, and Napa) to analyze the
effectiveness of local partnerships in reshaping social networks to facilitate
sustainable practices. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research contributes to
"sustainability science," which is the application of scientific methods to
analyze the often vague and debated concept sustainability. Sustainable
agriculture promises to change agricultural practices in ways that enhance
economic, environmental, and social welfare. This promise often goes
unfulfilled, however, as the term sustainability is used to justify maintaining
the status quo. This research provides empirical evidence about the social and
institutional variables that will facilitate real changes in agricultural
practices.