* 0922596
* MRI:  Development of a New Instrument to Observe Isotopic Fluxes of Methane and Carbon Dioxide from Arctic Melt Regions, to Link Carbon Fluxes, Climate Feedbacks and Sea Level Rise
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* James Anderson, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Pszenny
* 07/31/2011
* USD 1,048,994.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The primary objective of this project is to construct a new generation of field-
deployable instrumentation capable of establishing simultaneously the
isotopically differentiated (carbon-12 and carbon-13) fluxes of carbon dioxide
and methane emitted from the carbon reservoirs of the high latitude permafrost
regions of the Northern Hemisphere as these systems melt with the advance of
increased temperatures. The determination of the fluxes of these carbon isotopes
from Arctic carbon reservoirs is a critically important set of observations that
is needed for the prediction of both the rate and irreversibility of the climate
forcing resulting from the flow of heat into these systems. Observing these
isotopic fluxes with the requisite precision and traceable accuracy in real time
will be achieved with a new instrument that combines recent advances on multiple
technological fronts including: Integrated Cavity Output Spectroscopy (ICOS) to
achieve path lengths of 2 to 4 kilometers in a 50 centimeter cell, field-
programmable gate-array based control electronics, advanced mid-infrared
electro-optic technology, and high-level software fitting routines for data
analysis.

This instrumentation development project will reflect the highly
interdisciplinary nature of climate research at Harvard that directly links
faculty, postdoctoral scientists, graduate and undergraduate students across the
Departments of Earth and Planetary Sciences, Chemistry and Chemical Biology, and
the School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, and will engage the Harvard
University Center for the Environment. The new observations will involve highly
collaborative activities with colleagues studying the fusion of in situ data
with regional models, with colleagues studying the biogeochemistry of carbon
dioxide and methane release from reservoirs at mid and high latitudes, with
colleagues studying the paleorecord, with colleagues involved in developing
computer modeling strategies for climate forecasting, and with the large
community of undergraduates and graduate students at Harvard and at other
universities across the country. Student-level engagement from concept to
completion is crucial, not only to the successful construction and deployment of
the proposed carbon isotope instrument, but to the broader scientific future of
the United States, which will come to rely even more on scientists whose
training and philosophy is centered on the physical sciences in the service of
key societal objectives. Because of the scale of the carbon flux problem, the
design of the instrument will be made freely available to the broader climate
research community.