* 0922826
* MRI: Acquisition of a High Speed Imaging System for Fundamental and Applied Research/Teaching at Bradley University
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2011
* Scott Post, Bradley University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 07/31/2011
* USD 406,467.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This award provides funds to Bradley University to acquire a state-of-the-art
high-speed imaging system for research and education in the areas of dynamic
fracture mechanics of advanced materials, fluid dynamics and biomedical
engineering. The main component of this imaging system is a high-speed/high-
resolution rotating mirror CCD camera capable of capturing 62 one-megapixel
images over a wide range of frame rates up to 800,000 frames per second. The
system also includes ultra-high magnification zooming lenses allowing for micron
resolution (up to 1.5 micrometers/pixel). This system will enable Bradley
investigators to (a) understand and predict the mechanical and fracture response
of polymer-based materials over a wide range of strain rates by measuring in
real-time their dynamic deformation process using the full-field digital image
correlation technique; (b) study the failure mechanisms in plastic gears
subjected to realistic loading and environmental conditions allowing the
development of reliable models to design plastic gears; (c) study the collisions
of liquid drops to improve current CFD models for fuel sprays, which could
result in reduced emissions and improved fuel economy; and (d)characterize nano-
fiber formation during electrospinning to create a viable microenvironment for
living cells to adhere to, and also to improve current processes utilized to
fabricate fibers.

The acquisition of the high-speed imaging system has broad implications in both
research and education at Bradley University. This instrumentation that will be
incorporated into the PIs research and instructional laboratories will create an
attractive learning environment and enhance the educational experience and
hands-on training of both undergraduate and graduate students. Undergraduate
students will be actively recruited for involvement in the projects mentioned
above. The PIs plan to identify and recruit undergraduate researchers at the end
of their freshman year after completion of their physics and mechanics courses.
The research activities will be carefully organized such that the knowledge
required to properly carry out them will both match and reinforce the material
taught in the classroom. Existing courses in biomedical engineering, imaging
processing, fluid dynamics and fracture mechanics will be expanded and new ones
will be developed to include experiments with this imaging system to show both
the extent and limitations of analytical and numerical models. This
instrumentation will also provide faculty in the College of Engineering and
Technology at Bradley University with the necessary tools to successfully pursue
aspects of their research which are currently not available to them.