* 0922978
* MRI:   Acquisition of an Environmental Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) for Multidisciplinary Research and Undergraduate Research Training at Whitman College
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Gary Rollefson, Whitman College
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 07/31/2013
* USD 407,932.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award funds the acquisition of a
new scanning electron microscope (SEM) at Whitman College. Whitman College has a
track record of 24 years of successful research and student training using
scanning electron microscopy. The college's previous SEM is no longer
functional, and new faculty research programs require the acquisition of a new
instrument capable of capturing higher resolution images and handling wet
biological samples, such as plant embryos and cultured neurons. Features of this
new SEM will allow diverse applications: very low vacuum will allow research of
hydrous Arabidopsis samples for studies of gene functions in plant development,
and the three-nanometer resolution will enable high-quality digital photos of
brain cells, evolutionary adaptations of snake fangs, surfaces of protein
crystals, and traces related to the function and manufacture of prehistoric
tools; these are all components of current, student-centered research programs.
Furthermore the award funds an energy dispersive spectrometer (EDS) attachment
that will acquire and map chemical compositions of stone tools for provenance
studies, compositions of minerals in volcanic rocks for estimates of pressure
and temperatures of pre-eruption crystallization, and compositional variation of
carbonate-rich root casts for carbon cycle studies. This enhanced SEM therefore
will strengthen the research programs of eight faculty members, including two
junior faculty, in three different departments (Biology, Geology, Anthropology),
and it will contribute to cross-disciplinary research. Research results will be
presented at national and regional meetings, submitted for publication in
disciplinary journals, and featured on the Whitman College
website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SEM will also have considerable broader
impacts. Whitman College has an excellent record of training student
researchers, with 50% of students participating in research with the
investigators going on to graduate or professional schools. More than 50% of
students involved in research have been women or members of underrepresented
groups. Because SEM is used in a wide variety of private, governmental, and
academic research fields, use of this instrument in multiple upper-level
courses, as well as research, will prepare students for sophisticated post-
graduate work. Acquisition of an enhanced, environmental SEM will therefore
promote Whitman's ability to continue its strong track record of student
training and faculty research.&lt;br/&gt;