* 0922984
* MRI: Acquisition of a Stable Hydrogen Maser Frequency Standard for mm/submm VLBI Observations of a Black Hole Event Horizon
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Sheperd Doeleman, Northeast Radio Observatory Corp
* Standard Grant
* Gary Schmidt
* 08/31/2012
* USD 287,936.00

The ability of astronomers to detect fine structure details in distant objects
depends upon the angular resolution obtainable from their telescopes and
instruments. Angular resolution is related to the wavelength at which the
observations are made (the smaller the wavelength, the higher the resolution
that can be achieved) and also to the diameter of the observing objective (the
larger the objective, the higher the resolution). In most cases the observing
objective is the size of the telescope's primary mirror. But when multiple
telescopes are used simultaneously and their beams are combined the objective
size becomes the baseline distance between the telescopes used. For several
decades, radio astronomers have taken advantage of large baselines by
coordinating observations between radio telescopes on different continents in a
technique termed Very Long Baseline Interferometry (VLBI). This technique has
enabled radio astronomers (who work at quite long wavelengths compared to that
of visual light) to achieve angular resolutions that rival, and in some cases
surpass, the kinds of resolutions available to optical astronomers. Now Dr.
Sheperd Doeleman of the MIT Haystack Observatory wants to obtain even higher
resolution by moving VLBI observations to shorter wavelengths. His idea will be
made possible, in part, through an award from the National Science Foundation's
Major Research Instrumentation program that will enable him to obtain a very
stable high frequency standard that is necessary to calibrate the observations
at the shorter wavelengths. This new standard will enable observations that will
lead to a better understanding of the environment surrounding the Black Hole at
the center of our Milky Way Galaxy, more than 20,000 light years away.