* 0922288
* BYPASS1 root-to-shoot signaling: the mobile signal interacts with the auxin pathway
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Leslie Sieburth, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Wyatt
* 08/31/2012
* USD 250,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Leslie E. Sieburth&lt;br/&gt;IOS
0922288&lt;br/&gt;BYPASS1 root-to-shoot signaling: the mobile signal interacts
with the auxin pathway&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plants develop
in an integrated manner, even though root and shoot systems are separated
spatially and perceive different environmental conditions. For example, roots
directly detect the soil compaction or drought, but unfavorable conditions also
lead to altered shoot development. Physiological studies have shown that roots
produce signaling molecules that move to the shoot, but how these signaling
molecules modify shoot development is unknown. This project will investigate how
shoot development is modulated by a root-derived long distance signal that is
over-produced in Arabidopsis bypass1 mutants. This root-derived substance
arrests leaf development. Recent data suggest that growth restriction occurs by
reducing responses to auxin, an important plant hormone. The investigators will
use molecular and physiological approaches to investigate hormone responses.
Specific steps of the auxin response pathway will be analyzed using genetic and
biochemical tools. This research program will reveal mechanistic detail of root-
sourced signal interaction with auxin. Root-derived signals that limit shoot
growth impose severe reductions in agriculture. Understanding of how shoot
development programs are regulated by root-derived signals could lead to
alternative agricultural practices that maximize productivity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this work are scientific (advancing our
knowledge of signaling pathways, to be shared through publications and talks at
conferences) and educational. Two undergraduate students, one from an under-
served background, will be trained in genetics and molecular biology. One
postdoctoral scholar will receive communication and teaching training. The
postdoc and undergraduates will work together to develop a laboratory exercise
for an undergraduate developmental biology class. This lab will provide hands-on
experience with long distance signaling, and will be disseminated
widely.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;