* 0922342
* The Media and the State: Historical Evidence from U.S. Newspapers
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Jesse Shapiro, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2015
* USD 494,707.00

Extensive legal and regulatory traditions embed hypotheses about how media
market structure affects the performance of democracy. Testing those hypotheses
requires rich data from a setting with variation in market structure,
quantitative measures of newspaper content, and plausible strategies for
identifying effects of media markets on political markets. This project uses
novel data from the United States to fulfill these requirements and bring new
light to fundamental questions about the role of media in society. The first
part assesses the effect of media markets on political participation and
competitiveness. The analysis supplements limited existing evidence on the
effect of media exposure on political participation. It goes beyond existing
evidence in looking at how those effects vary with market structure: i.e., how
the number and diversity of actors in the media space impacts the political
process, both in terms of participation and candidate selection. The second part
studies how newspapers' incentives shape the ideological diversity of the media
market. It uses new data and methods to conduct the first ever empirical study
of the determination of media slant in the presence of competitors. It uses the
results to answer questions about how consumer tastes, competition, and other
factors affect the degree of diversity and the representation of minority views.
The third part studies the causes and effects of ownership consolidation in the
newspaper industry. It uses data on the economic performance of news markets to
assess alternative explanations for consolidation and analyze its effects on
market performance. It also attempts to explain the major twentieth century
trend towards cross-market ownership consolidation, and tests whether it is
related to trends in within market concentration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: This project produces by far the most comprehensive data archive to
date on the history of U.S. daily newspapers. This will be of broad use to
scholars of media history in all social science and humanities disciplines. The
project provides important empirical evidence on key policy questions relating
to the effects of the news media on society and the appropriate regulation of
media market structure. The project also creates opportunities to train
undergraduate and graduate students in empirical research using a novel dataset
that may form a useful starting point for independent research.&lt;br/&gt;