* 0922733
* Acquisition of a Quadrupole Laser Ablation ICP-MS for Materials Science, Biology, Earth and Environmental Science and Anthropology at Washington College
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2010,05/31/2014
* Karl Kehm, Washington College
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 05/31/2014
* USD 333,579.00

This grant will be used to acquire a quadrupole inductively coupled plasma mass
spectrometer (ICPMS) with a laser ablation (LA) system to support research in
geosciences, chemistry, biology and anthropology at Washington College. The
quadrupole LA-ICPMS is a highly flexible instrument capable of sensitive and
precise measurements of a wide range of elements in liquid or solid samples. The
LA-ICPMS will be used in the exploration of benign synthetic pathways for the
production of modern electroceramics, in the analysis of solar wind elemental
ratios by stepped etching of lunar soil grains, in a study of the impacts of
prescribed burning on the chemistry of a weathered soil on the mid-Atlantic
Coastal Plain, in a study of the interactions of toxic metals with DNA repair,
in trace element sourcing of metal artifacts and lithic materials from
archaeological sites, and in an investigation of heavy metal contamination in
bottom sediments in marinas on the Chester River in Maryland in collaboration
with the Chester River Association and teachers and students from the Kent
County STEM (science technology engineering mathematics)
academy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research performed using the LA-ICPMS will
create new opportunities for faculty-student collaborative research and
experiential learning at Washington College, which will improve recruitment of
science majors, and enhance research training for students going on to graduate
school and industry. In particular, the investigation of metal contamination in
Chester River sediments will facilitate scientific outreach to local
organizations and public schools, thereby promoting scientific research among
high school students and citizens in our community. The presence of the
instrument will also enhance our efforts to attract underrepresented groups and
women to scientific fields by creating research opportunities for undergraduates
and high school students from diverse backgrounds. The involvement of
researchers from multiple disciplines will generate excitement about science on
our campus and in our community by promoting the continuing growth of the
scientific research culture at Washington College.