* 0922825
* MRI:  Acquisition of High-Rate Testing and Videography Apparatus to Support Collaborative Research in Materials Engineering and Cross-Disciplinary Sciences
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Qingda Yang, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 08/31/2013
* USD 605,974.00

&lt;br/&gt;This 3-year award facilitates the purchase of two pieces of equipment
to form a package well suited to advance research and research-related education
in the areas of (i) Materials for the Built Infrastructure, (ii) High
Performance Composites for Aerospace Applications, and (iii) Atmospheric
Science. &lt;br/&gt;The equipment includes a customized, servo-hydraulic MTS
High Rate Material Testing Workstation and a Phantom V.12 high-speed video
camera. The material testing workstation allows for low- to medium-velocity
impact testing of materials, while the high-speed video camera is used in
conjunction with the material testing workstation to record high-resolution
video of the impact. The accompanying motion analysis software provides state-
of-the-art data collection and analytical capabilities for precise measurements
of distance, velocity, acceleration, and time. Data collection for both
apparatus can reach a threshold of 1,000,000 data samplings per
second.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The equipment-based projects expected to provide
advancements related to ?Materials for the Built Infrastructure? include: (a)
energy harvesting sensors for structural bridge health prognosis, (b) impact
response of sprayed fireproofing, and (c) engineered concrete using polystyrene
fillers and recycled automobile tires. Investigations related to impact-
critical, ?High Performance Composites for Aerospace Applications? include: (a)
biomimetic composites based on fracture of human cortical bone, (b) high-
temperature syntactic foam and phosphorescent coating, and (c) discrete fiber-
reinforced composites using alumina fibers. While the equipment is experimental,
it will validate analytical predictions offered by state-of-the-art programming
facilitated by collaboration with Teledyne and NASA. Equipment utilization in
?Atmospheric Science? consists of studying sea-spray generation phenomena
observed in hurricane force winds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A novel innovation
stemming from the acquired equipment is the creation of a ?Virtual Laboratory?
for real-time exchange of high-speed video and material testing data with remote
collaborators. This internet-based application seamlessly merges into the
existing College of Engineering infrastructure and expands the breadth of
research capabilities of engineering faculty. Furthermore, the Virtual
Laboratory can be expanded to include future equipment such as Magnetic
Resonance Imaging (MRI) and Computed Tomography (CT).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
terms of technology transfer, students on all levels (including high school)
will be gradually exposed to this state-of-the-art technology. Formal equipment
training for undergraduate students has been strategically integrated into the
existing curriculums of the PIs? respective engineering Departments. This
arrangement ensures a large base of trained student operators, exposes students
to state-of-the-art technology, and simultaneously introduces them to the
research arena. Opportunities in the PIs? Research Experience for Undergraduates
(REU) programs allow supervised operation of the equipment, followed by
independent utilization and peer mentoring during advanced graduate
study.&lt;br/&gt;