* 0922005
* Social Science Gateway to TeraGrid
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* John Abowd, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2013
* USD 393,523.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The Virtual Research Data Center at Cornell University has been a successful
research support tool for users of many of the Census Bureau large-scale
confidential data products including, but not limited to, those that are
accessible via the Census Research Data Center network. Over 200 computational
users and 600 download users have benefited from the VirtualRDC resources. Their
scientific publications cite the NSF grants that supported the development of
the VirtualRDC. The proposed activity seeks to keep this support network
flourishing. In addition, most social science researchers face substantial
hurdles when they wish to harness the power of large-scale computational
clusters, in particular when using new, very large synthetic data sets with
their unprecedented detail on people, jobs, and firms. The proposed activity
seeks to extend the VirtualRDC model to allow support of tera-scale social
science computing via the NSF-sponsored TeraGrid resources. The most widespread
statistical software packages used by social scientists, i.e., SAS, Stata, and
SPSS, are not available on the TeraGrid itself or on any of the servers at the
borders of the TeraGrid with fast connections to it. When viewing the problem
through the lens of the typical data-driven research process (extract, edit and
transform data; transfer data to a computational location; and perform analysis)
social science researchers are typically constrained in at least one of these
steps when approaching the high-performance computing clusters on the TeraGrid.
For most data preparation, and for much analysis, the lack of standard
statistical analysis and data preparation software packages is a serious
impediment. However, the typical social scientist workstation or university-
provided computational infrastructure does not have the resources to handle
these very large data sets. Furthermore, the social science workstation and the
university-provided infrastructure do not have sufficiently fast data
connectivity to transfer any large prepared data files to the TeraGrid for
processing there. This project aims to remedy bottlenecks in the first and
second steps, with a focused expansion of resources at a critical location
resulting in a highly useful gateway to the TeraGrid for the social sciences.
The project builds a social science TeraGrid gateway that (i) allows researchers
to perform the data preparation step using their comfort-level software
packages, speeding up the data preparation phase, and (ii) do so on servers that
have a fast connection to the TeraGrid, thus greatly speeding up the data-
transfer process. The third bottleneck absence of social statistics packages on
the TeraGrid is not addressed by this proposal, since it would require
resources, in particular licensing resources, an order of magnitude larger than
our proposed budget. This step is left to future proposals.

Broader impacts: Tera-scale social science data are underutilized. Initially,
serious confidentiality issues prevented most researchers from accessing these
data. Significant research effort on projects that solve most of these
confidentiality issues in combination with an expansion of the restricted-access
model via Census Research Data Centers has begun to address this
underutilization. Now that an increasing number of previously confidential data
sources are finding their way into the public domain, the quantity of social
science public-use data is once-again expanding dramatically. This project
proposes a method of unlocking those recently released data sources to allow
much broader access by the research community. Research strategies such as very
large scale resampling and synthesis, which were previously proposed but not
technically feasible, will be implemented. The expected explosion of use will
lead to new results in a multitude of social sciences. The knowledge gained from
running the Social Science TeraGrid Gateway will be leveraged and applied to
future proposals in which the third identified bottleneck the absence of
familiar software for social scientists on large-scale computing resources will
be addressed. The PIs on this proposal are actively involved with other research
teams that are moving forward with the development of such proposals. The long-
term goal of this proposal is that the tools put together for the research
community through this proposal will be the building blocks for bigger, and more
transparent mechanisms, for granting social scientists easy access to large-
scale computational facilities.