* 0922540
* Collaborative Research: Estimation and computation of dynamic oligopoly and network effects models
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Gautam Gowrisankaran, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2013
* USD 207,164.00

This project investigates consumer electronics markets for new durable goods
such as DVD players, digital camcorders and digital cameras. Consumers in these
markets often delay purchases in anticipation of future price decreases and
quality increases while firms typically base their pricing strategies on the
knowledge that this behavior exists. We study different important features of
these markets to evaluate their implications for economic performance and
policy. First, we examine the sources of the dramatic price declines that we
typically observe in these markets. Focusing on digital camcorder and digital
camera markets, we seek to determine the extent to which these declines are due
to strategic pricing by suppliers, entry by new competitors, and exogenous cost
declines. We perform this analysis by estimating the determinants of cost and
using the estimates to compute pricing behavior under counterfactual
environments such as a stable product mix over time. Second, we study how
complementary goods markets evolve and create network effects. We are
particularly interested in the success of the DVD market, which required
production and sales of both DVD players and DVD titles. We identify the
contribution of DVD titles to the dominance of the DVD standard, solving several
econometric issues that have not been well-addressed in the relevant previous
literature. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our results bear on antitrust and regulatory
policy towards these markets, the construction of relevant price indices, and
related issues in marketing and management. Our research is also relevant for
other researchers who estimate dynamic demand systems, study durable goods
markets or study oligopoly interactions. Solving dynamic models of consumer
demand and oligopoly supply is complex and, as a result, our solution methods
are new and computationally intensive, and are of independent interest to
researchers and analysts. As with our past projects, we will involve a large
number of graduate and undergraduate students, training them in applied
modeling, numerical techniques and parallel computer use, as well as more
generally in good research practices.