* 0922974
* MRI:  Acquisition of  High-Throughput Calorimeters for Ligand-Biopolymer Discovery and Characterization
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Sarah Assmann, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2012
* USD 459,570.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much of biology is regulated by the
specific and high-affinity binding of ligands to proteins and nucleic acids. In
most cases, however, the interacting molecules are either unknown or poorly
characterized. This project proposes to establish a calorimetry facility at the
Pennsylvania State University that will have high-throughput and high-
sensitivity isothermal titration (ITC) and differential scanning (DSC)
calorimeters. This unique facility will enable detection of ligand and drug
binding to proteins and RNA, which will lead to the discovery and
characterization of a wide range of ligand-biopolymer interactions, as well as
determination of effects of ligand and biopolymer modifications on RNA and
protein stability. New breakthroughs are anticipated in the areas of plant
biology, metabolism, and enzymology, among others. Training opportunities will
be available to undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral personnel at the
interface of biology and chemistry. Research and educational opportunities will
also be provided to Penn State campuses outside the main University Park campus,
including the Altoona and York campuses, which are primarily undergraduate
institutions. Outreach will be provided to underrepresented students at the
undergraduate and high school levels, including hands-on calorimetry experiments
and tours of the facility. Lastly, a short course will be developed on
biothermodynamics that will present theory and provide hands-on training in ITC
and DSC to all users. Scientific discoveries, publications, and educational
material will be disseminated to the public through a Penn State website.