* 0922930
* MRI: Acquisition of a white Light Confocal Imaging Profiler for Dental Texture Analysis of a Global Sample of Ancient Humans.
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Christopher Schmidt, University of Indianapolis
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2010
* USD 214,519.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award permits Dr. Christopher
Schmidt to purchase a Sensofar While Light Confocal Imaging Profiler to be
housed in the Indiana Prehistory Laboratory at the University of Indianapolis.
The instrument will be used to create three dimentional models of dental
occlusal facets at magnifications suitable for dietary reconstruction of
archaeologically-derived human specimens. In the process of mastication,
microscopic alterations occur on the enamel surface and these are, it is
believed, related to the qualities such as hardness and shape of the foods
consumed. Traditional techniques employed to measure such enamel damage
incorporate a significant subjective component and the confocal profiler can
overcome this problem. The instrument will initially be used to address the
question: how does diet affect teeth at the microscopic level. Dr. Schmidt will
quantify the frequency, size, shape and orientation of microscopic pits and
scratches on a group of over 1,000 samples from prehistoric agricultural,
horticultural, pastoral, foraging and fishing communities from across the globe.
This effort will provide a much needed baseline for future studies of recent
historic and prehistoric groups. It will also generate models for interpreting
the diets of Ice Age populations which frequently lack the better preserved
subsistence evidence found at more recent sites. Dr. Schmidt will also examine
the relationship between overall dental macrowear and microwear. This award
therefore will permit the application of an emerging, powerful and promising
technology to questions a central archaeological concern.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential impact of this instrumentation is broad and
includes ten primary collaborators who shall provide samples from North and
South America, Europe, Asia and Africa. An additional four colleagues on the
University of Indianapolis campus also plan to use the instrumentation and both
graduate and undergraduate students will have access to the profiler. Students
in dental science, skeletal biology, microbiology and plant science will also
find the instrument research relevant.