* 0922600
* Time-Varying Risk of Disaster, Time-varying Risk Premia, and Macroeconomic Dynamics
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Francois Gourio, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Niloy Bose
* 08/31/2012
* USD 182,442.00

Intellectual Merit The empirical finance literature has provided substantial
evidence that risk premia are time-varying. Yet, standard business cycle models
such as the real business cycle model, or the DSGE models used for monetary
policy analysis, largely fail to replicate the level and cyclicality of risk
premia. This seems an important neglect, since empirical work suggests a tight
connection between risk premia and economic activity: the default premium is
correlated with investment, and the stock market, the term premium and
(negatively) the short rate lead GDP. Introducing time-varying risk premia
requires solving a business cycle model using nonlinear methods, i.e. going
beyond the first-order approximation and considering ?higher order terms?.
Researchers disagree on the importance of these higher order terms, and the
standard view is that they are irrelevant for macroeconomic quantities. The PI's
results show, however, that this is not always the case. The proposal introduces
time-varying risk premia in a standard business cycle model, through a small,
time-varying risk of a ?disaster?. The possibility of disasters, such as wars or
economic depressions, can generate large risk premia. Existing work has so far
confined itself to endowment economies however, and hence does not consider the
feedback from time-varying risk premia to macroeconomic activity. This risk of
an economic disaster could be a purely rational expectation, or more generally
it could reflect a time-varying belief which is not equal to the objective
probability. There are two important channels through which time-varying risk
premia (here caused by an increase in the probability of disaster) can affect
macroeconomic aggregates. First, discount rates increase, spreads widen, and
asset values fall, which tends to reduce aggregate investment, directly through
a cost-of-capital effect and indirectly by affecting collateral values.
Aggregate employment and output also fall, leading to a recession. These
business cycle dynamics occur with no change in total factor productivity. Under
some conditions the increase in probability of disaster is observationally
equivalent to a preference shock, which is interesting since these shocks appear
to be important in accounting for the data (e.g. Smets and Wouters (2003)).
Finally, this simple model is at least qualitatively, and potentially
quantitatively, consistent with the lead-lag relationships between asset prices
and the macroeconomy mentioned above. This would be a first paper. The second
channel (which would be another paper) is that changes in risk-premia affect the
willingness to engage in risky investments. Economic activity turns to lower
risk, lower expected return projects, which has the effect of lowering aggregate
productivity and output. This reallocation effect has interesting micro-
implications, for which the PI provides some support in the proposal. There are
several other interesting extensions which are discussed in the proposal.
Broader Impact of the Proposed Activity DSGE models are becoming the workhorse
for macroeconomic policy analysis and even forecasting, yet most of them
abstract from risk premia and the financial side of the economy. The proposal
would lead to progress in this direction, which is important for positive as
well as normative analysis. This model is especially helpful in thinking about
periods of ?turbulence? in asset markets, such as the recent financial crisis:
many commentators have highlighted the possibility that the U.S. economy could
fall into another Great Depression. This model studies the macroeconomic effects
of such time-varying beliefs. This is also a model of ?asset pricing bubbles? in
that it gives a coherent framework where asset prices can move for reasons
unrelated to current or future productivity. In terms of research cooperation,
the project touches on many areas, including business cycle, asset pricing, and
investment theory, and hence would hopefully lead to more interaction between
these fields