* 0922479
* Doctoral Dissertation: Examining the Theoretical Boundaries of Tradable Rights in Fisheries Management
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2010
* Sherry Larkin, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 07/31/2010
* USD 13,300.00

Achievement of the economic and ecological goals of rights-based management
programs in fisheries depends on trading activity and the ability of the market
to facilitate trading, a market that is assumed to function on basic economic
principles. These markets are unique in several ways, however, particularly in
that each is tied to an unpredictable resource base, is initiated and structured
by a variety of agencies with distinct protocols, and?in many cases?is affected
by a deeply rooted social and cultural system among the fishermen. These factors
ensure that such markets are inherently variable, contribute to the riskiness of
the industry and complicate fishermen decisions. This study will use approaches
from economics, exchange networks, and anthropology to examine the market for
trap certificates, a program used to manage the Florida spiny lobster trap
fishery, to evaluate the boundaries of the theoretical framework as applied to
rights-based fisheries management. Historical transactions in a market for
rights to operate in a commercial fishery in Florida will be used to test
hypotheses regarding the functioning and development of markets over time.
Augmenting the transactions data with information obtained from personal
interviews of traders will allow for the examination of factors that are likely
to explain trading activity that cannot be captured otherwise, including
individual characteristics that are known to affect transactions costs and the
development of social networks. Finally, GIS-based information on fishing
habitat and market power will complete the set of explanatory factors for use in
statistical and regression analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study contributes
to understanding the extent to which theories of market structure and function
can be applied to tradable permit markets, specifically in commercial fisheries.
This study provides an example of the utility of social network analysis to
analyze market structure, a method not commonly used in fisheries studies but
highly appropriate given the importance of social ties in fishing communities.
The use of tradable instruments as management tools is increasing for all
resources, not just fisheries, and the results of this study?by explicitly
capturing spatial information on social networks and habitats in addition to
individual characteristics?can prove crucial to the development of theoretically
sound and effective programs. The results and policy recommendations will also
be useful to the international fishing community as the use of transferable
rights-based programs increases worldwide.