* 0922792
* Unequal Cleavage and D Quadrant Specification in the Leech Helobdella
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* David Weisblat, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Steven Klein
* 07/31/2012
* USD 350,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Embryonic development entails exquisitely orchestrated cell divisions and other
processes leading from a single cell, the fertilized egg, to the adult form.
Cells arising at each stage of development become fated to make a particular
contribution to the next stage via interacting intrinsic factors (inherited from
their progenitors) and extrinsic cues (such as signaling molecules produced by
neighboring cells). We know that a basic "toolkit" of cellular and molecular
mechanisms influencing these "fate decisions" is highly conserved from species
to species. Thus, understanding how the toolkit is deployed in various species,
including comparatively simple, more easily studied ones such as the leech, can
contribute to understanding how diverse kinds of animals evolved their distinct
adult body plans, how cell fating processes function in human development and
how malfunctions can result in disorders such as cancer and birth defects. This
proposal is to study a particular cell division occurring in the 2-cell leech
embryo, testing the hypothesis that interactions between intrinsic factors
(locally elevated calcium ion concentrations) and extrinsic signals (a highly
conserved protein called WNT secreted from the adjacent cell) cause the
recipient cell to divide unequally, yielding one daughter cell fated to
contribute muscle, nerves and skin to the developing embryo, and another fated
to contribute mainly to the gut. Dr. Weisblat's research also provides rigorous
and cost-effective training in cell and developmental biology techniques and in
the critical skills of analytical thinking and writing for postdoctoral
researchers, undergraduate and graduate students, many of whom have gone on to
studies in medicine, biotechnology, science policy, teaching and research. In
addition to recruiting and mentoring a diverse research group, Dr. Weisblat is
director for an NSF REU Site program aimed at improving the recruitment of
bioscience students from underrepresented minorities to Ph.D. studies. He has
also worked to promote scientific goodwill by teaching in developing nations
such as Brazil, Estonia, India, Mexico and Nigeria.