* 0922910
* MRI: Acquisition of Imaging X-Ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy System for Interdisciplinary Research and Education in Multi-Scale Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2010
* Derrick Dean, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Sean Jones
* 09/30/2010
* USD 431,200.00

0922910&lt;br/&gt;Stanishevsky&lt;br/&gt;U. Alabama
Birmingham&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This award is funded under the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: The proposed imaging
microprobe X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) system is designed for
spatially resolved chemical analysis of solid surfaces. This tool creates a new
multi-user element of the core shared analytical facility in the
interdisciplinary Center for Nanoscale Materials and Biointegration (CNMB) at U
of Alabama at Birmingham (UAB). It serves a large team of users from CNMB, four
UAB science and engineering departments, and fosters collaborations through the
partnership with Alabama State U (ASU) and NSF-Materials World Network with
Technical U of Lodz (Poland). XPS is critical for us due to its unique ability
to discriminate between different oxidation states and chemical environments in
a thin layer (&lt;5 nm) of a material, yet capable of the depth profiling of
chemical composition when using a sputtering accessory. Imaging XPS is the only
tool that has a combination of features to address the challenges of microscale
characterization in our projects on: (i) surface modification and
functionalization of new multi-scale biomaterials; (ii) bio-active monolayers
and self-assembled biomimetic nanoarchitectures; (iii) novel phases formed under
extreme pressures; (iv) chemistry of interfaces and thermally-induced processes
in polymer and polymer-ceramic multifunctional nanocomposites; (v) surface and
interface phenomena in wide band-gap semiconductor materials and structures; and
(vi) nanostructured, multilayer, and gradient metal-ceramic and ceramic thin-
film materials. This XPS system provides training in 3 graduate and 5
undergraduate courses with enrollment of ~135 per semester, enhances research
opportunities in our interdisciplinary NSF-REU site where women and minorities
account for 57% of the participants and in our partner ASU?s CREST and HBCUUP
programs, and raises the awareness of surface science and engineering among K-12
students, teachers, and general public through our NSF-RET site and UAB day at
McWane Science Center in Birmingham. CNMB provides necessary infrastructure and
long-term support for the XPS system operation, accommodation of multiple users,
and the initiation of new projects at local, national, and international
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Abstract: X-ray Photoelectron
Spectroscopy (XPS) is a chemical analysis technique used to determine the
composition of very thin layers of solid materials. Imaging XPS can also map the
variations in surface chemical composition with a micrometer resolution. Most of
our research projects deal with novel technological materials that have been
surface modified by different chemical and physical methods. Very often the
critical properties are determined by the outermost layers of the material, and
a contemporary surface-analytical tool would have a colossal impact on the
productivity of the research projects and generation of new ideas. The imaging
XPS meets this need and creates a new multi-user materials analysis facility at
University of Alabama at Birmingham. The instrument is the first of this kind in
Alabama, and it serves a large group of scientists and students in UAB?s Center
for Nanoscale Materials and Biointegration, four UAB science and engineering
departments, their partners at Alabama State University (ASU), and other
scientists across the state. It provides training in 3 graduate and 5
undergraduate courses with enrollment of ~135 per semester, enhances the UAB
Research Experiences for Undergraduates program where women and minorities
account for 57% of the participants, and ASU CREST and HBCUUP programs, raises
the awareness of surface science and engineering among K-12 students, teachers,
and general public through our Research Experiences for Teachers program and UAB
day at McWane Science Center in Birmingham, and fosters broader research
collaboration at the state, national and international levels. Overall, this XPS
system is a critical element of UAB research infrastructure, linked to the
development of highly skilled personnel and the generation of new knowledge,
which are a prerequisite for progress in science and technology as well as
economic growth.