* 0922003
* Chromosomal Evolution, Genetic Diversity, and Speciation Mechanisms in Polyploid Tragopogon (Asteraceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2014
* Douglas Soltis, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 06/30/2014
* USD 356,420.00

Polyploidy, or whole genome duplication, is a major force in flowering plant
evolution, with many flowering plant species having originated through the
combined processes of hybridization and polyploidy. Chromosomal changes may
generate genetic diversity via loss and duplication of genes in polyploids and
may promote speciation, but the extent of chromosomal evolution in young,
naturally occurring polyploid plants is unknown. Molecular cytogenetic methods
will be used to investigate chromosomal and genomic changes in Tragopogon mirus
and T. miscellus of the sunflower family. These species formed recently (in the
past 80 years) and repeatedly through hybridization of different populations of
the parental species. Furthermore, synthetic lines of both polyploids have been
produced in the lab. Tragopogon therefore provides a unique opportunity to
compare chromosomal variation in young natural and synthetic polyploid plants.
This project will address the extent of chromosomal variation in new polyploids,
whether or not certain "rules" govern the types of changes that occur, and the
effect of this variation in natural populations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polyploidy is common in flowering plants (a group of
300,000 or more species). Furthermore, all of the world's major crops and most
serious weeds are polyploid. Therefore, characterizing the processes that take
place shortly after polyploid formation is crucial for understanding the genomes
of most plant species, and thus for our ability to conserve plant biodiversity
and sustainably benefit from it. In conjunction with DNA sequence analyses, this
project will provide new insight into the process of polyploidization at the
chromosomal, genomic, and genetic levels.