* 0922075
* Contributions of Retrosplenial Cortex to the Medial Temporal Lobe Memory System
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2014
* David Bucci, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 06/30/2014
* USD 435,000.00

It is widely accepted that the hippocampus and other medial temporal lobe
structures have a critical role in many forms of learning and memory. However,
little is known about the contributions of regions such as the retrosplenial
cortex (RSP), which is heavily interconnected with medial temporal lobe regions.
Indeed, the RSP is well positioned as an interface between the sensory
neocortex, thalamus, and medial temporal lobe structures. One theory is that RSP
serves to integrate sensory and limbic information for subsequent mnemonic
processing by medial temporal lobe regions. Another theory is that RSP is a site
of long term storage of information processed by the medial temporal lobe. The
proposed studies will test specific hypotheses concerning the contribution of
RSP to the medial temporal lobe memory system using a combination of
experimental lesion, neural activation, and learning-theoretical approaches. The
resulting data will not only provide new insight into the function of RSP but
also add to our understanding of the basic mechanisms of information processing
in cortico-hippocampal circuits. Moreover, the data will be useful for
determining how different components of these circuits interact, and aid in the
development of new models of cortico-hippocampal function. Carrying out the
proposed studies will also provide valuable research training and opportunities
for undergraduates at Dartmouth College, and use new initiatives to promote
science education and research training particularly in groups that are
typically underrepresented in the sciences. At a community level, research
findings will also be used to expose the local community to basic research in
learning and memory through an outreach program developed in collaboration with
a local science museum.