* 0922258
* MRI:   Acquisition of flow cytometric, cell quantification and imaging equipment for use in functional studies of the human tight junction protein, claudin-3
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Maria Cuevas, Southwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2012
* USD 98,928.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

A new flow cytometer, a cell counter, and a phase-contrast microscope with
digital camera are being used to help advance the cellular and molecular biology
research programs of faculty and their undergraduate researchers at Southwestern
University. The major project explores the contribution of a membrane protein,
claudin-3, to tight junction (TJ) function in human breast epithelial cells. TJs
connect adjacent endothelial and epithelial cells preventing the unregulated
flow of solutes between cells. In addition, they have been implicated in a range
of cellular processes including regulation of cell growth, cell motility and
embryonic development. Currently, there is little information regarding the
roles of each of the 24 different types of human claudin proteins in particular
cells types. By comparing the effects of normal versus elevated levels of
claudin-3 on TJ strength, cell growth, motility and invasiveness in cultured
breast epithelial cells, this project is helping to functionally delineate the
role of claudin-3 in breast epithelial TJs. Undergraduate researchers will
contribute to the proposed research as participants in the Southwestern
University Biology Summer Research Programs and throughout the school year. By
providing students with the opportunities to use state of the art equipment
found in large research institutions and to apply current technical approaches
to solving problems in molecular biology, they will be well prepared for entry
into graduate school programs and future careers in science. The outcomes of
this project will be presented annually at the American Association of Cell
Biology Meeting and through publication in leading Cellular Biology journals.