* 0922588
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Powder X-Ray Diffractometer for Research and Undergraduate Research Training
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Yumi Ijiri, Oberlin College
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 09/30/2012
* USD 280,390.00

0922588&lt;br/&gt;Oertel&lt;br/&gt;Oberlin College&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This
award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public
Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: Powder X-ray diffraction
is one of the most powerful methods of characterizing the structures of solids
and is fundamental to research across the physical sciences. Within the proposed
project, a new diffractometer will be acquired and used by faculty and
undergraduate students from the departments of chemistry and biochemistry,
physics and astronomy, and geology at Oberlin College. This instrument will
combine reliable collection of high-quality diffraction data for bulk powder
samples with advanced capabilities for variable temperature, thin film, and
small-angle X-ray scattering experiments. The diffractometer will impact a wide
range of student-faculty research projects. Newly synthesized hybrid inorganic-
organic materials with potential catalytic and hydrogen-storage applications
will be identified and their structural changes probed as a function of
temperature. Thin corrosion films formed by organic acid attack on lead-tin
alloys will be analyzed as part of multidisciplinary research to understand the
causes and mechanisms of historic organ pipe degradation. Nanostructured
magnetic materials for data storage and biomedical applications will be
characterized using both the X-ray diffraction and small-angle X-ray scattering
capabilities of the instrument. X-ray diffraction of polycrystalline samples of
small peptides will complement solution-state and solid-state NMR determination
of their preferred, low-energy structures. Mineral polymorphs will be studied,
providing insight into the geodynamics of the subduction zones from which they
are extracted. In addition to providing training in advanced techniques to
undergraduate research students, the instrument will be integrated into the
intermediate and upper-level laboratory curricula in all three collaborating
departments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Abstract: Many classes of
commonly encountered materials ? including metals, polymers, and minerals ? have
underlying structures made up of repeating patterns of atoms or molecules.
Powder X-ray diffraction and related X-ray scattering techniques can determine
the arrangements of these atoms on nanometer length scales. Knowledge of these
structures is essential in developing new materials and applications as well as
in understanding geologic and chemical processes through which materials change
over time. Within the proposed project, a new powder X-ray diffractometer will
be acquired and used by faculty and undergraduate students in the departments of
chemistry and biochemistry, physics and astronomy, and geology at Oberlin
College. The five principal investigators, including two faculty members hired
within the last four years, have expertise in standard and specialized X-ray
techniques. The new instrument will contribute to their research in the
synthesis of new materials with magnetic, catalytic, and hydrogen-storage
applications; the determination of the detailed structures of peptides ? some of
the most basic biological materials; the understanding of the geological
processes occurring in subduction zones; and the conservation of historic organ
pipes that are damaged by atmospheric corrosion. The X-ray diffractometer will
enhance ongoing efforts to integrate teaching and research at Oberlin.
Undergraduate students engaged in research will receive training in
contemporary, advanced techniques for materials characterization. The instrument
will be used in laboratory coursework by all chemistry, physics, and geology
majors, a diverse group including many students who go on to graduate school in
the physical sciences.