* 0922187
* Middle-to-Late Jurassic terrestrial vertebrates of China: Systematics and geochronology
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2010,02/28/2015
* Xing Xu, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Yusheng Liu
* 02/28/2015
* USD 352,656.00

Middle-to-Late Jurassic terrestrial vertebrates of China:
Systematics&lt;br/&gt;and geochronology&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: James M Clark,
George Washington University &lt;br/&gt;Co-PIs: Catherine A. Forster, GWU; Xu
Xing, Chinese Academy of Sciences&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Land-living vertebrate
fossils from the Middle and early Late Jurassic (176-156 million years ago) are
very poorly known worldwide, but the Shishugou Formation of NW China preserves
abundant articulated skeletons from this age. This is an important time in the
history of modern land vertebrates, because the oldest occurrences of modern
mammals, lizards, turtles, and salamanders are this age or slightly older, and
the presence of the oldest bird Archaeopteryx later in the Jurassic indicates
that birds evolved at about this time. The major lineages of dinosaurs that
flourished in the Cretaceous (ceratopsians, ankylosaurs, ornithopods,
neosauropods, and coelurosaurs) also appear at this time. &lt;br/&gt; From
2001-2006 joint expeditions by GWU and the Chinese Academy of Sciences to the
Shishugou Formation, funded in 2004-2006 by the NSF, collected over 450
vertebrate fossils and documented the geology of the formation. We
radiometrically dated rocks indicating the formation spans the Middle-Upper
Jurassic boundary. Among our discoveries are the oldest and most primitive
tyrannosauroid (Guanlong wucaii) and ceratopsian (Yinlong downsi) dinosaurs, the
first ceratosaurian theropod dinosaur from Asia (Limusaurus inextricabilis), and
the oldest and most primitive member of the bizarre alvarezsaurid theropods.
Fossils in this collection bear important evidence on the origin of birds,
generating a new hypothesis for the identity of the fingers present in theropods
and documenting the diversification of the closest relatives of birds 10 million
years prior to Archaeopteryx. Two extraordinary sites preserve evidence of
miring, a highly unusual preservational milieu. Here we request support for 1)
studies of undescribed fossils, including nearly complete skeletons of a basal
lizard, a primitive mammal, an unusual new turtle, and a new maniraptoran
theropod dinosaur, 2) preparation of detailed descriptions of several important
dinosaur species, 3) radiometric dating (ID-TIMS) of rocks at the base of the
Shishugou Formation, in contemporary rocks elsewhere in the Junggar Basin, and
in the Middle Jurassic Shaximiao formations of Sichuan, China, and 4) continued
exploration for fossils in the Shishugou Formation, especially in the lower part
of the formation. Participants in this project include underrepresented groups
in Earth Sciences (two females and a native American).&lt;br/&gt;