* 0922702
* MRI: Acquisition of High Speed Network Infrastructure for High Performance Distributed Computation in the Colleges of Science and Engineering
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2009,02/28/2013
* Jose Castillo, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Barry I. Schneider
* 02/28/2013
* USD 255,873.00

This award will fund the purchase of a Cisco 10 Gigabit/s switch and wavelength
division multiplexing equipment to construct a three-way high-speed data link
between science and engineering research groups affiliated with the
Computational Science Research Center (CSRC) at San Diego State University
(SDSU), the TeraGrid hub at the San Diego Supercomputer Center (SDSC), and the
California Institute for Telecommunications and Information
Technology&lt;br/&gt;(CalIT2) at the University of California, San Diego (UCSD).
This network infrastructure will provide core data transmission resources for
research groups at SDSU in physical chemistry, geophysics, astronomy,
bioinformatics, thermal science, combustion engineering, fluid dynamics,
nonlinear dynamics, ocean modeling, and computer science who routinely use SDSC
and CalIT2 computing resources. The wavelength division multiplexing equipment
will enable rapid network transactions between the two campuses, thereby
allowing researchers at SDSU to rapidly transfer terabytes of data generated on
TeraGrid clusters back to SDSU for local visualization and post-
processing.&lt;br/&gt;The core 10 Gigabit/s switch will initially interconnect
server room facilities at SDSU in two separate colleges: the College of Science
and the College of Engineering. The switch will also provide several additional
10 Gigabit/s interfaces for individual research laboratories to connect and
thereby form a high-speed research backbone network on the SDSU campus. Research
projects that will immediately make use of this network infrastructure include
(1) the development of a service oriented architecture/cyberinfrastructure of
chemical equilibrium and kinetic services used to model gas turbine NOx
emissions in syngas combustion, (2) the development of a cyberinfrastructure for
the General Curvilinear Ocean Model (GCOM),(3) computational quantum mechanical
studies of floppy reactive intermediates, (4) the numerical investigation of
high-order particle-source-in-cell (PSIC) methods for the simulation of pulse
detonation engines, and (5) the development of PetaShake, a petascale
implementation of the TeraShake parallel Anelastic Wave Model (AWM) code that
simulates earthquake scenarios using several billion grid points. These projects
currently place heavy demands on the existing SDSU campus network. SDSU
researchers now require greater throughput and shorter delay when exchanging
datasets and this grant will provide a much needed improvement to SDSU-UCSD
network connectivity by funding the necessary equipment to facilitate rapid data
transfer between the two universities. &lt;br/&gt; In addition to faculty and
graduate student use, this network infrastructure will be used by undergraduate
students working on projects that include (1) senior thesis research projects in
computer science and computer engineering, (2) programming projects in courses
such as computer networking, high-speed network design, client-server
programming, and distributed computing, and (3) undergraduate research carried
out under existing, externally funded fellowship programs. SDSU occupies a
strong position for making these opportunities available to minorities
underrepresented in science and engineering research, as one of the top ten
campuses in the nation granting bachelor's degrees to ethnic
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;