* 0922127
* Quantile models, endogeneity, identification, and semiparametric methodology
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Coenraad(Joris) Pinkse, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2014
* USD 446,691.00

The proposed research consists of the development of econometric tools for the
analysis of economic data using nonparametric and/or semiparametric methods in
quantile models. Each of the three projects comprising the proposal improves on
existing methodology in a different manner. The objective of the first project
is to develop semiparametric methods that yield reliable inference in
instrumental quantile models when there is potentially insufficient exogenous
variation, a desideratum absent from classical methods. The second project seeks
to produce tighter bounds in triangular (quantile) models with discrete
endogenous regressors; tighter bounds lead to qualitatively more meaningful
conclusions. The third and final project aims to produce a new semiparametric
estimator for a general binary choice model which is easier to compute, for
which confidence intervals are more straightforward to obtain, and which can be
extended to allow for endogenous regressors. All three projects entail
extensions of existing econometric methodology. The first and third projects
involve discontinuity problems, which require novel applications of empirical
process theory. The firstand second projects moreover require extensions of the
asymptotic theory for semiparametric and nonparametric estimators. The results
of all procedures will be established rigorously and their usefulness
demonstrated by means of simulations and empirical
exercises.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact The proposed research will be
submitted for publication to academic journals and presented at conferences and
departmental seminars. It is of relevance in a wide range of empirical
applications using cross-sectional data, especially in industrial organization
and labor economics. Efforts will be made to persuade empiricists to use the
methodology developed here. Graduate students will coauthor most papers arising
out of this proposal.