* 0922735
* MRI:  Acquisition of Emission Moessbauer Facility with Cryomagnet for Study of Novel Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Jason Schmeltzer, University of North Carolina at Asheville
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 09/30/2013
* USD 628,665.00

0922735&lt;br/&gt;Nath&lt;br/&gt;U of North Carolina at
Asheville&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This award is funded under the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract: Emission Mössbauer Spectroscopy (EMS) is 2-3 orders of magnitude more
sensitive than the traditionally practiced absorption mode. More importantly,
its application is not restricted to the common Mössbauer radionuclides such as
Fe, Sn and Eu. The phenomenal sensitivity of EMS allows parts per million of
57Co substitution at the active site, e.g. for Cu in high Tc superconductors, Zn
in zinc oxide, and Mn in magnetoresistive manganites, without perturbing the
finely-attuned novel materials. EMS can help to unravel nanoscale behavior in a
variety of exotic materials. The 14.4 keV radiation emitted by 57Co brings with
it information about the electron density, deviation from spherical symmetry of
the electron cloud, hyperfine magnetism, local dynamics, and the binding
strength of the nanoprobe to its neighbors. For instance, the PI and his
collaborators could gain valuable insight of the behavior of high Tc
superconductors and magnetoresistive manganites using the EMS facility (work
published in PRL,Science,PRB et al.) available at Drexel University (which had
to be dismantled later). In contrast, absorption mode studies by other groups
using about 1 % of 57Fe substitution (essential to obtain statistically
significant spectra) modified these fine-tuned systems and so their results,
though interesting, did not have a direct bearing on the behavior of the parent
compounds. EMS can help in solving some challenging problems in frontier areas
of research such as how Co/Ni doping can induce superconductivity in SrFe2As2 ,
unraveling the origin of room temperature ferromagnetism in ZnO, and in
understanding the biological significance of dynamics in protein molecules. In
short, EMS developed by the PI during his sojourn at Lawrence Berkeley National
Laboratory, can be used to tackle challenging problems in frontier areas of
research facing students/ postdoctoral associates/faculty working in various
disciplines and venues. Our research group is already collaborating with
scientists at UTK/ORNL, Clemson,and University of Connecticut. The PI has the
credentials to handle radioactive solutions and in training others to do so. The
proposed facility, which would be the only one of its kind in the United States
dedicated to EMS would help in deepening our knowledge of exotic materials which
we do not understand well using existing
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Layperson Abstract: There is widespread
interest in designing and studying sophisticated materials with special
properties like high Tc superconductivity, novel magnetic properties (for use in
devices) or catalysis. These materials are finely-attuned and a slight change in
composition can destroy their special properties. To help design these
materials, an understanding of the physical processes at the ultramicroscopic
level is critical. There are only a limited number of techniques that can help
in that regard. Emission Mössbauer Spectroscopy is one of them and can be used
to unravel nanoscale behavior in a variety of exotic materials; it was developed
by the PI during his sojourn at the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory and
thus PI has the appropriate credentials to handle radioactive solutions and as
well to train students/postdoctoral associates/ young faculty to do so. If
funded, this will be the only facility of its kind in USA. American born
graduate students are in short supply. The proposed research using a novel
technique like Emission Mössbauer Spectroscopy along with other techniques to
solve challenging problems in frontier areas will provide our students/
postdoctoral associates/young faculty an exciting opportunity to broaden their
horizons. The involvement of students in internationally competitive research
would spur them to choose research oriented career. We have ongoing
collaborations with students/faculty at University of Tennessee/Oak Ridge
National Laboratory, Clemson and University of Connecticut, which enhances our
resources considerably.