* 0922937
* MRI: Development of an Optical Hall Effect Instrumentation for non-contact Nanostructure Electrical Characterization
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Stephen Ducharme, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 06/30/2012
* USD 299,915.00

0922937&lt;br/&gt;Schubert&lt;br/&gt;U. of Nebraska-
Lincoln&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary: Measurement of free charge
carrier properties in complex nanostructure materials and heterostructures is
becoming increasingly indispensible for understanding of fundamental and new
physical phenomena in such materials. Traditional electrical Hall effect
instruments are limited in their ability to probe the free charge carrier
properties, particularly in operation modes which are contactless, non-invasive,
non-destructive and yet capable of spatially resolving the charge carrier
behavior. This project aims to develop a low-operation-cost, feasible, easy-to-
use, desk-top-style, and world-unique Optical Hall effect instrumentation for
the 0.1 to 50 Terahertz (THz) spectral region for studying samples within
magnetic fields up to 8 T, and in the temperature range between 4 K and 300 K.
The new development measures the transverse and longitudinal optical
birefringence at long wavelengths due to displacements of charge location in an
external magnetic field, as a function of wavelength, magnetic field direction,
and strength. The Optical Hall effect instrument allows understanding of charge
and spin transport properties, and will greatly advance our understanding of
multiferroic tunnel structures, magnetoelectric heterostructures, ferromagnetic,
and ferroelectric polymer structures, magnetic, and piezoelectric hybrid
nanostructures and novel solar cell materials and devices, for example. The
instrumentation will be developed at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln (UNL),
and will be used in collaboration between different Universities, National
Laboratories and Companies working with electrical properties of nanostructure
materials and devices. The proposal will integrate the education of graduate and
undergraduate students with basic research and new instrumentation development,
and will leverage with NSF-MRSEC QSPIN, 2 NSF-CAREER, and NSF-DMR program
activities and inter-departmental and inter-collegiate collaborations within the
University of Nebraska-Lincoln. The MRI development will promote productive
partnerships for instrument development between UNL, and the J. A. Woollam Co.,
Inc. of Lincoln, Nebraska, the world-leading manufacturer of spectroscopic
ellipsometry instrumentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Layman Summary: The motion of
electrons and their positively charged counterparts - holes - in nanostructure
materials is governed by new phenomena due to the confinement imposed by the
nanostructure geometry and composition. Knowledge of the charge properties
within such nanostructures will enable design of new materials and devices with
capabilities far beyond current technology. Monitoring electron and hole motions
within strong magnetic fields using polarized Terahertz and Far infrared light
at frequencies up to ten thousand times faster than current desktop computer
clock speed reveals their location and properties, and fundamental and new
physical phenomena can be explored in such materials. Traditional methods
require electrical contacts, which are difficult or simply impossible to attach
to the nanostructures. The new and world-unique Optical Hall effect
instrumentation employs frequencies which penetrate the nanostructures and
screen their electron and hole properties without electrical contacts. Many
innovations are expected from studying new multifunctional nanostructures for
solar and energy restoring applications, for example. The instrumentation will
be developed at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln (UNL), and will be used in
collaboration between different Universities, National Laboratories and
Companies working with electrical properties of nanostructure materials and
devices. The proposal will integrate the education of graduate and undergraduate
students with basic research and new instrumentation development, and promote
productive partnerships between UNL, and the J. A. Woollam Co., Inc. of Lincoln,
Nebraska, the world-leading manufacturer of spectroscopic ellipsometry
instrumentation.