* 0922579
* Travel Support to attend 28th International Congress on Applications of Lasers &amp; Electro-Optics (ICALEO 2009); Orlando, Florida; November 2-5, 2009
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2010
* Yongfeng Lu, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 05/31/2010
* USD 15,000.00

The objective of this project is to support 30 graduate students from the United
States, particularly those from underrepresented groups and institutions that
traditionally lack funding for such support, to attend the 28th International
Congress on Applications of Lasers &amp; Electro-Optics (ICALEO 2009), which is
an annual conference organized by Laser Institute of America (LIA), to be held
in Orlando, Florida from November 2 to 5, 2009. This support opportunity will be
advertised though emails to be sent out by Laser Institute of America. The
students can apply for the support by replying to the e-mails sent from the
Laser Institute of America. The student selection process will be based on the
following priorities: 1) students from groups traditionally underrepresented; 2)
students from universities and colleges that traditionally lack funding to
support graduate student attendance at conferences; and 3) students who present
high-quality papers, as determined by the conference chairs in consultation with
the program committee. The selected students will be expected to present their
papers during the conference and compete for student-paper awards
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The efforts to be made in this project will blend research
and educational activities for the graduate students who attend. By
participating in the conference, these students will be exposed to state-of-the-
art research topics and will interact with academic and industrial leaders. They
will learn how to best use their time in graduate study and how to be prepared
for their future careers. The priority of support will be given to the graduate
students from underrepresented groups, such as women, African American and
Hispanic students, and from universities that lack financial resources.