* 0922851
* MRI: Acquisition of Analytical TEM for Multi-User Materials Research Environment
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2011
* David Van Aken, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Thomas P. Rieker
* 09/30/2011
* USD 496,500.00

0922851&lt;br/&gt;Van Aken&lt;br/&gt;Missouri
S&amp;T&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Acquisition
of an analytical transmission electron microscope (TEM) will complement and
expand the Advanced Materials Characterization Lab (AMCL) at Missouri S&amp;T.
The proposed TEM will be equipped with a Schottky field emission gun and an
X-ray energy dispersive spectrometer (XEDS), capable of operating in both
conventional TEM mode and scanning transmission (STEM) mode. The enhanced
capabilities of the TEM in the area of high resolution imaging, atomic number
sensitive (Z-contrast) imaging, nano-beam electron diffraction, and XEDS line-
scan/mapping will provide state-of-the-art materials characterization at
Missouri S&amp;T. Nearly a quarter of the 270 tenure track faculty members at
Missouri S&amp;T are engaged in materials-related research, cutting across 13 of
the 21 academic departments on campus. Other institutions that will benefit from
the acquisition of this equipment include the Research Alliance of Missouri and
the Missouri Nanoalliance, organizations dedicated to facilitating collaborative
nanoscience research in the State of Missouri. The TEM will be utilized in a
number of projects, including: 1) structure/ chemistry/ property relations of
3rd generation advanced high strength steels, 2) domain structures and interface
studies of epitaxial metal oxides films and superlattices, 3) structural and
compositional inhomogeneities in friction stir processed aluminum alloys, 4)
interface structure and concentration gradients in catalyst-dispersed nanowire
arrays for proton exchange membrane fuel cells, 5) impurity segregation and
defect interactions at grain boundaries in ultra-high temperature ceramics, 6)
structure, defects and doping properties at grain boundaries of high temperature
superconducting materials, and 7) glass/ceramic interfacial chemistry for the
application in solid oxide fuel cells. The proposed instrument will be managed
by the AMCL at Missouri S&amp;T. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-
technical&lt;br/&gt;Analytical transmission electron microscopes are an
essential tool in the development of new materials with nano-scale structures.
This new instrument will be used to develop lightweight steel, new materials to
generate electricity, new superconducting magnets, and high temperature heat
shields. Other institutions that will benefit from the acquisition of this
equipment include the Research Alliance of Missouri and the Missouri
Nanoalliance, organizations dedicated to facilitating collaborative nanoscience
research and facility development in the State of Missouri. The proposed
instrument will be managed by the Advanced Materials Characterization Laboratory
(AMCL) at the Missouri University of Science and Technology (Missouri S&amp;T).
The proposed equipment will be immediately utilized in several undergraduate and
graduate level classes in the areas of materials characterization and
evaluation, where 200 Materials Science and Engineering students are exposed to
cutting edge research in NSF-funded projects. In addition, the instrument will
enhance recruitment efforts at the undergraduate and graduate levels at Missouri
S&amp;T, through programs such as the Opportunities for Undergraduate Research
Experience (OURE), and the many summer programs coordinated by the Office of
Pre-College Programs such as the Jackling Introduction to Engineering and the
Materials Camp. Last year over 1,300 K-12 students were on campus, and most
toured through the AMCL.