* 0922757
* Antagonizing Signaling in a Drosophila Dorsal Closure Model
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2009,03/31/2013
* Anthea Letsou, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Steven Klein
* 03/31/2013
* USD 566,217.00

The high degree of conservation of fundamental biological processes across all
animals, coupled with the broad repertoire of fly genetic approaches makes the
fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster a uniquely powerful system for understanding a
broad range of developmental processes. In this study, genetic methods are
employed to identify, clone, and characterize genes required for fruit fly
dorsal closure. Dorsal closure is the developmental process by which a cell
sheet completely encases a developing fruit fly embryo. The dorsal closure
process is analogous to tube formation, with the edges of the epithelial sheet
meeting and fusing at the dorsal midline.&lt;br/&gt;Virtually all of the
molecules essential for the changes in cell shape and position that drive dorsal
closure are conserved, and they are required for a variety closure processes in
all vertebrates. These conserved processes include eyelid and neural tube
fusion, as well as wound healing. One's ability to dissect and characterize
dorsal closure in the experimentally tractable fruit fly, therefore, provides a
powerful system to elucidate a fundamental development process.&lt;br/&gt;The
foci of the studies described here are two Drosophila proteins that were
recently identified as being critical for dorsal closure: Raw (a novel protein)
and Mummy (a UDP]Nacetylglucosamine pyrophosphorylase). Given the conservation
of these developmental pathways, these proteins are likely important for neural
tube closure as well as for dorsal closure. Thus, the definition of the roles
that Raw and Mummy play in the developing fruit fly facilitates identification
of the molecular events necessary for key developmental events.&lt;br/&gt;This
project will provide undergraduates and high school students from the community
with 'hands-on' research training opportunities. In the past this research has
been highlighted at the University of Utah's Museum of Natural History, as well
as additional community venues. Teaching and community outreach remains a high
priority for the future.