* 0922709
* Acquisition of a Near Infrared Spectrometer to Rapidly Analyze Primate Diets
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,02/28/2013
* Colin Chapman, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2013
* USD 303,087.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Questions regarding the complex
interactions that humans and non-human primates have with their environment are
central to understanding both the evolution and ecology of our own species, as
well as that of non-human primates. Obtaining adequate nutrition is among the
most profound of these interactions. Estimates of the nutritional quality of
food resources are needed to address questions regarding the role of diet and
nutrition in primate abundance, distribution, and social behavior. Recently
documented striking and unpredictable variation in nutritional composition
within same plant species through time and space needs to be considered when
characterizing primate diets and addressing many questions of interest to
primatologists. This requires the analysis of thousands of plant samples to
examine primate diets, and traditional nutritional analysis is time-consuming
and expensive when dealing with sample sizes of this magnitude. Near-infrared
reflectance spectroscopy (NIRS) is an economical method that can be used to
rapidly assess nutritional content primate foods. The underlying principle of
this technology is that the chemical bonds in the organic matter of a food item
are represented in a spectrum when the sample is irradiated with near infrared
light. These spectra are then calibrated against reference values of nutrients,
obtained from traditional nutritional analysis, to develop predictive
statistical equations. Since a single spectrum can represent many attributes of
a sample (fiber, fat, protein etc.), it can replace assays for multiple
nutrients; over 150 plant samples can be analyzed per day for a variety of
nutrients simultaneously, greatly improving the efficiency of nutritional
analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support the acquisition of a
near-infrared reflectance spectrometer, and will form the foundation for
research collaboration among physical anthropologists studying primate behavior
and ecology. The spectrometer will be housed in the Department of Anthropology
at Hunter College of the City University of New York. The use of NIRS will
support many research and training activities within the PI's primate
nutritional ecology lab, including the research efforts of the PI, and five
collaborators and their students within North America. It will contribute to the
research activities of at least thirteen ongoing projects on primate nutritional
ecology on a diversity of monkeys living in East Africa and South America.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hunter College is a minority serving institution, where
many opportunities are available to improve the research and training
infrastructure of underrepresented groups and women pursuing degrees in the
sciences. Students at Hunter will be trained in this cutting-edge NIRS
technology, allowing them to test anthropological theories in ways that have not
been previously possible. Further, since NIRS users will be attracted to Hunter
College, collaborations through the use of the spectrometer will enable a
vibrant and engaged group from multiple universities internationally, enhancing
student training at both the undergraduate and graduate levels.