* 0922214
* Collaborative Research:  Population differentiation in an herbaceous plant: genetic divergence and outbreeding depression
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Laura Galloway, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 08/31/2011
* USD 91,786.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

ABSTRACT In plants, the distinction between species is often not complete,
allowing for the production of hybrids that frequently perform poorly.
Conversely, within a single species, genetic differentiation may develop between
isolated populations resulting in poor performance of crosses, termed
outbreeding depression. The long-term goal of this research is to evaluate
patterns of outbreeding depression and genetic divergence for an herbaceous
plant where preliminary data reveal up to a 90% reduction in performance of
between-population crosses relative to their parents. Addressing this goal
requires molecular genetic markers suitable for assessing population
differentiation. The proposed research will develop molecular markers and use
those markers to evaluate divergence among four isolated populations.

Studies of genetic divergence and outbreeding depression are important as they
provide a glimpse into the earliest stages of speciation. In addition,
conservation and restoration programs often involve combining individuals from
different populations. A greater understanding of the source of outbreeding
depression is necessary to make management decisions about mixing gene pools
from different populations.

