* 0922737
* Collaborative Research: Spatial Analytical Framework for Examining Community Risk Issues Over Space and Time
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Tony Grubesic, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2012
* USD 40,682.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nationally visible cases of convicted
criminals who lapsed back into criminal activity following their release into
the community have prompted state and federal legislators and local communities
to focus on the public safety risk posed by offenders and the most appropriate
means of dealing with this unique population. The monitoring and management of
convicted offenders is a major policy consideration in the United States. Many
federal and state regulations mandate that communities track those individuals
who have been convicted of certain crimes, in some cases for their entire lives
as they move from one location to another. Local jurisdictions have also
extended these federally mandated requirements for convicted offenders with
increasingly punitive ordinances that ban offenders from living within a
specified distance of certain locations and imposing dispersion and saturation
statutes that limit the number of offenders living within a community or local
area. This collaborative research project will (1) develop a spatial analytical
framework for addressing offender issues; (2) establish guidelines for the
appropriate use and specification of methods to address a range of contexts,
including inference and optimization approaches; (3) develop optimization models
reflecting public policy, thereby enabling spatial impacts to be evaluated for
alternative policy scenarios; (4) develop space-time methods for assessing
offender residency change; and (5) interpret findings to better inform public
policy and corrections practices with respect to legislative implications,
community notification, and offender reentry. The investigators initially will
focus on a case study in Hamilton County, Ohio, working to refine a spatial
analytical framework that will identify appropriate methods, address
specification issues, develop new methods, and provide interpretation in terms
of public policy and corrections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop
a spatial analytical framework and toolbox for addressing convicted offender
residency issues. This will facilitate access to a combination of new and
existing exploratory and confirmatory statistical methods and to new and
existing spatial optimization models that can be used for analyzing impacts as
well as developing and evaluating public policy associated with the management
of convicted offenders. The spatial analytical framework and toolbox will enable
spatio-temporal analysis and geovisualization of social impacts, clustering, and
offender residency movements as well as provide the capacity to examine
residency choice factors. Modeling techniques developed to identify the spatio-
temporal movements of offenders and the contingencies associated with existing
or proposed public policies for managing offenders will inform law enforcement
agencies of jurisdictional trends, and they will provide empirical evidence of
the spatial and socioeconomic consequences of enforcing geographic management
strategies both locally and regionally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;