* 0922406
* Macroeconomics of Occupational Mobility: New Facts, Theory, and Quantitative Evaluation
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Iourii Manovskii, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 06/30/2013
* USD 340,264.00

&lt;br/&gt;When a worker changes occupations (e.g., sales representative,
mechanic, taxi driver) she usually changes the kind of work she performs, with
potentially non-trivial loss of specific skills accumulated in the previous
occupation. Nevertheless, the fraction of workers changing occupations is
remarkably large - close to 20% of workers in the U.S. switch occupations in a
given year. Moreover, the size of worker flows vastly exceeds the amount of
reallocation needed to accomodate changes in occupational employment shares. Why
do workers switch occupations so much? What are the consequences for the
aggregate economy? Might there be a role for government intervention? The
objective of the proposed research is to provide answers to these
questions.&lt;br/&gt;The PI uses administrative panel data on 100% of the Danish
population to document a new set of facts characterizing the patterns of
occupational mobility. He finds that a worker's probability of switching
occupation is U-shaped in her position in the wage distribution in her
occupation. It is the workers with the highest or lowest wages in their
occupations who have the highest probability of leaving the occupation. Workers
with higher (lower) relative wage within their occupation tend to switch to
occupations with higher (lower) average wages. Higher (lower) paid workers
within their occupation tend to leave it when relative productivity of that
occupation declines (rises).&lt;br/&gt;These previously unknown facts are not
implied by existing theories of occupational mobility that mostly treat
occupations as horizontally differentiated sets of tasks. The PI suggests that
it might be productive to think of occupations as also forming vertical
hierarchies. Workers who are unsure of their abilities learn about them by
observing their output realizations. Employment opportunities in each occupation
are scarce inducing competition among workers for them. Complementarities in the
production function between worker's ability and productivity of an occupation
induce sorting of workers into occupations according to their expected ability.
The PI develops an equilibrium model of occupational choice with these features
and show analytically that it is consistent with patterns of mobility described
above. The PI plans to embed the features of this new theory into a dynamic
general equilibrium model of occupational choice that the PI developed in his
earlier work to quantitatively evaluate the contribution of different economic
forces - such as learning, fluctuations in occupational productivities or
demands, and search frictions in locating jobs in various occupations - to the
amount of occupational mobility observed in the data.&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of the project lies in (1) discovery of a new set of facts that
characterize patterns of occupational mobility, (2) an innovative research
strategy of studying occupational mobility as a function of a worker's relative
performance in her current occupation, (3) a development of a new theory of
occupational mobility that is very tractable, yet consistent with all the
features of the data it is designed to account for, (4) a development and
estimation of a quantitative model of occupational mobility that would allow
better quantitative evaluation of the forces driving occupational
mobility.&lt;br/&gt;The project will have a broad impact on the economics
profession because it will &lt;br/&gt;(1) provide a new empirical evidence
important for distinguishing between various theories of occupational
mobility,&lt;br/&gt;(2) provide a new theoretical model of occupational mobility
qualitatively consistent with the motivating evidence &lt;br/&gt;(3) develop and
calibrate a new quantitative model of worker mobility. It will also likely guide
our understanding of the reasons why wages grow with occupational experience.
&lt;br/&gt;Much of the existing literature attributes a sizable amount of this
growth to selection: workers with bad occupational matches leave their
occupations for better opportunities elsewhere which induces a correlation
between occupational match quality and occupational tenure in a cross-section of
workers. Given that the PI's findings challenge the importance of selection for
wage growth because both bad and good workers leave occupations, human capital
is the obvious remainder that can account for the positive relation between
wages and occupational tenure. The results of this research will be presented at
national and international conferences, and are likely to become a standard
entry on the reading lists in advanced courses.