* 0922915
* The Changing Nature of the American Corporate Elite, 1960-2009
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Mark Mizruchi, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 12/31/2012
* USD 168,493.00

SES-0922915&lt;br/&gt;Mark Mizruchi&lt;br/&gt;University of
Michigan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From the
1960s through the 1980s, social scientists conducted a number of studies of the
role of large corporations in American political life. This work slowed to a
trickle in the 1990s. The environment within which American corporations operate
has undergone significant changes over the past five decades, yet we know little
about how or whether the characteristics and behavior of the American corporate
elite (the leaders of the largest American corporations) have changed in
response. This study will examine changes in the American corporate elite from
1960 to the present, focusing on two areas: the extent to which the ideologies
expressed by corporate leaders have changed over time, and the extent to which
large corporations have become less cohesive in terms of their ideology and
political behavior. To do this, the study will focus on the content of business
positions on economic, political, and social issues; the effect of the length of
tenure of corporate chief executives on firms' political and philanthropic
behavior; and the effect of the diversity of corporate leaders (in terms of
social background, gender, and race) on the level of political and ideological
cohesion within the business community. Data used in the study will include
analyses of more than 2,000 public speeches made by corporate chief executives;
information on the average tenure of chief executives, their gender and race,
and other demographic characteristics; and the amounts and types of corporate
political and philanthropic contributions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will
explore the role that corporate elites have played in addressing societal
problems in the United States over the past half-century. There is evidence that
in earlier decades, members of the American corporate elite exhibited a high
level of concern for addressing issues such as poverty, education, and
employment opportunities. Some observers have suggested that contemporary
corporate elites are less focused on solving these problems. The data from this
study will show the extent to which elite responsiveness to societal problems
has varied over time. The study will employ (and provide training for) several
students, the majority of whom are members of groups historically
underrepresented in the sciences. It also will lead to the creation of several
data sets that will be made available to other researchers, including the PI's
students, to use as a source for publication and dissertation research.