* 0922994
* MRI: Acquisition of Nanoindentation System for the Enhancement of Interdisciplinary Research in Materials Science and Engineering at the University of Puerto Rico at Mayaguez
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Nelson Sepulveda, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 09/30/2012
* USD 184,871.00

0922994&lt;br/&gt;Padovani&lt;br/&gt;U. of Puerto Rico
Mayaguez&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This award is funded under the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary: In this nanotechnology-driven era, having the capability to understand
the materials mechanical behavior at the nanometer-scale is not only ideal, but
required. Nanoindentation is a state-of-the-art technique used for such
characterization and therefore, in order to support a number of ongoing
materials research initiatives at the University of Puerto Rico-Mayag√ºez (UPRM),
the proposed project seeks to acquire a Nano Indenter G200 system. The
instrument solicited will be the first-ever nanoindentation unit to be available
in Puerto Rico. The acquisition of this system will enable the proposed
interdisciplinary team to assess the integration capability of newly-developed
polymer- and metal-based nanocomposite materials into electronic devices,
construe the actual mechanisms involved in the degradation and aging of glass-
fiber reinforced polymers, evaluate tribo-mechanical properties of high-wear
strength aluminum matrix composites, define the fundamental materials mechanical
requirements for nanoimprint lithography, and characterize the mechanical
properties of intermetallic compounds in Pb-free soldering systems, VO2 thin
films, nanostructured membranes, and oxide nanoscaffolds. The broader impact of
the requested nanoindentation system hinges in the improved infrastructure
and/or state-of-the-art equipment that will be available for research and
training activities of a large number of Hispanic graduate and undergraduate
students in a variety of science and engineering fields at UPRM as well as on
the reinforcement of ongoing research collaborations with other
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;Layman Summary: Over the years, scientists have learned
that the properties of materials are a direct result of their atomic arrangement
and that, in order to fully understand the materials capabilities and
potentials, these need to be studied at the nanometer scale (approximately
10,000 times smaller than the width of a human hair). This project proposes to
acquire a Nano Indenter G200 system, a state-of-the-art instrument to study the
mechanical behavior of materials at such nanometer level. This nanoindentation
system will support a number of ongoing research activities at the University of
Puerto Rico-Mayaguez (UPRM) and will represent the first instrument of its kind
to be available in Puerto Rico. The acquisition of the nanoindenter will not
only significantly enhance the current UPRM facilities, but it will also allow
for critical mechanical property studies to be performed on materials such as
nanocomposites for electronic applications, glass-fiber reinforced polymers,
high-wear strength aluminum composites, nanostructured membranes, and oxide
nanoscaffolds. As a result of these studies, advanced materials with improved
properties are expected to be developed for novel nanotechnology applications
like fuel cells, sensors, and/or biomedical devices. Besides the apparent impact
on the existing research infrastructure, the nanoindentation system will also be
instrumental in the training of a large number of Hispanic graduate and
undergraduate students in a variety of science and engineering fields as a
direct result of the interdisciplinary nature of the proposing team. Finally,
this instrument will support ongoing research collaborations with other
institutions expanding the fast growing materials research network created at
UPRM.