* 0922374
* MRI:  Acquisition of Laser Ablation-Multicollector-Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometer (LA-MC-ICPMS) for Interdisciplinary Research
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Gary Stacey, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 09/30/2012
* USD 713,930.00

Funds from this Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program grant will support
the acquisition and installation of a multicollector inductively-coupled plasma
mass spectrometer (MC-ICP-MS) and laser ablation (LA) microprobe at the
University of Missouri Research Reactor (MURR). The instrumentation will enable
researchers at the University of Missouri (MU) to conduct high-precision studies
on the subtle variations in isotopic composition present in natural and
artificial materials caused by physical, chemical and biological processes. The
intellectual merit of this project will be the availability of the new
instrumentation to support a wide range of research activities at MU currently
being conducted in the fields of social sciences, chemistry, geosciences,
environmental sciences, life sciences and others. Some of the specific research
topics to be supported will include: studies of human migration patterns, human
behavioral evolution, transport of airborne pollutants, studies of melts and
fluid inclusions in minerals, the role of volatiles in volcanic systems,
petrogenesis of granites, climate evolution, searches for extremophilic
microorganisms, and iron bioavailability in plants. Presence of this
instrumentation at MU will open up additional areas of research with colleagues
from other institutions who already collaborate with MU scientists. The broader
impact of this instrumentation will be greater opportunities for undergraduate
and graduate students to access the most modern and up to date elemental and
isotopic analytical techniques. Students and faculty will have be able to design
hands-on experiments not possible at another location, to receive training from
one of the leading analytical laboratories in the nation, and to be trained on
how to interpret the data acquired with the instrumentation. Presence of these
new capabilities will attract more graduate students into the research programs
at MU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;