* 0922636
* Collaborative Research:   Searching for Links Between Genotype and Phenotype in the Evolution of Air-Breathing, Hypoxia, and Terrestriality in Gobies
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Andrew Gracey, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 08/31/2013
* USD 146,143.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)." This study will investigate aspects of aerial respiration
and amphibious capacity in mudskipper fishes (Family Gobiidae), which are
renowned for their capacity to live out of water. The research will probe the
genetic bases for the evolutionary progression of the mudskippers from forms
that only used air-breathing as an emergency response to low environmental
oxygen conditions to forms that spend extended periods out of water and thus
have become highly dependent upon air breathing. The radiation of mudskippers
into ecological niches requiring higher degrees of terrestriality parallels the
evolutionary sequence of the early tetrapods and this study will employ
mudskippers as a model group for investigating physiological aspects of the
adaptations underlying the tetrapod progression onto land during the Late
Paleozoic Era (~380-250 million years ago, mya). In the late Devonian Period
(380-360 mya), atmospheric oxygen was low (13-17%) but then increased to 30-35%
in the Carboniferous-Early Permian (360-280 mya). The research on mudskippers
will test theories suggesting that atmospheric oxygen levels affected the
vertebrate land radiation. This will be done by measuring the effect of ambient
oxygen levels on mudskipper performance on a terrestrial treadmill enclosed in
an atmospheric chamber. In addition, time-series comparisons of post-exercise
levels of nutrients (glucose) and metabolites (lactic acid), blood properties,
and other indices of metabolic state will be made for gobies that differ in
their degree of specializations for terrestrial life. Also to be studied is the
genetic link between the extent of time a mudskipper spends out of water and its
capacity for air breathing. This will be done by comparing how the gene-
expression profiles of different species are altered by exercise and prolonged
air exposure. The proposed research will involve the training and mentoring of
undergraduate, graduate, and post doctoral students and thus continue to promote
teaching, training, and learning.