* 0922659
* Macroeconomic Implications of Capital Markets Frictions with Heterogeneous Agents
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Enrique Mendoza, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Niloy Bose
* 08/31/2012
* USD 454,976.00

This proposal includes three research projects that study the macroeconomic
implications of capital markets frictions in economies with heterogeneous
agents. The first project explores the link between the process of financial
globalization and the ongoing global financial crisis. The second project
explores how capital markets liberalization affects the international business
cycle. The third project proposes a new framework to study sovereign defaults on
domestic debt. The three projects are linked by the common theme of studying how
frictions in capital markets affect macroeconomic performance using models in
which agents' heterogeneity plays a critical role. The urgent need to understand
the mechanisms behind the current global financial crisis makes the general
intellectual merit of pursuing these projects and their potential broader impact
self evident. It is clear that the crisis originated in the buildup of high
levels of leverage in the private and public sectors of the U.S. economy. The
driving forces behind the high leverage are much less clear. The projects
included in this proposal aim to shed some light on this issue and to consider
their policy implications. In the first project the PI's pose the hypothesis
that the buildup of leverage was caused by the process of international
financial integration. The debt buildup results from the higher ability to
insure away individual risk that U.S. agents enjoy relative to the rest of the
world thanks to more developed financial markets. As a result, financial
integration leads to a reduction of the real interest rate, a large drop in the
U.S. net foreign asset position, and a surge in debt relative to the value of
asset holdings for U.S. agents. The heterogeneous agents setup also allows the
project to examine how the familiar Fisherian debt-deflation channel triggered
by a credit shock can have cross-sectional implications. In particular, a credit
shock that first affects only the most highly leveraged agents, can be
transmitted to other agents once asset prices begin to decline in response to
the initial shock. The second project is motivated by the observation that as
the process of financial globalization moved forward, business cycle volatility
of output fell for the majority of OECD countries. The PI's study and estimate
using structural Bayesian methods a model with financial markets frictions and
credit shocks. The estimated model generates a decline in the volatility of
output and a higher cross-country co-movement after capital markets
liberalization. A key ingredient to generate this result is the way credit
shocks are propagated to the real sectors of the domestic and foreign countries.
The third project examines a striking empirical regularity showing that
countries viewed as capable of defaulting on external debt, have also a record
of defaulting explicitly on domestic debt obligations. Rogoff and Reinhart
(2008) refer to this phenomenon as a key item in the `forgotten history of
domestic debt' which has been largely ignored in the literature. The PI's put
forward the hypothesis that domestic sovereign default can be explained if we
take into account the heterogeneity of agents in terms of their position in the
wealth distribution. If a benevolent government trades off the adverse
consequences of economy-wide tax hikes that will harm proportionally more the
poor against the option of defaulting on domestic public debt that is held
proportionally more by the rich, the government may prefer the latter.