* 0922876
* MRI:Development of Coherent Confocal Light Absorption & Scattering Spectroscopic Scanning Microscope
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Lev Perelman, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 07/31/2013
* USD 499,907.00

0922876 Perelman

The overall objective of this project is to develop and test a novel major
research instrument, Coherent Confocal Light Absorption and Scattering
Spectroscopic Scanning Microscope (or C-CLASS Scanning Microscope), for non-
invasive dynamic monitoring of subcellular structure which can be used in
multiple areas of biomedical research. This instrument will scan biological
cells with a coherent broadband supercontinuum focused laser beam and collect
elastically scattered light using a confocal arrangement. Collected light,
elastically scattered by various subcellular organelles and structures, will
provide real time information about the morphological, biochemical and physical
properties of various regions of the living cell and their function.

This new C-CLASS instrument will provide dramatically higher spectral contrast
compared to existing incoherent CLASS instruments. The design of the C-CLASS
instrument will utilize several major parts of a commercially available Olympus
confocal microscope system suitably modified to perform C-CLASS. Development of
this instrument will have broad impact in such diverse areas as cell biology,
reproductive biology, obstetrics, neuroscience and drug discovery that are all
linked by the potential of this technique to observe functional intracellular
processes nondestructively. Another important application of this instrument
will be in the area of designing optical nanoprobes with specific spectroscopic
characteristics for molecular imaging. Human embryo development, quality, and
response to environmental factors, might be monitored progressively at all
critical stages, using the C-CLASS Scanning Microscope. Because the C-CLASS
measurement is nondestructive and requires no exogenous chemicals, a given
embryo in vitro could be monitored over time and still be suitable for
implantation. These progression studies are not possible with currently
available techniques.