* 0922480
* Reconstructing Systemic Stress Variability Among Ecologically and Behaviorally Diverse Foragers From Prehistoric Japan Using Enamel Microstructures
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2010
* Daniel Temple, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 08/31/2010
* USD 35,214.00

This project will reconstruct patterns of systemic stress among prehistoric
Middle-Final Jomon period (5000-2500 BP) foragers from Japan using incremental
enamel microstructures (perikymata) found within and between linear enamel
hypoplasia (LEH) defects. Results will help explain the biological impact of
subsistence diversity among foragers and provide a biocultural framework for
interpreting the spread of wet rice economies across the Japanese Islands. Jomon
foragers from western Japan occupied an environment of low resource density and
consumed foods with poor nutritional yield compared to groups from eastern and
northern regions. Wet rice economies were introduced and adopted in western
Japan around 2500 BP, followed by diffusion to eastern regions around 2300 BP,
but failure to spread northward. Greater prevalence of LEH defects and reduced
stature are reported among Jomon foragers from western Japan. This suggests that
agricultural diffusion may have been influenced by systemic stress patterning,
though the more finite components of stress including chronology, duration, and
periodicity are poorly understood. Five hypotheses predicting greater defect
prevalence, earlier stress chronology, greater stress duration, reduced time
intervals between defects, and seasonal stress patterning for western compared
to eastern and northern Jomon people will be tested. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High
resolution silicone impressions were collected for more than 1200 teeth from
more than 500 Middle-Final Jomon period individuals recovered from over 15
archaeological sites on Hokkaido and Honshu Islands. Tooth replicas will be
fashioned from these impressions for microscopic analysis. Perikymata spacing
and counts derived from microscopic analysis of tooth replicas will then be used
to reconstruct chronology, duration, periodicity and prevalence of stress
between regional Jomon samples.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several aspects of this
study contain significant intellectual merit. First, this study highlights the
relationship between environmentally mediated behavioral choices and systemic
stress in a behaviorally diverse group of foragers. Second, this study helps
explain the relationship between systemic stress and phenotypic variation (long
bone length). Third, this research explores the relationship between behavior,
cultural diffusion, and systemic stress. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts
of this study are as follows: First, large, widely comparable data-sets will be
disseminated on a professional webpage. In addition, data sets accumulated by
this study will be used for educational purposes in the classroom, while
equipment purchased by this study will provide graduate students access to
technological resources that can be used to test independent research
hypotheses. Finally, tooth replicas manufactured by this study can be used by
other researchers interested in questions involving life history and dental
anthropology.