* 0922962
* MRI: Development of a Controllable optical emission spectroscopy diagnostic system for use in atomic and molecular sciences
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Matthew Goeckner, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2012
* USD 481,151.00

0922962&lt;br/&gt;Goeckner&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the applicants propose the
development of a novel chemical analysis technology. Analysis of chemical
species has been important to many technological advances. Current technologies
rely on adsorption spectroscopy, inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission
spectroscopy (ICP-AES), mass spectrometry (MS), gas chromatography (GC) and a
few other diagnostics. Depending on the industry, there is often one tool that
is considered the standard. For example the EPA sets pollution standards based
on the capability of GC tools which employ ICP-AES tools within the system. The
PI proposes to complete the basic development of a new diagnostic system that
has the potential to replace ICP-AES and thus revolutionize both emission
spectroscopy studies as well the capabilities of GC systems. Specifically the
new tool is based on the use of well characterized variable electron beams to
produce the emission. By employing a variable electron source, the density of
the electrons can also be controlled independent of the electron energy. This
change allows the development of a new class of emission spectroscopy tools that
are inexpensive, easy to calibrate and allow direct density measurements.