* 0922888
* MRI: Acquisition of Equipment to Develop an Energy Efficient and Reliable Wireless Sensor Network for Urban Landscape Irrigation Management System
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Lawrence Osborne, Lamar University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2013
* USD 214,363.00

Proposal #: CNS 09-22888 PI(s): Sun, Bo Makki, Kami; Osborne, Lawrence J.
Institution: Lamar University Beaumont Beaumont, TX 77705-5748 Title: MRI/Acq.:
Acq. of Equipment to Develop an Energy Efficient and Reliaable Wireless Sensor
Network for Urban Landscape Irrigation Management System Project Proposed: This
project, designing and implementing an energy efficient and reliable Wireless
Sensor Network (WSN) for Urban Landscape Management System (ULIMS), aims to
provide significant cost-savings and alleviate urban water shortage problem by
combining WSNs, data management, system integration, and web-based delivery. The
constructed WSN will consist of a long-lived, real-time reliable network with
remote control capability. Based on engineer portable, low-energy sensor nodes
that can provide sensed data, the resulting system (W-ULIMS) addresses
fundamental constraints faced by WSNs deployed in outdoor harsh environments,
including energy supply, limited memory, the need for unattended operation for a
long period of time, and the lossy and transient behavior of WSN communication.
The project presents the following activities: - Randomized scheduling with a
connectivity guarantee, - Extremely low duty-cycle data forwarding, and - Remote
control (using the idea of Trickle). The randomized scheduling with connectivity
guarantee and extremely low-duty cycle data forwarding protocols under study are
expected to collect sensor data in an energy efficient manner. The testbed
provides an infrastructure to study practical estimation, data collection and
dissemination, and energy conservation faced by WSNs in harsh environments.

Broader Impacts: This project applies new technologies to traditional
agricultural environments and other applications while advancing the complex
behaviors of WSNs. It should contribute to alleviate the significant water
shortage problem facing many cities by providing cost-savings through efficient
usage of agricultural labor and timely notification of situations requiring
managerial decisions. Furthermore, it establishes an environment to broaden
student?s knowledge and research experience.