* 0922297
* Problems in Applied Market Design
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Jonathan Levin, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2012
* USD 276,131.00

Economic analysis has played an increasing role in shaping the design of market
rules and institutions. In the field of auctions and market design, ideas now
move rapidly from the research frontier into practice, informing government
policy on the allocation of radio spectrum, being incorporated into proposals
for cap and trade policy, troubled asset purchases, and broadband stimulus, and
providing new methods and approaches for private sector firms such as Google
that have been quick to capitalize on new ideas about auctions and market
organization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses a combination of economic
theory and empirical methods to understand a series of applied problems in
market design. The first problem relates to the design and implementation of
radio spectrum auctions, now run regularly by many countries following the lead
of the FCC. The research documents a variety of surprising bidding patterns in
past auctions and explains the role of strategic bidding.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A second project studies the college admissions market.
The investigator documents a set of empirical facts about the use of early
admissions programs and develops a game-theoretic model that matches the
empirical patterns and explains the strategic choices facing students and
colleges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A third project studies the problem of selling
dated goods, with an empirical application to the market for graphical internet
advertising. This project develops an approach to estimating demand for
perishable goods when buyers arrive over time and compares competing sales
approaches such as auction mechanisms and traditional negotiation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The last project analyzes advanced market commitment
mechanisms, which have been proposed as a market-based approach to encourage the
development of vaccines for developing countries. The research builds on ideas
that arose in designing a program for pneumoccal vaccine that is now being
implemented, and so examines the early performance of that program as well as
exploring alternative incentive mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal
also highlights additional theoretical and empirical problems in market design
that may arise and lead to fruitful innovations during the course of the grant.