* 0922391
* Regulation and Modeling of Lignin Biosynthesis
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2009,09/30/2015
* Ronald Sederoff, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* thomas okita
* 09/30/2015
* USD 3,722,841.00

PI: Vincent L. Chiang (North Carolina State University)

CoPIs: Joel J. Ducoste (North Carolina State University), Fikret Isik (North
Carolina State University), John Ralph (University of Wisconsin-Madison), and
Ronald R. Sederoff (North Carolina State University)

Climate change has become the most important factor affecting plants in
agriculture and natural ecosystems through increasing environmental stress.
Transport of water and nutrients and the resistance of plants to pests and
pathogens are dependent on lignin, a phenolic polymer and a structural component
of many plant cell walls. The mechanisms of regulation of lignin biosynthesis
are largely unknown. The project seeks to build models to describe how the
pathway is regulated and to reveal new control mechanisms, leading to lignin
polymers. The project will use the model woody plant, Populus trichocarpa (black
cottonwood) and a systems approach including advanced quantitative methods of
genomics, proteomics, biochemistry and structural chemistry, to provide a
comprehensive analysis of the regulation of lignin biosynthesis. A perturbation
strategy will be used to reduce the expression of all genes known to be involved
in lignin biosynthesis during wood formation and the effects on lignin analyzed
using advanced genomic methods available. Quantitative models of lignin
biosynthesis would guide strategies for improved plant productivity, production
of materials, energy, and food.

Broader Impacts: Global warming increases stresses on plants and increases
susceptibility to pests and pathogens. The ability of woody plants to establish
forest ecosystems depends on lignin. Lignin is the main barrier to the
utilization of biomass for energy, for papermaking, and for forage
digestibility. Understanding the fundamental nature of lignin biosynthesis will
lead to improved crops and can also aid in resistance to drought, pests and
pathogens.

Graduate and postdoctoral education and training in systems biology is a major
emphasis of this project. Students and postdocs will develop a rigorous
understanding of plant metabolic networks and the broader implications of
systems biology for plant adaptation to changing environments and the
implications for our nation's agriculture. The outreach/education efforts focus
on under-represented groups at the university and high school levels. Project-
specific research training/learning opportunities will be offered and efforts
will also focus on developing curricular materials for nation-wide dissemination
to bring cutting-edge plant genomics/systems biology to high school classrooms.
The project aims to interest students from under-represented groups in careers
in science and technology.

A database (LigninSystemsDB) containing all project data and protocols will be
accessible to the public at the project website (http://www.ligninsystems.org).
Results from this project will be linked to long term databases, including GEO
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/), BRENDA (http://www.brenda-enzymes.org/) or
SABIO-RK (http://sabio.villa-bosch.de/), KEGG (http://www.genome.jp/kegg/) and
PLANTCYC (http://www.plantcyc.org/), and DENDROM(http://dendrome.ucdavis.edu/).
The project will also provide new annotation to the poplar genome through the
DOE/JGI poplar genome portal (http://genome.jgi-
psf.org/Poptr1_1/Poptr1_1.home.html). All trees and other biological materials
generated by this project will be publicly available for further research
through the project website (http://www.ligninsystems.org) or by contacting the
PI at vincent_chiang@ncsu.edu.