* 0922947
* From small molecule to gene: using chemical genetics to understand cell wall sensing and advance molecular resources
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Seth DeBolt, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Wyatt
* 08/31/2013
* USD 331,000.00

Seth DeBolt &lt;br/&gt;IOS- 0922947&lt;br/&gt;Title: From small molecule to
gene: using chemical genetics to understand cell wall sensing and advance
molecular resources&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While traditional genetics aims to
understand the relationship between genotype and phenotype, the goal of chemical
genetics is the targeted use of cell-permeable small molecules as modulating
ligands for a particular phenotype. A plant's sessile lifestyle requires that it
respond quickly to its environment. A cell wall is one of the most conserved
evolutionary features of the plant cell and its dynamic structure regulates the
passage of biomolecules, creates physical strength and acts as the first line of
defense against biotic and abiotic stress. The project uses a chemical ligand
that blocks cell wall sensing by targeting an integral protein kinase. The
investigators will use chemical genetics, fluorescence biomarkers and molecular
biochemistry to identify other genes in the signaling pathway, identify the
substrate for the kinase and observe the system in real time. Ultimately, the
project aims to discover the dynamics of cell wall signal transduction and
transform our view of how plants perceive their environment and initiate
downstream response. Synthesis of the project will provide training to a Ph.D
student, several undergraduates and foster an educational outreach program with
the science museum for children in Lexington Kentucky in order to engage the
community with the exciting world of plant and agricultural sciences.