* 0922640
* Collaborative research: Molecular mechanisms of scent mediated self / non-self recognition in a pelagic seabird
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Gabrielle Nevitt, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Beth Saffo
* 07/31/2013
* USD 220,012.00

Personal odors can be influenced by genes of the major histocompatibility
complex (Mhc), which is a cluster of genes essential for immune function. These
odors impact recognition and preference in mammals, lizards and fish, but
whether Mhc-associated odors could play a similar role in birds is currently not
known. The tube-nosed seabirds (Order: Procellariiformes: petrels and
albatrosses) are an ideal group for investigating this possibility. These birds
mate for life. They also have a remarkable sense of smell, and some species can
tell each other apart using only odors. This latest finding suggests that
personal scent may play a role in social behaviors, which, until now, has not
been seriously considered in birds.

To investigate this possibility further, Professor Gabrielle Nevitt, a sensory
ecologist specializing in bird olfaction, has teamed up with Professor Scott
Edwards, an evolutionary biologist and expert in the field of Mhc in birds. They
will investigate this problem using the Leach's storm-petrel (Oceanodroma
leucorhoa) as a model system. The primary objectives of this project are: 1) To
perform the first multigene characterization of Mhc class II genes, and other
genes related to olfactory and immune function, in a procellariiform seabird; 2)
To investigate the role of Mhc in individual scent recognition; and 3) To
investigate whether Mhc is involved in life-long partner choice.

Results showing that birds can either detect Mhc odors or use them to choose
mates would represent a paradigm shift in how biologists typically view mate
choice decisions in birds. Just as importantly, many species of petrels and
albatrosses are facing extinction, and understanding the factors driving mate
choice will make a valuable contribution to comprehensive management plans for
endangered species. Finally, the project will provide interdisciplinary training
at the undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral levels, particularly for
minorities and women, who will be targeted for these positions.

