* 0922307
* Acquiring Airborne Lidar data to study hydrologic, geomorphologic, and geochemical processes at three Critical Zone Observatories (CZO)
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Christopher Duffy, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2013
* USD 935,457.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Earth?s ?critical zone? is where
water, atmosphere, ecosystems and soils interact on a geomorphic and geologic
template, and extends from bedrock to the atmospheric boundary layer. Process
understanding of erosion, weathering, soil formation, water movement and
nutrient transport in the critical zone depends in large part on new
observations, coupled with models that can take advantage of those new data. In
particular, accurate, high&amp;#8208;resolution images of the land surface and
vegetation canopy, and the structure in between, have the ability to transform
our ability to describe and model those processes, and to predict how changes in
climate and landcover will perturb water cycles and critical&amp;#8208;zone
processes linked to water. Airborne LiDAR (Light Detection and Ranging) is
proving to be a transformational technology that can determine the
three&amp;#8208;dimensional structure of the critical zone, and thus enable this
process research. LiDAR flights will measure canopy during leaf on/leaf off
conditions, snow distribution and other physical features of the land surface at
the three NSF&amp;#8208;supported Critical Zone Observatories (CZOs) and other
three key sites. Physiographic data will be used to derive the LiDAR products,
such as a high&amp;#8208;resolution digital elevation model, tree heights, tree
diameter at breast height, leaf area index, crown cover, and snow depth.
Ground&amp;#8208;truth data will be collected to validate and calibrate the
LiDAR derived products. Advanced, state&amp;#8208;of&amp;#8208;the&amp;#8208;art
processing will be carried out to assure that products are accurate.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit. The resulting information will be used
for hypothesis&amp;#8208;driven research across these sites.
High&amp;#8208;resolution topographic data will characterize landscapes and
enable testing hypotheses about the geomorphic processes that have generated
these landscapes. The data will enable examining the role of aspect in
geomorphic and hydrologic behavior, and the feedbacks between slope, soil
moisture, weathering, soil formation and vegetation. Hydrologic simulations
using emerging, physics&amp;#8208;based models will also be carried out, using
the high&amp;#8208;spatial&amp;#8208;resolution topographic and canopy products
from LiDAR. High&amp;#8208;resolution estimates of spatial patterns of snow
depth will provide an unprecedented ground&amp;#8208;truth data set for modeling
the physiographic controls on snow accumulation and melt. LiDAR scenes will
contribute to estimating vegetation structure, which will then be used for
parameter estimation in coupled hydro&amp;#8208;ecologic model analysis and in
scaling of evapotranspiration and carbon flux. LiDAR&amp;#8208;based estimates
of micro&amp;#8208;topography, the patterns of which give rise to ?hot? and
?cold? spots of soil biogeochemical cycling generated by preferential flow of
nutrient&amp;#8208;rich litter leachate into mineral soils, will help guide
sampling of litter and soil nutrient concentrations along gradients of water and
biological availability. By quantifying functional controls on rates of erosion
and weathering, the LIDAR data will contribute to improved understanding of how
(and why) sediment and solutes move across (and through) the landscape.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: There are two main, direct broader
impacts of this project. First, making LiDAR data available for the three CZOs
will enhance their potential and use as community platforms for research. The
goal of CZOs is to build a network to advance interdisciplinary studies of Earth
surface processes as well as foster collaboration among scientists and engineers
from different disciplines. However, existing spatial data cannot meet the
research needs of the CZO teams because of being incomplete, outdated and of
insufficient spatial resolution and temporal scale. A second broader impact will
be to make LiDAR products easily understood and widely used by researchers
working at CZOs and similar study areas, building on the community nature of CZO
data and resources, and well&amp;#8208;developed plans to share those resources
and disseminate CZO products.&lt;br/&gt;