* 0922524
* Macroeconomics and Global Climate Change
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Anthony Smith, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 06/30/2013
* USD 232,320.00

The overall purpose of the proposed project is to study the macroeconomics of
global climate change. Its specific and overarching goal is to provide a
quantitative evaluation of government policies designed to reduce emissions of
greenhouse gases (such as carbon dioxide) that cause global warming. To this
end, building on the pioneering work of William Nordhaus and others, this
project (which is joint work with Per Krusell) will construct a quantitative,
welfare-based dynamic macroeconomic model of the world economy which
incorporates realistic interactions between economic activity and the global
climate system. The project will bring to bear state-of-the-art computational
methods developed by the PI and others to study macroeconomic models with
substantial heterogeneity across both consumers and firms that have not
previously been used to analyze so called "integrated assessment" models. These
methods will allow the project to incorporate many important features that are
largely absent from existing models of climate-economy
interactions,&lt;br/&gt;including: a fully micro-founded neoclassical model with
which standard welfare analysis of policy can be undertaken; uncertainty about
technological, climatic, meteorological, and other possible disturbances; a very
large number of regions (in the thousands across the entire globe); significant
region-specific detail about the nature and magnitude of economic damages caused
by changes in global climate; and rich economic interactions between regions,
including trade, insurance, and migration, thereby allowing regions to adapt,
through standard economic market mechanisms, to changes caused by global
warming. Armed with this rich global model of economy-climate interactions, the
project will evaluate quantitatively the distributional effects across different
regions of the world of a variety of policies aimed at reducing greenhouse-gas
emissions. These policies include taxes on carbon emissions and "cap-and-trade"
systems that require firms to obtain permits to emit greenhouse gases. This
policy analysis will take into account uncertainty about how the economy and the
global climate interact by reporting probability distributions over the possible
outcomes of various policies. In addition, it will use the tools of decision-
making under uncertainty to calculate optimal settings for policy parameters.
Finally, it will address the politics of climate policy by providing a
quantitative assessment of the incentives for groups of regions (e.g., countries
and other economic and political unions such as the European Union) to deviate
from international agreements on limate-change policy.&lt;br/&gt;To achieve
these goals, the project will proceed in three phases: first, development of an
appropriate theoretical model of the global economy along with computational
tools to analyze it; second, calibration of the model's parameters using
economic, demographic, climatic, and meteorological data at a very high degree
of geographic resolution; and third, detailed region-by-region quantitative
analysis of the welfare effects of climate-related policies. &lt;br/&gt; The
intellectual merit of the proposed research, then, is to advance the state of
the art in "integrated assessment" modelling by bringing these models into the
mainstream of modern macroeconomics and by using the tools of modern
macroeconomics to build richer, more complex, and more realistic models of
economy-climate interactions. &lt;br/&gt; The broader impact of the proposed
research is to enrich society's understanding of the economic effects of global
warming and to improve its ability to design and evaluate government policies
that attempt both to reduce global warming and to ameliorate its effects on the
global economy