* 0922442
* Identification and Characterization of Single Gene Mutations Causing Heterosis in Tomato
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2009,02/28/2013
* Zachary Lippman, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 02/28/2013
* USD 499,075.00

PI: Zachary B. Lippman (Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory) Collaborator: Dani Zamir
(Hebrew University)

The agricultural yields of the world's major crop plants have increased
significantly in the last century, thus providing food for an ever-growing
population. This was made possible primarily through the century-old discovery
that crossing different poor-yielding inbred varieties of corn causes a
remarkable increase in yield among the inter-crossed, or hybrid, plants. Such
hybrid vigor, termed "heterosis", has since become a foundation for crop
breeding and a focus of intense research. While studies have revealed important
generalizations about what controls heterosis, the individual genes and
molecular networks responsible have still not been identified. This project will
test a new hypothesis, namely that a mutation in a single gene, which is
seemingly detrimental to plant growth, can cause heterosis when hybridized back
to a normal non-mutant plant. The resulting partial gene activity in the "mutant
hybrid" results in a new state of growth that is beneficial to yield through a
genetic phenomenon called "dosage". Preliminary research in tomato has already
identified multiple mutant hybrids that increase fruit production. Based on
these findings, the goals of this project will be to: i) search for additional
tomato mutants that show heterosis when hybridized with normal plants, ii)
characterize the changes in growth (e.g. branch number, flower production) that
are the basis for heterosis in two previously identified mutant hybrids, and
iii) study novel changes in the activity of all tomato genes in mutant hybrids.
Unlike previous studies, this project will be able to link heterotic effects of
a single gene with specific changes in growth and relevant changes in gene
activity. This new knowledge can then be harnessed to identify genes causing
heterosis in other crop species.

To promote educational outreach about heterosis and the principles of this
project to the general public, a teaching program about plant breeding and food
production has been developed. Specifically, a three-part lesson explaining the
processes by which plants make flowers, fruits, and seeds has been developed for
an elementary school with an underrepresented student population in Queens, New
York. Live plants from multiple crops will be used to illustrate the dramatic
changes in growth that occur as plants switch from making leaves to making
flowers. Discussion sections will emphasize how the environment interacts with
plants to stimulate flower and fruit production, and how plant breeders leverage
this knowledge to develop new crop varieties. It is anticipated that this
outreach project will serve as a model for future programs that will target
additional schools in New York City. Finally, all data generated in this project
will be made publicly available through the Solanaceae Genomics Network
(http://sgn.cornell.edu/). In addition, seeds from mutant hybrids can be
requested from Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
(http://www.cshl.edu/public/SCIENCE/lippman.html) and from the Tomato Genetics
Resource Center (http://tgrc.ucdavis.edu/).