* 0922968
* MRI: Development of an In situ Device for Integrated Nano-mechanical Electrical and Thermal Measurements
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Vikas Prakash, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 07/31/2012
* USD 339,178.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

The Case Western Reserve University will develop a versatile state-of-the-art
in situ test and characterization tool for simultaneous nano-mechanical
electrical and thermal (NMET) property measurements in nanostructured materials
inside a ultra-high resolution Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM). The SEM has a
large specimen chamber that is ideal for in situ physical property
characterization; the chamber is equipped with two Kleindiek nanomanipulators
and a micro-delivery gas injection system that facilitate transportation,
positioning and assembly of nanoscale structures with nanoprecision. The
development of the instrument will utilize a custom built transducer that will
enable nanoNewton force and subnanometer displacement resolution measurements
during in situ mechanical straining of nanoscale structures. In addition, novel
probe tips will be integrated with the specimen grips on the loading/testing
apparatus, which will provide unmatched capability to perform simultaneous
nanoscale mechanical, thermal and/or electrical measurements in nanostructures,
nano-engineered composites and biological materials while performing high
resolution imaging. Improved characterization methods for nanostructured
materials is expected to lead to a better fundamental understanding of the
underlying physics, and is critical to further developments in the field of
nanotechnology.

The development of the instrumentation is expected to support research teams
whose efforts intersect more than one traditional discipline. Availability of
this unique diagnostic tool will open new lines of communication with
researchers at other Ohio institutions and our collaborators. The
instrumentation will also provide an opportunity for laboratory experience and
training for undergraduate, graduate and post-doctoral students. The
instrumentation will be integrated into the laboratory courses for imaging
experiments and for nanoscale mechanical or transport measurement projects.