* 0922923
* MRI: Acquisition of a Supercomputing Cluster for Data-Intensive Computational Research using the Open Science Grid (OSG) Cyberinfrastructure
* CSE,OAC
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2011
* Neeti Parashar, Bellarmine University
* Standard Grant
* robert pennington
* 03/31/2011
* USD 200,273.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bellarmine University will acquire a
64-node Supercomputing Cluster with approximately 22TB of RAID6 disk storage
space to conduct grid-enabled computational research in High Energy Physics
using the Open Science Grid (OSG) cyberinfrastructure. The collaborative
research activities will be carried out in close partnership with University of
Oklahoma, State University of New York at Albany, Purdue University at Calumet,
Southwestern University, and a Historically Black Minority-Serving institution,
Benedict College. Using the grid middleware resources, this partnership will
essentially create a virtual organization that will link all the research
participants by bringing together geographically and organizationally dispersed
computational resources and people from the six institutions from six different
states by developing a platform for shared systematic use of the supercomputing
cluster and effective utilization of computational tools. We plan to search for
the Higgs Boson and SUSY (Supersymmetric) particles in specific decay channels
using the LHC (Large Hadron Collider) data. The physics studies will first be
carried out and tested on detailed simulations of particles and their
interactions with the detector using the GEANT monte-carlo package. This multi-
institutional research team will focus on the development of evolutionary
algorithms and computational code to carry out the complex data analyses tasks
by studying the various detector parameters - focusing on data reduction and
filtering methodologies and pattern recognition techniques for extracting
?discovery level signals? from petabyte-scale datasets. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The availability of a supercomputing cluster will serve as a powerful
stimulus for the recruitment of undergraduate students in the sciences,
especially from the underrepresented groups. The computational research
activities with OSG will not only have a significant and a broad societal impact
on the educational training of undergraduate students of all races and ethnicity
at Bellarmine University, but also has the potential to bring in a new era of
grid-enabled scientific research capability at this institution via infusion of
this new knowledge. The grid-enabled supercomputing cluster will create
precisely the kind of exciting learning environment that will provide the next
generation of students at all seven participating institutions with an
accessible entry to research and education at the frontiers of computational
science, information technology, and cluster/grid computing. These trained
students will acquire a solid computational background with broad technical
skills and expertise in high performance parallel cluster computing techniques
and grid middleware technologies. Using this supercomputing facility, we plan to
incorporate the grid-enabled research activities into the academic curriculum by
developing an innovative interdisciplinary course in ?Computational Science
using Grid Technology.? Additionally, we plan to host a hands-on OSG Summer Grid
Workshop/School at Bellarmine University for the undergraduate students from the
regional public, private, and minority-serving institutions in Kentucky.
&lt;br/&gt;