* 0922522
* MRI: Acquisition of a Field Emission Cryo-Scanning Electron Microscope for Nanocharacterization and Patterning of Soft Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Matthew Libera, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 09/30/2012
* USD 699,848.00

0922522&lt;br/&gt;Libera&lt;br/&gt;Stevens Institute of
Technology&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary: This project applies a new,
state-of-the-art, cryo-scanning electron microscope (SEM) to measure soft-
materials morphology at high spatial resolution. This new microscope will
advance over ten research projects at Stevens Institute of Technology and enable
them to follow important directions that amplify their ongoing and anticipated
aims. All involve soft materials ? either synthetic polymers, biological
structures, or combinations of the two. Among the materials being studied are:
self-assembled, weak-polyelectrolyte, responsive micelles; nanoparticle
composites; degradable scaffolds that mimic natural bone; infection-resistant
orthopedic implants; natural extracellular matrix; and synthetic nanofiber
extracellular matrices. Synthetic and natural polymers are challenging materials
to study by electron microscopy because of their radiation sensitivity, weak
intrinsic contrast, and susceptibility to electrical charging. This new
microscope provides controllable electron accelerating voltages enabled at low
voltages by a field-emission (FEG) electron source; gas compensation to mitigate
specimen charging; high-efficiency electron detectors that minimize the required
incident dose; robust methods for digital image acquisition/processing; cryo-
imaging capabilities for studying frozen-hydrated materials; and
hardware/software for robust electron-beam lithography. All of these features
are either inadequate or unavailable on the SEM the new microscope replaces.
Importantly, the new SEM is housed in a central user facility with a history of
successful multidisciplinary training that spans high school through post-
graduate school. Users receive substantial training both by concentrated hands-
on self-user practice and by graduate lecture/lab course work. In addition to
serving the immediate Stevens research community, the instrument plays an
important role in community outreach and education by way of collaborative
activities with the Stevens Center for Innovative Engineering and Science
Education, an established K-16 outreach organization, and the Project SEED
program of the American Chemical Society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Layman Summary:
Scanning electron microscopes (SEMs) are used to study the surfaces of materials
at magnifications between about 20 and 500,000 times. They can provide important
information about the structure and composition of materials. So-called soft
materials, such as plastics and biological tissue, are typically more
challenging to study by electron microscopy than metals or semiconductors,
because soft materials can become both electrically charged and chemically
changed by the electrons used in the microscope. At Stevens Institute of
Technology there are more than ten research projects, all of which involve soft
materials, whose progress is limited by the need to do more and better SEM
imaging and analysis. The newest scanning electron microscopes incorporate
innovative features that can help Stevens researchers overcome the problems of
specimen charging and chemical damage. To take advantage of these, this project
is using a new, state-of-the-art, SEM to measure soft-materials morphology and
help Stevens researchers make new discoveries. These scientists are, for
example, using the microscope to develop new ways to delivery drugs, to make hip
and knee implants more infection resistant, and to help heal major bone
fractures. Because this new microscope is a complex instrument, it is housed in
a laboratory with a dedicated staff and facilities to both maintain the
microscope and provide the advanced training needed for university students to
make the best use of this new tool. Importantly, however, many aspects of the
microscope are relatively easy to use and understand, so this microscope is also
helping Stevens develop connections to the surrounding community through a
variety of high-school outreach programs designed to get more young people aware
of and interested in science and engineering.