* 0922095
* Maize Epigenomic Variation
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2010,02/28/2014
* Nathan Springer, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 02/28/2014
* USD 1,678,620.00

PI: Nathan M. Springer (University of Minnesota - Twin
Cities)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CoPI: Matthew W. Vaughn (Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborator: Irina Makarevitch (Hamline
University)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a growing interest in understanding
how epigenetic variation might contribute to phenotypic variation. Epigenetic
variation, heritable variation that is not due to sequence changes, has been
observed in a number of biological phenomena. However, the prevalence and
heritable behavior of epigenetic variation is not well understood. This project
will study the prevalence, heritability and potential consequences of epigenetic
variation in maize. Whole genome profiling of DNA methylation, histone H3 lysine
9 dimethylation and histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation will be performed on
several tissues of the maize inbred line B73 and on a set of 26 inbred lines
that capture much of the diversity of maize. By focusing on this population it
is possible to add epigenomic data to a wealth of existing data on genetic and
phenotypic information. This will provide the potential to identify examples of
epigenetic variation that contribute to phenotypic variation within a species.
The project will also study how epigenetic differences are inherited in hybrids
and recombinant inbred lines to assess the stability of epigenetic variation
over multiple generations, which is critical to understanding the heritability
of epigenetic variation and how it might be relevant to heritable phenotypic
variation. In addition, relatively little is known about the role of epigenetics
in natural variation. In order to provide a more detailed understanding of the
role of epigenetics, it is critical to understand how this behavior is inherited
and how this variation arises within a species. This project will develop tools
that will enable epigenomic research in maize and will provide a framework for
considering the frequency and stability of epigenetic variation among maize
inbred lines and may provide a framework for integrating both genetic and
epigenetic variation into plant breeding and improvement
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project will provide a set of
excellent training opportunities for scientists at various stages of their
careers. Undergraduate students from the University of Minnesota and Hamline
University will be involved with the primary research and will receive mentoring
from post-doctoral scientists and principal investigators. Postdoctoral
scientists and a graduate student will perform hypothesis-based research that
will provide experience with genomics and bioinformatics. In addition, the
principal investigators have both shown a commitment to general outreach.
Outreach efforts will include public education and K-12 teacher training. All
data produced by this project will be made publicly available through
established databases such as GEO (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/), Gramene
(www.gramene.org) and MaizeGDB (www.maizegdb.org) as well as through a project
website. The proposed project will also have broader impacts on other research.
The information obtained in this project will influence studies of breeding and
evolution. A greater understanding of the sources of variation within a species
will influence the view of many fields.