* 0922819
* MRI:   Acquisition of a 9.4 T High Field Fourier Transform Ion Cyclotron Resonance Mass Spectrometer for Biological and Materials Applications
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Peter Armentrout, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2012
* USD 757,870.00

Faculty at the Department of Chemistry at Wayne State University (WSU) in
Detroit, MI have been granted an award from Major Research Instrumentation (MRI)
program to acquire a 9.4 T Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance mass
spectrometer (FT-ICR MS) to establish a biological mass spectrometry resource.
The ultra high mass accuracy and resolving power, upper mass limit, and the
dynamic range of this state-of-the-art instrumentation will provide support for
transformative research and education in biology and the myriad
interdisciplinary fields born of biology and chemistry, chemical engineering,
environmental engineering, geology, and environmental health sciences. This
instrument will provide a powerful tool for studies of a broad variety of topics
in structural biology and the evolving fields of genomics, proteomics,
glycomics, lipidomics, metabolomics, drug development, biological/nano materials
and sensor applications, and methodology development for improved sensitivity
and quantitation in mass analyses of biological
molecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This state-of-the-art FT-ICR MS will contribute
to both research and educational infrastructure at WSU. It will be used as a
central tool for numerous projects in a variety of Departments and several
advanced laboratory courses at WSU, and will also provide benefits to the
academic and industrial researchers that employ the WSU Central Instrumentation
Facility (CIF) for mass spectral analyses. The instrument is expected to have a
broad impact on education and training of undergraduate and graduate students,
as well as the traditionally under-represented groups that make up ~33% of the
WSU enrollment. The inherently interdisciplinary and collaborative nature of the
projects that will benefit from this advanced instrumentation will promote WSUs
training of scientists equipped to address the challenges facing the chemical,
biological, geological, and engineering fields in the coming decades. Widespread
dissemination of research outcomes will be achieved via presentations at
scientific meetings, seminars at Universities, and research publications in a
variety of scientific journals. Information regarding this FT-ICR MS instrument
and research outcomes will also be disseminated to the general public and
scientific communities via the Internet.&lt;br/&gt;