* 0922243
* The Importance of Anaerobic Manganese Respiration in the Cycling of Nitrogen in Sediments
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Thomas DiChristina, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2013
* USD 388,301.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). Nitrogen is an essential element for life on Earth, yet
fixed nitrogen is relatively scarce in the oceans. Simultaneously, global
nitrogen budgets are difficult to balance, suggesting unknown nitrification and
denitrification reactions may account for a large flux of nitrogen between
reservoirs. Over the last decade, new microbial transformations of nitrogen have
been discovered using geochemical, cultivation, and molecular approaches, and
genes responsible for the oxidation of ammonium have been found in a wide
variety of prokaryotes. Among these processes, anammox, which anaerobically
oxidizes ammonium to N2 in the presence of nitrite or nitrate, may contribute to
30-50% of denitrification in marine environments. Other thermodynamically
favorable pathways hypothesized to play a significant role in the transformation
of nitrogen in sediments include iron- and manganese-coupled nitrification and
denitrification. The overall objective of this project is to demonstrate that
manganese-reducing prokaryotes play a significant role in the nitrogen cycle by
providing, through anaerobic oxidation of ammonium, an alternative source of
nitrite and nitrate to denitrifying and nitrate- reducing microorganisms.
Several studies, including ours, have concluded that manganese- coupled
anaerobic nitrification occurs in marine sediments, though direct evidence for
such processes is still lacking and pure strains have yet to be isolated. A
series of incubations with sediments will be complemented with cultivation-
independent molecular phylogenetic studies to identify the dominant microbial
species in incubations displaying MnO2-dependent nitrifying activities. These
incubations will be supplemented with a cultivation approach to isolate pure or
mixed cultures catalyzing this reaction. This study will demonstrate that
dissimilatory manganese reduction plays a significant role in anaerobic
nitrification and, ultimately, denitrification through the anammox process.
Denitrification and the dissimilatory reduction of manganese play a significant
role in the cycling of carbon in sediments, thus the new processes identified in
this study will have broader implications on our understanding of the global
carbon cycle. This study will also refine diagenetic models and expand the
number of microbial processes involved in the nitrogen cycle to help balance
nitrogen budgets more accurately.