* 0922587
* MRI: Acquisition of an Ultrafast Laser System for the Center for Research and Education in Optical Sciences and Applications
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Noureddine Melikechi, Delaware State University
* Standard Grant
* Siu Au Lee
* 08/31/2012
* USD 48,178.00

This award provides funds for equipment to enhance the capabilities of the NSF-
CREST Center: Center for Research and Education in Optical Sciences and
Applications (CREOSA). This center was established in September 2006 at Delaware
State University. The equipment will be used in a project which aims at studying
complex samples characterized by the large number of physical effects that take
place as a result of laser excitation: absorption, scattering, heating,
photochemical effects, nonlinear optical effects and others. Three types of
experiments will be done: femtosecond (fs) laser breakdown spectroscopy (fs-
LIBS), the development of a novel multi-photon photothermal lens (PTL)
microscope, and fs-coherent photon echo spectroscopy. Independent projects for
teaching ultrafast laser technology and its applications in nonlinear optics and
spectroscopy are also planned.

The project involves a close integration of research, education and training in
nonlinear laser spectroscopy of undergraduate and graduate students with special
emphasis in broadening and promoting the participation of underrepresented
groups. Courses on Lasers, Laser Spectroscopy, Non-linear Optics and Modern
Optics are currently being taught as core courses of the MS and PhD programs of
CREOSA. The teaching of these courses will be enriched by the training and the
use of state of the art high power fs-laser high resolution spectroscopic system
in education as mentioned in this proposal.