* 0922684
* Planning Visit:  U.S.-Danish Research on Diversity and Toxin Production of Pseudo-nitzschia Species in Sub-Arctic and Arctic Regions with Focus on Iron Enriched Regions.
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2010
* Sibel Bargu, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 04/30/2010
* USD 9,408.00

OISE 0922684&lt;br/&gt;Bargu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Relatively little is know
about the distribution of marine diatom, Pseudo-nitzschia, in offshore, oceanic
environments and corresponding ecosystem-wide consequences associated with the
diatom?s potential production of the toxic Domoic Acid (DA). Though this
research planning visit, Sibel Bargu and a graduate student from Louisiana State
University and A &amp; M College will initiate a collaborative project with
Danish partner, Nina Lundholm at the University of Copenhagen. They intend to
study diversity and toxin production of the Pseudo-nitzschia species in sub-
Arctic and Arctic regions with a particular focus on iron enriched regions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Accurate species identification and molecular studies of
this source organism are needed to further evaluate the ecology and toxin
production of the taxa. The U.S. principal investigator?s strengths in
ecological measurements of DA in iron rich waters, seaward of continental
margins, complement the Danish partner?s extensive knowledge of systematics and
molecular biology in Artic and sub-Arctic locations. Together the international
team will begin work to confirm the ultimate identity of the Pseudo-nitzschia
species by using electron microscopy and genomic analysis. Their efforts are
expected to begin to reveal more about the production and transfer of DA through
food chains in places like the Gulf of Alaska and Greenlandic waters, with the
long-term goal of documenting Pseudo-nitzschia distribution and toxicity in
world oceans. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research visit fulfills the program
objective of advancing basic knowledge of this genius and the relative toxicity
of strains by enabling experts in the United States and Europe to share research
resources and plan beneficial projects in areas of strong mutual interest and
competence. Broader impacts include providing one Louisiana State University
graduate student with an early career introduction to forefront international
collaboration and field work. Based on previous observations, team members
conclude that iron enrichment may selectively promote growth of the toxin
producing strains. Therefore, new results could identify potential DA hazards
that should be considered in iron fertilization experiments designed to remove
carbon dioxide from the atmosphere through sequestration in deep
oceans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;