* 0922315
* Graphical versus Numerical Presentation of Quantitative Environmental Risk Information About Unexploded Ordnance
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Jacqueline MacDonald Gibson, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 08/31/2011
* USD 339,374.00

An increasing amount of land in the United States that is contaminated with
unexploded ordnance (UXO) is becoming available for conversion to civilian
uses?a result of an ongoing military base restructuring campaign. UXO
contamination results from the failure of ammunition launched during live-
weapons training exercises to function as planned, leaving a legacy of ordnance
items that have the potential to detonate if disturbed. Complete cleanup of UXO
generally is not possible with existing technologies, so decisions must be made
about how to balance the risks from UXO against the benefits of land conversion.
This research provides the foundation for development of evidence-based risk
communication materials concerning UXO. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Federal agencies
involved at UXO sites have expressed considerable skepticism about the public?s
ability to comprehend quantitative information about UXO risks and in part for
this reason have not pursued development of a quantitative UXO risk assessment
approach. The qualitative methods currently in use, however, do not allow for
risk-benefit analyses that could inform decisions about the extent of cleanup
that should be required and the kinds of land uses that can be permitted
afterwards. This research employs a new comprehensive risk assessment method
that provides the quantitative risk information that would best inform this type
of risk-benefit analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The present work examines how
this quantitative risk information can best be communicated so that the public
can understand and use the information to make informed decisions. In
particular, the research team evaluates the effects of graphical versus
numerical presentation of the risk information on both cognitive and affective
responses to the risk information and how these responses, in turn, affect
decision making. Further, this work examines the extent to which these effects
hold equally for people with high and low ability to understand numerical risk
information and whether specific presentational formats are necessary for people
with different levels of numerical understanding. Ultimately, this research will
lead to a citizenry that is better informed in making decisions concerning
remediation and land reuse at UXO sites.