* 0922436
* DDIG: Body Cultures, African American Girls, and Physical Activity Engagement
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,04/30/2012
* Stephanie McClure, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 04/30/2012
* USD 8,550.00

Doctoral student Stephanie McClure, supervised by Dr. Eileen Anderson-Fye, will
undertake research on the relationships between body conceptualization and
physical activity engagement within a specific racial and age group -- African
American adolescent girls. The research focuses on answering two overarching
questions. The first question is: how do local cultural contexts affect body
agency, the body as an expression of identity? (Local cultural contexts comprise
the blend of lived experience, family and peer norms, local history, and macro-
level social constructions.) The second question is: how does body agency shape
the meanings and practices of physical activity engagement?

These questions are important because while adolescence-associated declines in
physical activity are more marked for African American girls than for girls of
other racial groups, their actual physical activity levels, low body weight
norms, and body image focus vary. This within-group variability is not accounted
for if racial norms alone are used as an explanation. The research will be
conducted in a high school. The researcher will employ a mix of qualiatative and
quantitative research methods, including: focus group interviews, semi-
structured individual interviews, direct observation, electronic physical
activity monitoring, and anthropometric measurement.

This research will provide needed data about cultural variability among African
Americans and the interaction between identity, body conceptualization and
bodily practice in adolescent life contexts more generally. Research findings
will inform the development of effective obesity prevention programs and
policies targeting American adolescents. Funding this research also contributes
to the education of a social scientist.