* 0922830
* MRI:   Acquisition of an Atomic Force Microscope/Confocal Imaging System for Research and Training at the College of Nanoscale Science and Engineering
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* James Castracane, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2012
* USD 609,677.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

A grant is awarded to the University at Albany to acquire an atomic force
microscope (AFM)-laser scanning confocal microscope (LSCM) for research and
training at the College of Nanoscale Science & Engineering (CNSE). Biological
research at the nano- and micro-scale requires increasingly sophisticated
instrumentation. A particular need for biological research is the capability to
combine high resolution optical imaging with biophysical force measurements.
This can be achieved by incorporating biological AFM with LSCM. LCSM enables
high-resolution optical imaging, while AFM provides nanoscale topographical
information and ultra-sensitive mechanical measurements. The integration of
these two techniques yields a powerful research tool capable of high-resolution
imaging and nanoscale mechanical measurements at specific locations within
complex biological samples. A cross-disciplinary portfolio of research projects
will utilize this AFM/LSCM system. Experiments focus on the observation and
measurement of cellular and molecular interactions, mechanical studies of cell
differentiation, measurement of single molecular interactions, and elucidation
of mechanisms involved in 3D tissue development. For each of these efforts, it
is critical for investigators to perform non-invasive 3D optical sectioning
while simultaneously measuring mechanical properties, adhesion forces, or
mapping physical 3D topography. These research efforts are collectively aimed at
the understanding of mechanical interactions in cellular and molecular systems.
Improved understanding of these systems will provide important information for
tissue engineering, therapeutics, and rational design of biomolecular machines.

This AFM/LSCM system will support a wide range of interdisciplinary research
efforts and will become a focal point for bridging collaborations between CNSE,
the UAlbany Department of Biological Sciences, the Wadsworth Institute (NYS
Dept. of Health), and the Ge*NY*sis Center for Excellence in Cancer Biology. It
will enable cutting-edge research efforts ranging from the dynamic measurement
of cell-surface interactions, measurement of nucleic acid - protein
interactions, mechanical studies of stem cell differentiation, and the
elucidation of 3D tissue development. The senior personnel involved with this
effort span a wide range of disciplines including physics, nanoengineering,
chemical engineering, biophysics, developmental biology, molecular biology,
cancer biology and neurology. This highly-interdisciplinary team will utilize
the proposed instrumentation to greatly advance their current research efforts,
resulting in new research proposals, scientific publications and the development
of novel biomedical technologies. This AFM/LSCM system will serve as a unique
training tool for graduate students and post doctoral researchers, and will also
provide one-of-a-kind training for undergraduate and high-school students in
outreach programs. Hands-on training will be provided for undergraduate students
involved in an integrated summer internship program and through use of the
instrument in year-long embedded internships. High school students will
participate in integrated discovery programs as part of ongoing partnerships
with the urban Albany School District's "Nano High" and "Engineering
Explorations Program." Using the proposed instrument, exciting, hands-on
laboratory activities for these students will be developed to bring together
principles of nanotechnology, biology, physics, and engineering. A series of
spotlights on these research and outreach activities will be broadcast to the
community through CNSE's news columns and internet postings. In this way, the
proposed instrument will have a profound impact on research, training, and
community outreach efforts.