* 0922067
* The Biogeographic Impact of the Late Ordovician Richmondian Invasion: Assessing Faunal Dynamics by Combining Niche Modeling and Evolutionary History of Cincinnatian Brachiopods
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Alycia Stigall, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Yusheng Liu
* 09/30/2013
* USD 152,000.00

The biogeographic impact of the Late Ordovician Richmondian Invasion: Assessing
faunal dynamics by combining niche modeling and evolutionary history of
Cincinnatian brachiopods

Alycia Stigall, Ohio University

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The goal of this project is to assess the long-term impacts of invasive species
on speciation, extinction, and community reorganization by analyzing a
particularly well characterized interval of intense invasive activity preserved
in the Late Ordovician strata of the Cincinnati Arch. This project will employ
ecological niche modeling (ENM) techniques to reconstruct the geographic ranges
of individual species of brachiopods at multiple time slices before, during, and
after the invasion interval. ENM methods utilize sedimentary parameters
determined from the rock record as environmental proxies to estimate the set of
environmental condition, or niche, inhabited by individual species. The species
geographic range is then predicted to extend to where the set of environmental
conditions exists within the study area. The abundant fossils within a well-
developed stratigraphic framework in Late Ordovician strata of the Cincinnati
Arch will provide an excellent geologic setting to implement and refine ENM
methods for modeling the geographic range of fossil species. Using Geographic
Information Systems (GIS), the reconstructed geographic ranges of individual
species will be analyzed spatially and temporally to examine biogeographic
patterns through the invasion interval. Specifically, this project will analyze
the biogeographic differences between species native to the Cincinnati region
that become extinct versus persist through the invasion interval. For native
taxa that survive the invasion interval, whether they respond to the altered
environment by (a) shifting their biogeographic ranges to follow a preferred set
of abiotic environmental conditions without exhibiting evolutionary change
(=habitat tracking or niche conservatism), (b) adaptive change to shifting
environmental parameters (=niche evolution), or (c) some combination of these
options will be assessed. Phylogenetic revisions of the four brachiopod genera
will be conducted to provide an evolutionary framework to assess speciation
events during the Richmondian Invasion and further characterize the role of
invasive species on speciation. This project will also assess whether native and
immigrant species respond differently to environmental change and what features
(morphological, phylogenetic, environmental preferences, etc.) characterize the
native species that do survive the invasion regime. By elucidating the relative
extent that habitat tracking, adaptive change, and biotic vs. abiotic factors
have on faunal dynamics during the course of a Paleozoic invasion event, better
constraints can be developed to determine the expected long-term (thousands of
years) outcome of species invasions within the modern ecosystem. At least three
graduate and up to four undergraduate students will be trained in systematic
paleontology, stratigraphic field work, and GIS and ENM techniques and will gain
experience participating in professional meetings. Collaboration with the
Cincinnati Museum Center will result in enriching their collections through
donating newly collected material and creation of a permanent exhibit on the
relationship between species range and environments and the impact of species
invasions in the fossil record. Data collected will also be published in peer-
reviewed journals and will target both paleontological/geological and biological
audiences in order to best disseminate data on the long term impacts of invasive
species to audiences interested in Earth history as well as the potential
effects of invaders in the modern biodiversity crisis.