* 0922235
* Collaborative Research: The effects of weathering on bedrock channel erosion and form
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Cameron Wobus, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jessica Robin
* 07/31/2013
* USD 282,710.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Erosion of bedrock in river channels is
a fundamental process governing the evolution of landscapes that has not yet
been evaluated fully. The rate of this erosion and its location within a river
channel depend on a river's energy available to do work on the river bed, the
distribution of sediment cover, and the type of bedrock underlying the channel.
Several recent modeling studies have examined the coupled evolution of channel
cross-sections and longitudinal profiles, but field-based studies investigating
bedrock channel erosion are rare. Moreover, few studies have explicitly
considered the effects of weathering on bedrock channel geometry and long-term
channel evolution. This project will test four hypotheses focused on evaluating
how weathering affects bedrock channel erosion 1) bedrock is more highly
weathered along channel margins than near the channel center; 2) the degree of
weathering is not enhanced beneath sediment cover; 3) the abrasion rate of
bedrock increases as the degree of weathering increases; and 4) where weathering
is substantial, channel cross-sections are wide and shallow, and as weathering
efficiency decreases, channel cross-sections become narrower and deeper. These
hypotheses will be tested by measuring the cross-channel distribution of rock
weathering at stream sites with both easily weathered rocks (e.g., weak
sandstones, limestone) and weathering-resistant rocks (e.g., quartzite, granite)
in three hydro-climatic settings. The degree of weathering will be quantified
using two geochemical weathering indices, in situ using Schmidt hammers and
fracture density and length, and in the laboratory using Brazilian tension
splitting tests. Rock erodability will be gauged via abrasion mill experiments
in the laboratory. The results from these investigations will allow weathering
to be incorporated into existing numerical models of bedrock
erosion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rock erosion by river channels forms some of the
most spectacular topography on Earth (e.g., Grand Canyon), and is the most
effective erosion process active in non-glaciated landscapes. Understanding the
processes responsible for rock erosion by rivers and the rates at which these
processes work is therefore fundamental to interpreting the history of Earth's
surface. Using field investigations, laboratory measurements, and numerical
modeling, several hypotheses will be tested that have important implications for
documenting the nature and rate of bedrock erosion in river channels under
various conditons This project will provide substantial educational and
personnel development benefits, including support of undergaraduates, a graduate
student, and a post-doctoral research fellow.