* 0922686
* MRI:  Acquisition of Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Instrumentation for Undergraduate Research and Research Training at Minnesota State University Moorhead and Concordia College
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Craig Jasperse, Minnesota State University Moorhead
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2012
* USD 420,363.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award from the Major
Research Instrumentation (MRI) program, Craig Jasperse, Gary Edvenson and P.
Asoka Marasinghe from Minnesota State University - Moorehead and their
colleagues Donald Krogstad and Drew Rutherford from Concordia College will
acquire a 400 MHz NMR spectrometer to support chemical research of faculty at
their respective campuses. Proposed research spans a number of areas in
chemistry, including: 1) the development of new ligands for use in green
chemistry; 2) the studies of protein phosphorylation and membrane protein ion
exchange; 3) the design of new ligands and catalysts for use in fluorous
chemistry; 4) the development of new transition metal complexes for use as
catalysts and as components in nanostructured materials; 5) the design of novel
boron-containing agents for potential use in Boron Neutron Capture Therapy; and
6) the construction of improved solar cells. The instrumentation will also be
used in teaching and training of undergraduate students in coursework at both
institutions, as well as being an integral part of outreach activities to
Hispanic and native American students from the area.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is one of
the most powerful tools available to chemists for the elucidation of the
structure of molecules. It is used to identify unknown substances, to
characterize specific arrangements of atoms within molecules, and to study the
dynamics of interactions between molecules in solution. Access to state-of-the-
art NMR spectrometers is essential to chemists who are carrying out frontier
research. The results from these NMR studies will have an impact in synthetic
organic/inorganic chemistry and biochemistry.&lt;br/&gt;