* 0922667
* MRI: Acquisition of a Tecnai TS 20 Field Emitter Transmission Electron Microscope
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* K. Sharvan Kumar, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 09/30/2012
* USD 700,000.00

0922667&lt;br/&gt;Paine&lt;br/&gt;Brown U.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This award is
funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This MRI
proposal by Brown University requests support for the acquisition of an FEI
Tecnai S20 transmission electron microscope (TEM) to serve the nanoscale imaging
and micro/nano-characterization needs of the local research community. The
proposed instrument addresses the need at Brown for a modern TEM imaging tool
that will allow both conventional materials science studies for the
understanding of the microstructure of materials used in electronic, structural,
and biological applications and, at the higher resolutions at lower energies
available with a field emitter (FE) source, new applications in biomedical and
soft-matter physics. This tool will provide both the versatility and flexibility
to satisfy the needs of our diverse research community by combining high
performance in all imaging and diffraction modes with the ease of operation
needed in a multi-user materials research environment. It will enable new
material sciences research pursued by the faculty and students in departments
across the physical sciences and beyond at Brown, including Engineering,
Physics, Chemistry, Geology, Biology, Archaeology and Biomedicine. Some ongoing
research that will make use of the new FE TEM includes: studies of the nanoscale
features of highly localized adiabatic shear bands formed in high strain rate
deformation of steel; creation of nanopore-based prototype device structures for
biomolecule analysis; analysis of interfaces and microstructure in the materials
used in oxide electronics; understanding growth-related crystallographic defects
in nanowire structures fabricated via novel chemical pathways; and evaluation of
inclusions for the identification of the origins of archeological glass samples.
More broadly, the selected instrument will provide the local research community
with a capability that is not currently available anywhere in the state of Rhode
Island. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Brown University materials research community encompasses a diversity of
disciplines that share a common interest in understanding materials at the
atomic level. The acquisition of a modern transmission electron microscope (TEM)
will enable researchers in Engineering, Physics, Chemistry, Geology, Biology,
and Archaeology to probe, image, and chemically characterize the structure of
materials synthesized through a wide range of chemical, metallurgical, physical
and biological processes. In the last century, it was discovered that a beam of
electrons passing through a thin sample will interact with the sample?s atoms in
ways that provide a wealth of chemical and structural insights while
simultaneously providing images of features that are just a few atoms or
molecules in size and impossible to see by other means. Researchers at Brown and
the neighboring research community will use the capabilities of the new field
emitter TEM (the only one in Rhode Island) to understand and ultimately control
the nano- and micro- structure of materials used in a wide array of
applications, Current research at Brown that will utilize this new capability
includes: development of devices for the detection of DNA and other
biomolecules, new oxide-based electronic devices, battery and fuel cell
materials, and it will play a key role in the development of materials that are
both strong and lightweight for improved energy efficiency in automotive and
aerospace applications.