* 0922872
* MRI:    Development of Carbon 14 Analyzer
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Daniel Murnick, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2012
* USD 741,190.00

Carbon 14 (14C) exists in the biosphere with an abundance of about 1 part per
trillion relative to carbon 12, and decays with a half-life of 5730 years thus
providing a tag for carbon dating. In addition, compounds labeled with 14C are
routinely used to trace metabolism in physiology research. In atmospheric
science, small changes in 14C content can monitor how much carbon dioxide is
being released into the atmosphere from fossil fuel burning. Sensitive
measurement of 14C now requires the use of large dedicated and expensive
particle accelerators. In this project, a new laser based ultra-sensitive 14C
detection instrument for routine quantitation of 14C will be developed. The
resulting system will be easy to operate and allow the use of extremely small
(of order 0.1 mg) samples. Users of the first instruments will come from three
broad areas: environmental monitoring, physiology studies, and small sample
analysis, all of which require the unique capabilities of the system. The
project uses a new ultra-sensitive laser based analytical technique, intracavity
optogalvanic spectroscopy (ICOGS), which enables the detection of 14C labeled
carbon dioxide. Three major development goals are planned: optimization of the
laser system; preparation of sample handling and introduction protocols; and
development of calibration and standards methodology and equipment. Two
instruments with a common technology will be built- a high sensitivity device
for small sample and environmental monitoring and a lower sensitivity device for
routine analysis of organic and biological samples labeled with 14C tracers.
Successful completion of the project will make available laboratory size, user-
friendly instruments for highly sensitive measurements of 14C in biological and
environmental samples. It will also greatly expand the range of measurements
possible and increase the size of the user community. Because the instrument can
accommodate continuous flow of carbon dioxide, real-time atmospheric monitoring
is also possible. A major outcome of the instrument development program will be
technology transfer to both a broad user community from industry, government and
academia; as well as to potential commercial suppliers. Results obtained will be
submitted to interdisciplinary scientific journals and at regional and national
meetings.