* 0922912
* MRI:  Acquisition of an Analytical Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope for Research and Teaching
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* David Coleman, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 09/30/2012
* USD 580,777.00

0922912&lt;br/&gt;Coleman&lt;br/&gt;Wayne State U.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This
award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public
Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary: A scanning electron
microscope (SEM) is a very important instrument for research in Materials
Science and related fields. Nanotechnology efforts at Wayne State University
(WSU), a nationally ranked Research University, includes emphasis in the
following areas: (i) nanoparticle synthesis and assembly; (ii) direct self-
assembly of nano-crystalline and thin films; (iii) sensors and nano-devices,
biosensors; (iv) drug delivery; and (v) energy materials such as solar energy
materials and catalysts for fuel cell technology. The proposed (Field Emission)
FE SEM is required to achieve the required resolution (1.4 nM), as well as
imaging of conductive and non-conductive materials and biological samples in all
these areas. These capabilities are not possible with the existing 20+ year old
technologically-out-of-date instrument. The instrument will be located in the
WSU Laboratory of Analytical Electron Microscopy (LAEM) that is one of several
core facilities administrated by the Central Instrument Facility (CIF). The
instrument will be available to the entire WSU campus, other local universities,
and local industries. This instrument will impact more than 100 users from 25
research groups across the WSU campus, 3 groups from University of Toledo, and
several local companies. This instrument will also affect the education quality
for undergraduate and graduate students majoring in Materials Science, Physics,
Chemistry &amp; Chemical Engineering, Electrical and Computer Engineering and
Biological Science. This instrument will explicitly be used by a large number of
graduate students and post-doctoral fellows as part of their on-going research
experience and maturation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Layman Summary: A scanning
electron microscope (SEM) is a very important instrument for research in
Materials Science and related fields. It is used not only for imaging the
surface of samples as a magnifier with higher resolution than possible with
optical microscopes, but also for obtaining information about the local chemical
composition and crystal structure by using various specialty detectors.
Nanotechnology efforts at Wayne State University (WSU), a nationally ranked
Research University, includes an emphasis in several area including:
nanoparticles, thin films for semiconductors, biosensors for disease detection;
drug delivery for medical patients, solar energy materials, and fuel cell
technology materials. The proposed (?Field Emission?) FE SEM is a state-of-the-
art instrument that is required to achieve maximum magnification on conducting
and non-conducting materials and biological samples. None of this is possible
with the existing 20+ year old technologically out-of-date instrument. The
instrument will be located in the Laboratory of Analytical Electron Microscopy
(LAEM) at WSU that is one of several core facilities administrated by the
Central Instrument Facility (CIF). The instrument will be available to the
entire WSU campus, other local universities, and local industries. This
instrument will impact more than 100 users from 25 research groups across the
WSU campus, 3 groups from University of Toledo, and several local companies.
This instrument will also affect the education quality for undergraduate and
graduate students majoring in Materials Science, Physics, Chemistry &amp;
Chemical Engineering, Electrical and Computer Engineering and Biological
science. This instrument will explicitly be used by a large number of graduate
students and post-doctoral fellows as part of their on-going research experience
and maturation.