* 0922991
* MRI: Acquisition of X-ray Fluorescence and Mercury Analysis Instrumentation for Environmental Research
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Samantha Langley-Turnbaugh, University of Southern Maine
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2012
* USD 231,738.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program, Lucille A.
Benedict and Samantha J. Langley-Turnbaugh of the University of Southern Maine
will acquire a portable x-ray fluorescence (XRF) analyzer, a bench top x-ray
fluorescence analyzer and a direct mercury analyzer. They will be used in
several research projects including, 1) environmental contamination of heavy
metals from cigarette waste; 2) exposure to metals from modern grown foods:
concentrations and plant uptake in compost; 3) phytoremediation of urban soils
in Portland, Maine; and 4) trace metals in high elevation forest soils in Maine;
5) bioavailability and bioaccumulation of heavy metals from soils and freshwater
environments.

XRF is a nondestructive analytical method that does not require the dissolution
and loss of samples or the disposal of hazardous waste solvents. Electron
transitions between the inner shells of atoms create x-rays with wavelengths
characteristic of the element. XRF analysis uses this characteristic radiation
for qualitative and quantitative elemental analysis. The principal methodology
behind direct mercury analysis utilizes combustion, collection of Hg with gold
amalgamation, and detection by atomic absorption spectrometry. The proposed
projects will considerably enhance the infrastructure for research and teaching,
promote undergraduate participation in research activities, and foster
partnerships between the University and outside scientists.