* 0922657
* MRI: Acquisition of a Facility for Computational Approaches to Molecular-Scale Problems
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Douglas Doren, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2012
* USD 451,051.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) program, Prof.
Douglas Doren and colleagues at the University of Delaware will acquire a hybrid
computing cluster, with GPU-accelerated computing nodes. The computing cluster
will be used by a large number of theoretical and experimental researchers to
study a number of problems in the chemical sciences, including: 1) materials
synthesis and property studies, 2) biomolecular interactions and bioinformatics,
3) development of new electronic structure methods, and 4) innovations in
computational thinking and emerging paradigms. The infrastructure will be
available to a large number of researchers, and will facilitate training in
computational molecular science, as well as in software development for new
kinds of computational chemistry
architectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computational chemistry is a tool in the
modern chemist's arsenal. Experimental researchers need access to and training
in the use of this powerful scientific tool. In tandem with experiment,
computational chemistry approaches allow chemists to explore reactivity and
structure that can help make sense of experimental data. The infrastructure made
available with this grant will be used in teaching and training a broad range of
scientists in computational chemistry. The re-purposing of Graphical Processing
Units (GPUs) for scientific research is an interesting broader impact of this
project.