* 0922860
* MRI:Acquisition of a Circular Dichroism Spectrophotometer for Interdisciplinary Research and Training in Chemistry and Biology at an Undergraduate College
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Julia Miwa, Wellesley College
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2013
* USD 116,686.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award from the Major Research
Instrumentation (MRI) program, the Department of Chemistry at Wellesley College
will acquire a circular dichroism (CD) spectrophotometer for use in research and
training of students. Research projects involve a wide array of problems at the
chemistry-biology interface including: 1) How the structure of antimicrobial
peptides is related to their ability to cross and disrupt cell membranes, 2)
Measurement of the structural effect of cell-signaling mutations associated with
lymphomas, 3) The aggregation behavior of peptides related to neurological
diseases, 4) A study of the structure-function relationships of an enzyme that
processes neuropeptides, and 5) The biochemical characterization of a protein
thought to play a critical role in membrane trafficking events during plant cell
cytokinesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A circular dichroism spectrophotometer will
produce spectral data that provides information on molecular structure and
especially the conformations of bio-molecules such as nucleic acids, proteins,
and enzymes. The instrument will be used in research and laboratory classes by
undergraduate students. The CD spectrophotometer will be integrated into
Introductory Chemistry, Organic Chemistry and Biochemistry laboratories by
applying circular dichroism spectra to the study of intermolecular interactions,
geometric isomers and protein structure.&lt;br/&gt;