* 0922967
* MRI:  Acquisition of a high-performance computer cluster for the computational study of complex chemical systems:  from small molecules to biological nanomachines
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2009,02/28/2011
* Millard Alexander, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* robert pennington
* 02/28/2011
* USD 308,544.00

The best work in theoretical chemistry combines innovative creation of new
mathematical methods, the development of new algorithms for the computational
implementation of these methods, and large-scale, computer-intensive simulations
on systems of key importance in chemistry in its broadest sense. Excellence in
all three of these area characterizes the work of Millard Alexander, John Weeks,
Daniel Kosov, Christopher Jarzynski, and Dev Thirumalai of the University of
Maryland. Their work covers chemistry and chemical biology in the broadest
sense, ranging from including non-adiabatic effects in small molecule dynamics
(Alexander), thermodynamic properties of complex systems (Weeks), non-
equilibrium electron transport through nanostructuctures and molecules (Kosov),
thermodynamic properties of complex systems (Jarzynski), and the mechanism of
ribosome assembly (Thirumalai). The principal investigators have already
established transformational, forefront research programs in these areas. In
addition, several of the principal investigators have contributed to the
development of state-of-the-art software packages in their individual areas
which are now being used in many research groups external to the University of
Maryland. A major challenge in theoretical chemistry and chemical biology is the
extension of accurate modeling to systems of larger complexity and
dimensionality. The computational resources currently available to the principal
investigators are either outdated or oversaturated, and thus have become
insufficient for their research and training activities. The present MRI
proposal will allow purchase of a new cluster, based on dual-core, multi-cpu
server nodes. &lt;br/&gt;This insight gained from the proposed research will
have potential application in many areas of chemistry and chemical biology,
ranging from combustion, to atmospheric chemistry, to complex fluids and
interfaces, to current flow in nanomaterials, to the understanding of
thermodynamic equilibrium in complex systems and to the functioning of
biological nanomachines. All of these areas are of crucial importance to our
society as a whole, in particular to the development of cleaner combustion, more
efficient lubrication, higher throughput fluid transport, new nano-materials and
for a better understanding of fundamental biological transformations. Also, the
proposed research will lead to the continued development of theoretical methods
and computational codes for accurate, fast simulations in the areas described
above, making use of both micro- and macro-parallelization. These codes will be
freely distributed to the scientific community at large. In addition, future
research scientists undergraduates, graduate students and postdoctoral fellows
will be trained in the use of the latest tools in computational chemistry and
biophysics and in the development of strategies for efficient use of high-
performance, massively parallel computer architectures. These skills are crucial
to ensure the technological leadership of the United States.