* 0922435
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: School Girls and Modern Women: Education and Gender in Contemporary Bhutan
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2009,01/31/2011
* James Eder, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 01/31/2011
* USD 13,020.00

Doctoral student, Dolma Choden Roder (Arizona State University), under the
guidance of Dr. James Eder, will undertake research on how schooling affects
gender relations and experiences. The research will be carried out in Bhutan
where access to formal education and literacy are comparatively recent for most
women because non-monastic, co-educational institutions have been available only
since the 1960s. It has long been claimed that Bhutanese society is
characterized by gender equity, which differentiates the country from much of
South Asia. However, little research has tested these claims or determined what
equity actually means for women's lives. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researcher
will investigate three key features of schooling as they affect women: 1) access
to formal education, 2) the experience of schooling, and 3) the outcomes of
schooling, particularly in relation to individual aspirations and perceived
access to the labor market. Research will take place at Sherubtse College, the
oldest and for many years the country's only college. As a national institution,
it draws students from all over the country and therefore promises to reveal
much about the national experience of Bhutanese schooling. The researcher will
employ a variety of social science methods including semi-structured interviews,
focus groups, video elicitation, classroom observations, and archival
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Formal education is increasingly a universal
contemporary experience. In developing nations, these relatively new and foreign
institutions can have significant political, cultural, and social effects.
Schools therefore are rich sites for before-and-after studies that will
elucidate the underlying causes of social change, including gender relations.
This study also has the potential to provide useful and timely data to policy
makers and educators, and it will contribute to the education of a graduate
student.