* 0922546
* Sucrose / H+ symporters in plants for targeted biomass partitioning
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Brian Ayre, University of North Texas
* Continuing Grant
* Sarah Wyatt
* 07/31/2013
* USD 472,561.00

Sucrose / H+ symporters in plants for targeted biomass
partitioning&lt;br/&gt;Plant productivity has increased dramatically over the
last century due in part to breeding practices that divert resources to
harvested organs. Sucrose (Suc) is produced in leaves by photosynthesis and is
transported to tissues that are growing or accumulating storage reserves.
Understanding Suc transport is thus essential to understanding growth and yield.
Suc may move passively from cell to cell through specialized channels called
plasmodesmata or may be accumulated across plasma membranes by Suc/proton (H+)
symporter enzymes. Suc/H+ symporters are therefore fundamental to carbohydrate
distribution and to coordinating disparate organs into a whole entity. Suc/H+
symporters form a small gene family, but the physiological functions of most
members is poorly resolved. A better understanding of their function would help
clarify their respective roles in whole-plant nutrient partitioning, and would
enable their manipulation to target biomass to harvested organs. This project
will 1) establish the capacity of representative symporters for moving Suc
across membranes in whole plants by assessing their ability to complement a
defined Suc-transport-defective mutant, and 2) establish the potential of
ectopically expressed symporters to target carbohydrate and biomass to specific
tissues to enhance plant productivity. Broader Impacts: By building on strengths
established during prior support, this project will efficiently contribute to
our understanding of nutrient partitioning in relation to whole-plant physiology
and provide transformative strategies to increase productivity; provide
interdisciplinary training for high-school, undergraduate, graduate, and
postdoctoral scholars from diverse backgrounds; and engage students from at-risk
groups by coordinating with organizers of the UNT FOCUS scholarship program
(Fostering Outstanding Cohorts in Undergraduate Science, NSF program 07-524,
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics [S-STEM],
Project #0807128), which promotes success by fostering cohorts of science majors
and promoting interaction with science mentors.&lt;br/&gt;