* 0922011
* Price Adjustment, Exchange Rate Policy and Monetary Models
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2009,05/31/2013
* Jon Steinsson, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 05/31/2013
* USD 419,833.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;I. Intellectual Merit. The nature of
price setting by firms is central to many important questions in macroeconomics.
Over the last few years, research on firm price setting has been transformed by
the increased availability of micro price data. For several years, the PI's have
been engaged in developing and analyzing the newly available micro price data at
the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). The goal of the current project is to
continue this research along four dimensions.&lt;br/&gt;First, the PI's intend
to work with the BLS to extend the academic research database on consumer prices
further back in time. The current start date of this database is 1988. They hope
to be able to extend the database back to the 1970's. This is of particular
interest because inflation in the U.S. was much more variable in the 1970's and
early 1980's than it has been since. They intend to use the expanded database to
analyze how the frequency and size of price changes as well as the degree of
price dispersion has varied over time. This will allow them to draw sharper
conclusions about the success of different models of price setting than are
possible using currently available data. Since the dataset will be constructed
as a research database, they expect it will eventually be heavily used by future
researchers both in academia and at the BLS.&lt;br/&gt;Second, they intend to
analyze how product replacement affects exchange rate pass-through. In
constructing price indices, price adjustments that occur at the time of product
replacements tend to be dropped. If price adjustments disproportionately occur
at the time of product replacements, then price adjustments are
disproportionately unobserved. This will bias measures of exchange rate
passthrough. The preliminary estimates suggest that this bias is large,
potentially affecting estimates of exchange rate pass-through for the U.S. by as
much as a factor of two.&lt;br/&gt;Third, they intend to use a large proprietary
dataset we have obtained from AC Nielsen to analyze the comovement of retail
prices across products, stores and cities in the U.S. The data consist of weekly
prices and quantities for several thousand products and several thousand grocery
stores over five years. Preliminary results suggest that a large part of retail
price variation is due to dynamic pricing strategies as opposed to
contemporaneous demand or supply shocks. The PI's are in the process of
collecting an additional new dataset on manufacturer contracts that will allow
them to extend their findings to answer the question of whether the observed
variation in retail prices arises from complex price discrimination strategies
by manufacturers or from dynamic pricing strategies by
retailers.&lt;br/&gt;Fourth, they intend to use a new dataset on Icelandic
consumer and import prices to analyze the role of local costs in explaining
failures of purchasing power parity. Several existing studies of failures of
purchasing power parity distinguish between traded and non-traded goods to try
to evaluate the importance of local costs. An important concern regarding such
studies is how to define tradable goods, since many goods that are in principle
tradable are in practice rarely traded. The PI's aim to address these concerns
by using the unique feature of the Icelandic consumer data that it identifies
which products are, in fact, imported and which are not, and by matching the
consumer price data with at-the-dock import prices to gauge the importance of
non-traded distribution margins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;II. Broader Impact. The
research is potentially highly relevant to policymakers at the Federal Reserve
by shedding new light on the costs of inflation, the likely real effects of
monetary policy and the effects of movements in the U.S. dollar on prices. The
project involves the creation of a new historical dataset in collaboration with
the BLS. This dataset will be made available to the academic community through
the BLS outside researcher program. The PI's earlier research on this topic has
been published in top academic journals and they intend to continue to
disseminate their work in academic journals. Their prior research on this topic
has also informed public discourse by being discussed in major news outlets such
as The Economist and in undergraduate textbooks on macroeconomics.