* 0922367
* Regulation of meristem function by AIL proteins
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2009,09/30/2013
* Venugopala Gonehal, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Amy Litt
* 09/30/2013
* USD 420,415.00

Beth A. Krizek&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: IOS-0922367&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title:
Regulation of meristem function by AIL proteins&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The unique ability of plants to initiate organs
throughout their lifespan results from the activity of meristems. The shoot
apical meristem, a group of cells at the apex of the plant, provides cells for
the initiation of lateral organs such as leaves and flowers while maintaining a
central core of stem cells that remain undifferentiated. The shoot apical
meristem is highly organized and yet dynamic, responding to local signals and
those originating from more distant parts of the plant. Gradients of plant
hormones within the meristem appear to be important in balancing stem cell
renewal with organ initiation. But it is not clear how these hormone gradients
are generated and how they are translated into different cellular behaviors.
This project will investigate the hormonal regulation of shoot apical meristem
function in the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana. The role of three related
AINTEGUMENTA-like (AIL) proteins in mediating the antagonistic behavior of two
plant hormones (auxin and cytokinin) within the meristem will be investigated by
genetic, molecular and live imaging approaches. The expected results from this
work are an integration of these AIL genes into a genetic framework for meristem
function, molecular information on how these proteins regulate hormone
levels/responsiveness, and a spatiotemporal map of the dynamic interactions
between the expression of these proteins and hormone gradients within the
meristem. Because the shoot apical meristem shapes the overall architecture of
plants, this work has broad implication for the design of food and biofuel crops
with improved yields and the production of new varieties of ornamental plants.
The project will provide training opportunities for students, a postdoctoral
fellow and a K-12 teacher.