* 0922161
* ACM CHI 2009 Workshop: Human-Computer Interaction Doctoral Research Consortium
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2010
* Bonnie John, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 02/28/2010
* USD 30,000.00

This is funding to support this year's HCI doctoral research consortium
(workshop) of approximately 15 promising doctoral students from the United
States and abroad, along with distinguished research faculty. The event will
take place in conjunction with the ACM 2009 Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems (CHI 2009), which will be held April 4-9 in Boston, and
sponsored by the Association for Computing Machinery's Special Interest Group on
Human-Computer Interaction (SIGCHI). Goals of the workshop include building a
cohort group of new researchers who will then have a network of colleagues
spread out across the world, guiding the work of new researchers by having
experts in the research field give them advice, and making it possible for
promising new entrants to the field to attend their research conference. Student
participants will make formal presentations of their work during the workshop,
and will receive feedback from the faculty panel. The feedback is geared to
helping students understand and articulate how their work is positioned relative
to other human-computer interaction research, whether their topics are
adequately focused for thesis research projects, whether their methods are
correctly chosen and applied, and whether their results are appropriately
analyzed and presented. Student participants will present their work to the
doctoral consortium on April 4-5, with follow up activities planned during the
technical program of the conference. Extended abstracts of the students' work
will be published in the CHI 2009 Extended Abstracts, which has wide print and
electronic distribution. SIGCHI's conference management committee will evaluate
the doctoral consortium, and the results will be made available to the
organizers of future consortia. The CHI doctoral consortia, which began in 1986,
have been highly successful in providing a forum for the initial socialization
into the field of young doctoral scholars, and many of today's leading HCI
researchers participated as students in earlier
consortia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The annual CHI doctoral
consortia traditionally bring together the best of the next generation of HCI
researchers, allowing them to create a social network both among themselves and
with senior researchers at a critical stage in their professional development.
Because the students and faculty constitute a diverse group across a variety of
dimensions, including nationality/cultural and scientific discipline, the
students' horizons are broadened to the future benefit of the field. This year,
in an effort to further broaden the impact of the event, the organizers have
undertaken to use NSF funds to support participation by no more than one student
from any one institution, and to also consider gender in the participant
selection process with a target of a 50/50 split.