* 0922742
* The Amborella Genome: A Reference for Plant Biology
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2010,09/30/2019
* Claude dePamphilis, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 09/30/2019
* USD 7,315,073.00

PI: Claude W. dePamphilis (Pennsylvania State
University)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CoPIs: Victor A. Albert (University at
Buffalo), W. Brad Barbazuk (University of Florida - Gainesville), James Leebens-
Mack (University of Georgia - Athens), Hong Ma (Pennsylvania State University),
Douglas E. Soltis (University of Florida - Gainesville), and Pamela S. Soltis
(University of Florida - Gainesville)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborators:
Jeffrey D. Palmer (Indiana State University), Steven D. Rounsley (University of
Arizona), Stephan C. Schuster (Pennsylvania State University), and Susan R.
Wessler (University of Georgia - Athens) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The origin and
early diversification of flowering plants (angiosperms) had profound impacts on
Earth's biota, providing the raw genetic material from which most crops and
economically important plants were derived. The diversification of genes,
genomes, and important traits cannot be adequately interpreted without a
comparative framework firmly rooted with genome sequences from basal
angiosperms. A genome sequence of Amborella trichopoda will provide a foundation
for all comparative analyses of angiosperm gene content and genome structure.
Among basal angiosperms, Amborella has the most extensive genomic resources,
already possessing high-quality genomic libraries, a physical map, and a large
expressed gene (transcriptome) database. These resources, along with its pivotal
phylogenetic position and moderate genome size (870 million base pairs), make
Amborella the singular choice for the first basal angiosperm to be fully
sequenced. The Amborella genome project will: 1) complete the physical map of
Amborella; 2) generate a high-quality draft sequence and assembly of the
Amborella genome using "next generation" sequencing methods and a cost-effective
strategy that has been tested on rice genomes and is superior to traditional
sequencing methodologies; and 3) develop bioinformatic tools and public access
websites to display the project database as it is produced, and support
comparative analyses and data mining by the scientific community at
large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The Amborella genome, and the
strategies being used to obtain and analyze the genome, will provide a unique
scientific resource broadly impacting plant biology as well as excellent
opportunities to demonstrate the utility of comparative genomics across the
biological sciences. A reference for angiosperm genome content and organization
will benefit the analysis of all currently available angiosperm genome sequences
and those that are obtained in the future. Comparative genomics workshops for
middle and high school teachers will be held and teaching modules for broad
dissemination of project outcomes and the utility of comparative genomics will
be created. In addition, the project will expand a successful cross-cultural
scientific mentoring program involving minority undergraduate students at each
of the participating universities, train postdoctoral scientists and graduate
students, and create mentoring opportunities for inner-city high school students
to help them consider careers in the plant sciences. Specific mentoring
activities for the post-docs will enhance their professional development. The
project website (www.Amborella.org) will provide public access to all data,
project results, and long-term repositories. All sequence data will be deposited
to NCBI as they become available and image data will be deposited at Morphbank
(http://www.morphbank.net/).