* 0922165
* Quantifying subglacial erosion rates and exploring pro-glacial bedrock as climate archive by in-situ cosmogenic C-14 and Be-10 techniques
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Joerg Schaefer, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Jessica Robin
* 09/30/2013
* USD 187,029.00

A growing consensus believes that the number one environmental problem of our
time is climate change and the evaluation of its consequences. Fundamental to
predicting these effects is knowing whether the climate during the Holocene
Epoch (the last 11,500 years), the period during which human civilization has
developed, was perhaps even warmer than today. Glaciers are highly sensitive to
climate changes and fluctuate considerably in response to small temperature
excursions, such as the Little Ice Age. This project investigates the climate
history of selected mountain glaciers that retreated substantally during recent
years : Rhone Glacier, Switzerland, Nigardsbreen, Norway, and Franz-Josef-
Glacier, New Zealand. Analysis of in-situ cosmogenic Be-10 and C-14 from bedrock
surfaces in proximity to these glaciers will address whether, and for how long,
these glaciers were smaller than today during the Holocene. The project will
also yield quantitative data for glacier-bedrock interactions that can be
directly fed into glacier-geomorphic landscape models.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Human civilation has developed during the extraordinarily
stable Holocene warm period, but climate variability has been large enough to
impact rise and fall of ancient societies, illustrating the significance of
climate change. However, the record of this change is poor. Glaciers are among
the few elements of our environment sensitive enough to respond quickly to
climate changes. The present episode of glacier retreat is exposing a large
amount of bedrock, which can be used to determine the amount and timing of
glacial recession . Cosmogenic isotopes from these bedrock surfaces provide
information about when these surfaces were exposed by melting ice. The glacier
fluctuation data will be coupled with ice-flow models to interpret them in view
of realistic climatic scenarios. This project will add fundamental information
to kowledge of subglacial erosion rates and Holocene warm periods, a key
parameter in climate prediction models. Additionally, this study will assist in
the evaluation of water availability in times of retreating glaciers and
increasing population around the globe.