* 0922362
* MRI: Acquisition of a High Performance Computing System for Undergraduate Physics Research
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2010
* Trinanjan Datta, AUGUSTA STATE UNIVERSITY
* Standard Grant
* Sean Jones
* 09/30/2010
* USD 126,100.00

0922362&lt;br/&gt;Datta&lt;br/&gt;Augusta State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary: Research and training
opportunities in high performance computing are vital for next generation of
undergraduate students. However, lack of computational resources at primarily
undergraduate institutions limit the scope of research. Funding from this Major
Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program will support the acquisition of a 16 CPU
compute cluster to be housed at the Physics Department of Augusta State
University (ASU). The proposed research with this equipment falls into two
categories: a) Hysteresis of frustrated magnetic systems with applications to
multiferroic materials. Multiferroics have novel applications as solid state
devices which are typically operated under an external bias ? an inherently non-
equilibrium situation. By using well established statistical simulation
techniques the physics of hysteresis and dynamic phase transition in frustrated
magnetic lattices will be studied. The proposed investigations will further our
understanding of the fundamental mechanisms in multiferroic materials subject to
non-equilibrium conditions. b) Statistical seismology, which can be subdivided
into stochastic parameter estimation, imaging in heterogeneous media, and signal
detection in highly scattered wavefields. The proposed research will be able to
verify that the currently developed 2-D seismic inversion techniques are valid
for 3-D models. The requested instrumentation will also allow in quantifying the
degree to which a heterogeneous crust can affect the reliability of images in
P-to-S converted wave imaging. The instrumentation will expand on our ability to
provide essential research training for undergraduate students. The cluster will
help foster research collaborations with other departments at ASU. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Layman Summary: Research and training opportunities in high
performance computing are vital for next generation of undergraduate students.
However, lack of computational resources at primarily undergraduate institutions
limit the scope of research. The Department of Physics at Augusta State
University (ASU) proposes to expand on our existing facility for high
performance computing to accommodate greater levels of undergraduate research
and faculty research in statistical simulations of condensed matter systems,
numerical modeling techniques in geophysics, and geophysical signal processing.
The requested instrumentation will establish an advanced, modern computational
facility and support innovative, high quality research by faculty and
undergraduate students for many years to come. The compute cluster will support
research on a) Hysteresis and dynamic phase transition in frustrated magnetic
lattices with applications to multiferroic materials. The proposed
investigations will further our understanding of the fundamental mechanisms in
multiferroic materials subject to non-equilibrium conditions, and b) Seismic
wave simulations in highly complex earth materials. These simulations will aid
in the development of techniques in geophysical imaging, signal processing, and
signal detection. The instrumentation will expand on our ability to provide
essential research training for a diverse group of undergraduate students, most
of whom go on to pursue physics graduate school programs, engineering graduate
school programs, or join the growing petroleum industry and the alternate energy
research workforce. The cluster will help foster research collaborations with
other departments at ASU.