* 0922296
* Sediment routing in gravel-bed rivers following dam removal
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Andrew Wilcox, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 06/30/2012
* USD 179,703.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fundamental knowledge of how rivers
respond to changes in sediment supply is essential to the management of issues
associated with the removal of large dams. Dam removal also creates an
opportunity for learning about the response to large sediment pulses, which is
critical for planning and stream restoration. This project will examine the 2008
removal of Milltown Dam on the Clark Fork River, MT, to develop new insights
into sedimentary and geomorphic processes, including how quickly sediment pulses
move through rivers, where they deposit, the extent to which they infiltrate
into gravel river beds, how far they propagate, and how they affect channel
morphology. This will be achieved through measurements of bedload transport;
sampling of bed material to assess textural changes, infiltration dynamics, and
contaminant transport; and repeat surveys of river bed, bar and floodplain
topography to identify spatial and temporal patterns of sediment deposition and
erosion. Field efforts will be complemented by laboratory analysis of sediment
geochemistry, to fingerprint fine sediment and investigate transport of metal-
laden reservoir sediments, and modeling of flow and sediment transport
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research, by developing a comprehensive
dataset on geomorphic response to a large dam removal and generalizing those
results beyond the study area, will contribute to emerging efforts to develop
more predictive science for informing dam removals and river restoration. This
research will also represent a field-scale experiment into the movement and fate
of sediment pulses in gravel-bed rivers that will be used to evaluate how theory
and data from flumes and smaller streams can be applied to larger rivers. The
dam removal investigated here is especially significant in light of the quantity
(approximately 3 million cubic meters) and quality (varying degrees of mining-
derived contamination) of reservoir sediments potentially available for
downstream transport. This project will build on data collected immediately
before and after the Milltown dam removal under a NSF Small Grant for
Exploratory Research. Outreach efforts will include workshops about river
processes and dam removal for students from Montana Tribal Colleges and for K-8
teachers participating in the Big Sky Science Partnership. Education and
outreach will also be achieved through the University of Montana?s Center for
Riverine Science and Stream Renaturalization conferences and support for
graduate and undergraduate students.