* 0922988
* MRI:   Acquisition of Instrumentation for Comparative Experimental Biomechanics Research
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Stephen Reilly, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Joyce Fernandes
* 08/31/2012
* USD 401,083.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Ohio University has recently expanded its research and education facilities to
allow investigations into the dynamics of movement in large animals. This award
will fund the acquisition of state-of-the-art equipment at this new facility and
support the research and educational activities of faculty, affiliated
researchers, graduate students and undergraduates at Ohio University. A motion
capture and analysis system will be used to acquire high speed images of body
movements. Two videofluoroscopes utilizing x-rays will enable researchers to
visualize skeletal movements. When used with the motion capture system hardware
and software, these x-ray images can be used to generate 3-dimensional movies of
the skeletal movements. A force-plate integrated treadmill will be used to
record the forces generated during ground contact at different speeds. Finally,
a pressure plate will provide the details of the pressure distribution on the
feet during contact with the ground. Additionally, this award will support the
continued training and mentoring of a recent PhD in biomechanics research
through a postdoctoral position. Individuals utilizing this equipment will study
all aspects of musculoskeletal function and movement in animals, with a special
emphasis on feeding and locomotion. Feeding studies will evaluate, for example,
how jaw movements are coordinated in different animals to direct tooth contacts
and motion at the jaw joint. Locomotion studies will focus on gait initiation
and transitions and foot contact pressures across a range of speeds to
understand how limb movements change during running, walking, and trotting.
Research outcomes will include increased scientific understanding of the
musculoskeletal form and function across different types of mammals. Movement
and force data will also be integrated with anatomical studies of associated
muscles and bones to develop models of musculoskeletal evolution. Educational
outcomes will include the training of undergraduate and graduate biology and
engineering students at Ohio University in the most advanced techniques for
understanding musculoskeletal biomechanics. Project outcomes will be
disseminated through scientific publications and presentations as well as
through public outreach in local and regional venues. Because most of the
equipment will enable dynamic visualization of movements of the body, data from
these studies provide a unique opportunity to engage the public in the science
of motion. Thus, PIs will also generate videos and computer animations from
research projects for internet access by the public. These videos will be made
available to the public through PIs individual webpages as well as through a
facility webpage. These videos will be particularly useful for educational and
outreach activities aimed at local public school students in rural southeast
Ohio.