* 0922827
* MRI: Acquisition of Imaging Micro-FTIR and Imaging Micro-Raman Spectrometers in Support of Research at Stony Brook University
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2011
* Hanna Nekvasil, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 01/31/2011
* USD 339,771.00

0922827&lt;br/&gt;Glotch&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides funding for
acquisition of a micro-FTIR and micro-Raman spectrometers for petrological,
mineralogical and biogeochemical research. The instrumentation will allow
hyperspectral imaging at spatial resolution necessary for various research
projects. The instrumentation will enhance existing funded research but will
also be used to complete exploratory pilot research aimed at enhancing future
proposals. Current and pending research involves mineralogical petrology, cement
and coatings effects on remotely sensed infrared spectra, deep-sea vent Fe-S
mineral and organic chemistry, sulfide particle-living cell interactions,
volatile effects on mineral/melt equilibria, marine sediment early diagenesis
and its alteration by bottom-dwelling animals, high-pressure carbonate
geophysics and chemistry, pressure-induced polymerization, organic matter
distribution in sedimentary carbonate rocks, and investigating Marian aqueous
processes. Leveraged NASA funds will be used to purchase vibration-resistant
optical benches for the new instruments. The PI will conduct user training for
all new users and has committed 10% time to setup, calibration and training. The
instrumentation will be used by members of the Geosciences, Marine Sciences and
Chemistry Departments. In addition, users will come from the Mineral Physics
Institute. Stony Brook will also incorporate these instruments into existing
IGERT and CIDER activities. Instruments will be incorporated into undergraduate
and graduate courses covering mineralogy, spectroscopy and remote sensing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;