* 0922794
* MRI-Consortium: Development of a Neutron Detector Array by Undergraduate Research Students for Studies of Exotic Nuclei.
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Paul DeYoung, Hope College
* Standard Grant
* Bradley D. Keister
* 09/30/2012
* USD 203,894.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Studies of exotic nuclei (those with a
large excess of neutrons) are a top priority to address a number of outstanding
nuclear physics questions. These include measurements to explore changes of the
nuclear structure in nuclei far from stability and reaction rates to infer
(gamma,n) rates for astrophysical applications. The MoNA Collaboration has been
successful at measuring a number of neutron- unbound ground states and excited
states of exotic nuclei, but such experiments have been restricted to cases
where the decay energy associated with a resonant state was relatively low. With
this project the remaining unbound nuclei as well as many unknown higher-lying
unbound states in light neutron-rich nuclei (Z&lt;9) will be accessible. The
MoNA Collaboration will expand on its past success and measure one- and two-
neutron coincidence experiments following knock-out reactions with the new
device. The group will also be able to pursue structure questions in those same
nuclei via Coulomb dissociation measurements.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The Large-
area multi-Institutional Scintillator Array (LISA) will consist of 128 plastic
scintillator bars (2 m by 10 cm by 10 cm). LISA will determine neutron energy
through time-of-flight and the interaction point along the bar will be based on
the time difference between the photomultiplier tubes at each end. When combined
with the existing Modular Neutron Array (MoNA) and Sweeper instruments, the
proposed array will facilitate exciting and important physics measurements with
rare isotope beams at the National Superconducting Cyclotron Laboratory. In
addition, since this collaborative proposal is entirely based at Primarily
Undergraduate Institutions (PUIs), the grant will have a broad impact.
Undergraduate researchers and under-represented groups will benefit from the
actual construction, testing and commissioning of the array, as well as
participation in future cutting-edge research. Finally, this work will have a
long-term impact for the future Facility for Rare Isotope Beams (FRIB) since the
proposed detector would be a Day One device there, the undergraduates involved
in the proposed project can be part of the workforce at FRIB, and future
undergraduates will have access to this new facility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Division of Physics and the Directorate for Education and Human Resources have
participated in the funding of this award.