* 0922126
* Processes of Alpine Glacial Erosion in the Sierra Nevada, California, and the Wind River Range, Wyoming
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2012
* Robert Anderson, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 06/30/2012
* USD 265,801.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Glacial erosion is accomplished by quarrying of rock from rough edges of the
subglacial bed, and abrasion of rock that smoothes and polishes the bed. Yet
there is little quantitative data how rock hardness and the degree of rock
fracturing govern quarrying and abrasion processes. Preliminary work in the
granitic landscape of Yosemite National Park suggests that the pace of glacial
landscape evolution and the spatial pattern of erosion are controlled by the
spacing of fractures in the rock. This study will improve knowledge of glacial
erosion by employing two natural experiments in the Sierra Nevada and the Wind
River Range of Wyoming. Variations in fracture spacing are common in the
crystalline plutons of Yosemite Park, whereas in the Wind River Range glaciated
terrain incudes both crystalline and sedimentary lithologies. Cosmogenic 10Be
measurements of glacial polish samples collected along longitudinal valley
profiles will constrain the depth of glacial erosion, and the history of
deglaciation. Interpretation of field data will rely upon 1D and 2D numerical
glacial models. These models will simulate the evolution of the longitudinal
valley profile in the face of the measured contrasts in bedrock erodibility,
explictly accounting for both quarrying and abrasion, and they will track basal
sediment content and size distribution, allowing testing against observed
patterns of both erosion and distribution of coarse sediment.

This project is designed to document the specific controls on glacial erosion.
With few exceptions, the importance of rock properties in controlling styles and
rates of erosion in the landscape has not received much attention in the past.
The study sites are in areas where glacial features are prominent, and the
influence of rock properties can be ascertained. This problem is important
because glacial processes have shaped much of the modern landscape of North
America, and changing climates may affect the degree of glacial erosion. The
study site in Yosemite National Park also provides opportunity to take the
science directly to the public in outreach activities that take advantage of the
high volume of visitors and strong collaborative ties to park staff.