* 0922862
* MRI:   Acquisition of a 900 MHz Ultra-High Field NMR Spectrometer
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Walter Chazin, Vanderbilt University Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 07/31/2013
* USD 3,948,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Funding is provided for installation of a 900 MHz nuclear magnetic resonance
(NMR) spectrometer into the Biomolecular NMR Facility at Vanderbilt University.
This spectrometer will be used primarily for multidimensional solution NMR
studies of the structures and interactions of biomacromolecules and is expected
to have a broad impact on scientific research, education, and training at
Vanderbilt. In addition, this instrument will be made available to scientists
with justified need throughout the mid-south region of the US. The available
instrument time for the new 900 will be divided among the five major users
(70%), other Vanderbilt users (10%), outside users (15%), and for training (5%).
Projects include: (i) Studies of large micellar complexes of integral membrane
proteins such as diacylglycerol kinase, the amyloid precursor protein, and G
protein coupled receptors, as well as a large soluble receptor-effector
proteins, such as arrestins. (ii) Application of solution NMR to protein-protein
complexes and multi-domain proteins involved in Ca2+ signaling, protein
ubiquitination, and DNA replication, damage response and repair. (iii)
Characterization of the detailed chemistry and conformations of DNA adducts
formed by reaction of nucleic acids with electrophiles, a major cause of genetic
lesions in biology. (iv) Studies of the structures of designed proteins with
internal symmetry. (v) Use of NMR to characterize bacterial two-component
signaling, including large protein-protein and protein-DNA complexes. The 900
MHz spectrometer will broadly impact research and education by: (i) Enabling
major discoveries in structural biology, as well as complementing and extending
discoveries being made in other major research initiatives. (ii) Improving the
quality of research training for students pursuing advanced degrees. (iii)
Enhancing the academic research infrastructure of Vanderbilt University and
furthering the academic research infrastructure of the mid-south region of the
US. (iv) Attracting students and other trainees, particularly from
underrepresented groups and women, to science and engineering. The role of the
900 MHz NMR spectrometer in furthering these goals will be actively promoted
through the participation of the users group and NMR Facility staff in a variety
of new and existing outreach programs.