* 0922643
* MRI: Acquisition of a Chemical Ionization Mass Spectrometer and a High-Resolution Time of Flight Aerosol Mass Spectrometer for Organic Aerosol Oxidation Studies
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,02/28/2011
* Cliff Davidson, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 02/28/2011
* USD 490,000.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-
5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0922643&lt;br/&gt;Donahue&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/
&gt;Researchers in the Carnegie Mellon University Center for Atmospheric
Particle Studies (CAPS) will acquire two instruments in order to probe the
complex interactions between gas-phase organic oxidation chemistry and the
evolution of organic particulate matter (PM). One instrument is a Chemical
Ionization Mass PSpectrometer (CIMS) designed for flexible, highly sensitive
measurement of critical radicals (OH, HO2, and RO2), sulfuric acid vapor, or
ammonia. The radical levels control the rate as well as the mechanisms for
oxidation of organic compounds in the atmosphere; ammonia and sulfate, along
with organics, are critical players in new-particle formation and grown in the
atmosphere. The other instrument is a High-Resolution Time of Flight Aerosol
Mass Spectrometer (HR-AMS), with a mass resolution of 5000 (_0.02 amu). The HR-
AMS will measure the size-dependent non-refractory fraction of particle
composition between 50 and 700 nm, explicitly resolving C:H:O:N:S in the
particles. With a light-scattering module to detect individual particles, the
HR-AMS will be able to detect single particles, enabling experiments addressing
the evolving mixing state of aerosols from different
sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Taken together, these instruments will permit
research at the forefront of atmospheric chemistry. Organic aerosols are a
dynamic system, combining phase partitioning between the gas and particulate
phases with oxidation chemistry, which causes the volatility distribution of
organic material associated with atmospheric particles to evolve continuously
over their roughly week-long residence time in the atmosphere. Concurrently, the
state-of-the-art in condensed-phase measurements is evolving rapidly, so that it
is now possible to measure the molecular formula of most fragments observed in
an organic mass spectrum. The HR-AMS will thus enable measurements of the
oxidation state of organic particulate matter as it evolves due to gas-phase
oxidation reactions.