* 0922277
* CAREER:  Heterogeneous and Competitive Self-assembly at Liquid-Liquid Interfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 09/30/2008,08/31/2014
* Lenore Dai, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2014
* USD 410,000.00

CAREER: Heterogeneous and Competitive Self-assembly at Liquid-Liquid
Interfaces&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lenore L. Dai, Texas Tech
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientific Significance: Self-assembly of micro-
or nano- objects at liquid-liquid interfaces is of tremendous interests in
various natural and industrial applications. This project focuses on integrating
research and education centering on heterogeneous and competitive self-assembly
at liquid-liquid interfaces. First, the PI will investigate the self-assembly of
heterogeneous colloidal lattices using Pickering emulsions as an experimental
template. The two-dimensional colloidal lattices will contain colloidal
particles of different wettability, size, and charge. Second, the PI will expand
the concept of Pickering emulsions and use solid particles to stabilize double
emulsions (self-assembly of single species solid particles at heterogeneous
interfaces). They will investigate the influences of particle size, type,
concentration, ionic strength, and oil/water ratio on the structure and
stability of double emulsions stabilized by solid particles. Finally, they will
study the heterogeneous or competitive self-assembly of nanoparticles and
surfactants at liquid-liquid interfaces using a molecular dynamics simulation.
They will simulate different concentrations of nanoparticles and surfactants at
water-trichloroethylene interfaces as well as other pairs of liquid-liquid
interfaces. This state-of-the-art research is of both fundamental and practical
significance. Heterogeneous and competitive self-assembly at liquid-liquid
interfaces is important in various natural and industrial processes. The
proposed heterogeneous colloidal lattices are anticipated to open new ways to
functionalize novel materials and to provide heterogeneous 2-D experimental
model for condensed matter physics study. The expansion of Pickering emulsion
concept to double emulsions is another innovative usage for particles and is
anticipated to overcome the current major limitation of double emulsions that
inhibited them from featuring in practical and commercial applications. The
molecular dynamics simulations of heterogeneous or competitive self-assembly of
nanoparticles and surfactants will provide in-situ and molecular information and
a better fundamental understanding of the phenomenon that exists in many
industrial processes such as oil recovery, multi-layer coatings, and emulsion
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The integration between
research and education will be performed to meet the NSF's goals for two
strategic outcomes: People and Ideas. With a strong commitment to education, the
PI will establish research-related open-ended projects in the existing courses,
promote undergraduate and graduate research, establish a new summer program to
broaden the participation of under-represented groups, participate in the
Teacher Training Institute, and promote technology transfer. Heterogeneous and
competitive self-assembly at liquid-liquid interfaces are important and have
widespread practical applications. Last, but not least, this project also
provides a unique opportunity to meet the nation's need for a cutting-edge
research area with the potential of significant expansion in the 21st
century.&lt;br/&gt;