* 0922752
* CONFERENCE : 2009 Molecular Genetics of Bacteria and Phages Conference to be held August 4-9, 2009
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2010
* Sarah Ades, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Susanne von Bodman
* 07/31/2010
* USD 7,000.00

The Molecular Genetics of Bacteria and Phages Conference is the direct
descendent of the original "phage meetings" organized by Delbruck, Luria,
Hershey, and colleagues in the 1940s, and thus is the oldest scientific
gathering focused on prokaryotic molecular biology. The 2009 Molecular Genetics
of Bacteria and Phages Conference will be held at the University of Wisconsin-
Madison from August 4-9, 2009. While the focus of the meeting has evolved over
the years, it still remains dedicated to the problem-oriented philosophy of the
physicists, chemists, and microbiologists who founded the meeting. The
conference provides a forum for the presentation and discussion of the latest
research findings and technical advances in modern prokaryotic molecular
biology. It is the primary scientific meeting for many laboratories working with
prokaryotes. A central aspect and major attraction of the meeting is the breadth
of the research presented, ranging from basic phage genetics to organismal
genomics/proteomics, from atomic-level structure-function analyses to microbial
cell biology, and from single-molecule biochemistry to viral self-assembly. The
diversity of research areas is mirrored by the diversity of organisms
investigated, including model organisms as well as environmental and host-
associated bacteria and phages. This award will provide travel grants to
encourage and assist graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, and beginning
faculty working on various aspects of prokaryotic molecular biology to attend
one of the premier meetings in their field.

A key objective of the meeting is to provide a broad educational experience for
graduate students, postdoctoral fellows and other young scientists who
constitute over half of the attendees of the meeting. Nearly all the graduate
students and postdoctoral fellows attending this meeting give a poster or an
oral presentation. It is one of the few meetings where the majority of the
presentations are given by the people performing the research. In addition,
leading senior scientists are invited to present comprehensive introductions to
the 10 scientific sessions, and a keynote lecture will be given by a world-
renowned scientist. Both the session leaders and keynote speaker remain on site
for the entire meeting. As such, scientific experts are always in the audience,
which ensures high scientific standards and critical, yet supportive,
questioning and commentary at the conclusion of talks. With planned close
proximity of graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, and junior and senior
faculty, a unique atmosphere is created for scientific interactions which are
beneficial for all, but especially for the graduate students and postdoctoral
fellows. Many postdoctoral mentors and job candidates are discovered at this
meeting. The meeting is also particularly supportive of female and minority
scientists. Half of the session chairs and one of the lead organizers are women,
providing role models for younger scientists.

In summary, this meeting ensures a unique wide-ranging educational experience,
encouraging junior scientists to present their results to senior scientists, as
well as to their peers. It provides opportunities for young and senior
scientists to interact, stimulating everyone's research and often leading to
future training and academic job opportunities, and the development of important
career contacts.