* 0922868
* Excavations at Bosutswe, Kaitshe and Lose: Transformations in Political Economy along an Important Early Trade Corridor from the East Coast to the Far Interior
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* James Denbow, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2013
* USD 279,873.00

With National Science Foundation Support, Dr. James Denbow and an international
team from the United States, Botswana, and South Africa will conduct three field
seasons of archaeological research in eastern and central Botswana. The team
brings together specialists in ceramic and lithic analysis, multi-stable isotope
analysis, archeo-zoology, optical petrography, and metallurgical analysis to
address the impact of intra- and intercontinental trade and climate change and
their impact on processes of ethnic and state formation. Three deeply stratified
sites will be excavated, each spanning the important period between CE 900 and
1600 when the first regional states of Mapungubwe and Great Zimbabwe developed
from earlier chiefdoms based on control over cattle. While these large centers
controlled the flow of gold, ivory, and other luxury commodities from the
interior to the coast, little is known about how they impacted the political and
social dynamics of regional settlements on their margins. The excavations will
provide the first detailed knowledge of how such relations were negotiated
between emerging states and smaller sub-regional polities. The research is
particularly important because earlier excavations at Bosutswe produced
tentative evidence that commoditized inter-continental slavery may have impacted
the region as early as CE 1000. This would have had profound implications on the
social and political development of the sub-continent, casting new light on the
political economy of early state formation. It would also impact in profound
ways our historical understanding of ethnogenesis in the region.
&lt;br/&gt;Multi-stable isotope and trace element analyses will be used to
identify and track movements of people and goods across the region. The sites to
be excavated, Bosutswe, Kaitshe, and Lose, lie in significantly different
environments astride one of the only well-watered routes from the East Coast
into the far interior. Because each of the sites spans the entire period of
state formation in southern Africa, they are ideal for testing questions about
climatic, economic, and political changes over time. The sites are unique in
this respect and will thus contribute importantly to new understandings of how
social and political relationships were negotiated rather than imposed in a sub-
continental context otherwise dominated by the large centers such as Mapungubwe
and Great Zimbabwe. &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits of the research include
an in-depth investigation of the social and political impact of interaction and
trade along an important trade corridor from the Indian Ocean to the far
interior. This may have included the earliest evidence of commoditized slavery
found in southern Africa. Not only will the project produce data to test how
climate change, varying economic strategies, and different physiographic
conditions affected land use decisions, it will investigate how economic and
social relationships were negotiated between agro-pastoralists, foragers, and
herder-foragers living these in differing environmentals. &lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts include training of undergraduate and graduate students from Botswana,
South Africa and the USA, thereby enhancing their scientific preparation and
abilities. University and Museum colleagues in Botswana will benefit from
opportunities to expand their training needs and experience, helping them to
meet their educational and heritage management responsibilities.