* 0922898
* MRI: Acquisition of a Transmission Electron Microscope for Materials Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Jharna Chaudhuri, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 09/30/2012
* USD 533,500.00

0922898&lt;br/&gt;Chaudhuri&lt;br/&gt;Texas Tech
U.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: A transmission electron microscope
(TEM), in high resolution and with a STEM (scanning transmission electron
microscopy) and an EDS (energy dispersive spectroscopy) system, is increasingly
becoming an indispensable system to study structural characterization of
materials. High resolution TEM imaging and spectroscopic analysis will support
research programs in Mechanical, Industrial and Electrical Engineering,
Chemistry, Physics, GeoSciences, and Environmental and Human Health including
the study of crystallinity and phases in wide band gap semiconductor nano-
crystals, atomistic deformation mechanism of nano-crystalline laminates,
dislocations in AlGaN quantum dots, crystallographic and morphologic information
of metal oxides, size and composition of the nano-alloy catalysts, unique
dimensions of nano-energetic materials controlling reaction propagation, nano-
scale catalysts, interface of wide band gap semiconductors devices, analysis of
carbon nano-tubes, analysis of biodegradable polymer nano-composites, structure
and morphology of functionalized nano-particles, reaction mechanisms in rare
earth and actinide element-bearing accessory minerals, deposition of metal oxide
nano-particles on the surface of fibers, and crystalline defects in B12As2
epitaxial films on SiC substrates. It is expected to bring major scientific and
technological breakthroughs through the use of the proposed TEM in all of these
studies. The core faculty involved in this project will use this equipment to
train graduate and undergraduate students and also to enhance outreach programs
to assure the maximum opportunity for training and research by a diverse
population of students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Layman Abstract: Transmission
electron microscopy (TEM) is a microscopy technique whereby a beam of electrons
is transmitted through an ultra thin specimen, interacting with the specimen as
it passes through. An image is formed from the interaction of the electrons
transmitted through the specimen; the image is magnified and focused onto an
imaging device, such as a fluorescent screen, on a layer of a photographic film,
or to be detected by a sensor such as a CCD camera. TEMs are capable of imaging
at a significantly higher resolution than light microscopes, owing to the small
de Broglie wavelength of electrons. This enables the instrument to be able to
examine fine detail?even as small as a single column of atoms, which is tens of
thousands times smaller than the smallest resolvable object in a light
microscope. A transmission electron microscope (TEM) is increasingly becoming an
indispensable system to study structural characterization of materials at the
atomistic level. High resolution TEM imaging and compositional analysis will
support research programs in Mechanical, Industrial and Electrical Engineering,
Chemistry, Physics, GeoSciences, and Environmental and Human Health including
wide band gap semiconductor nano-crystals, nano-crystalline laminates, AlGaN
quantum dots, metal oxides, nano-alloy catalysts, nano-energetic materials,
nano-scale catalyst materials, wide band gap semiconductors devices, carbon
nano-tubes, biodegradable polymer nano-composite plates, functionalized nano-
particles, rare earth and actinide element-bearing accessory minerals, nano-
fibers, and crystalline defects in B12As2 epitaxial films on SiC substrates. It
is expected to bring major scientific and technological breakthroughs through
the use of the proposed TEM in all of these studies. The core faculty involved
in this project will use this equipment to train graduate and undergraduate
students and also to enhance outreach programs to assure the maximum opportunity
for training and research by a diverse population of students.