* 0922651
* Constituting the Arctic Environment: How U.S. Military Patronage after World War II influenced the Environmental Sciences in the Far North
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Ronald Doel, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 09/30/2013
* USD 489,371.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project,
"Constituting the Arctic Environment: How U.S. Military Patronage after World
War II influenced the Environmental Sciences in the Far North," is the US
contribution to a nine-member, seven-project collaboration, seven-nation
research study titled, "Colony, Empire, Environment: A Comparative International
History of Twentieth Century Arctic Science (CEE). One of seven research teams
funded within the framework of the European Science Foundation EUROCORES
initiative "BOREAS: Histories from the North," the CEE Project will produce a
comparative international history of changing conceptions of the Arctic
landscape, its scope ranging from science to art. The larger collaborative
project will increase understanding of field stations and their role in
research, as well as how international polar conflicts, with their resultant
demand for particular kinds of geographic knowledge, shaped perceptions of the
Arctic and research undertaken there. In addition, this collaborative research
will also reveal how western ideological conceptions of the Arctic environment
helped to keep the Arctic "open" for colonialism as well as nature conservation.
Wide-focus projects of this kind are extremely difficult to accomplish by a
single scholar, necessitating cooperative and comparative approaches. The CEE
project will contribute a greatly improved understanding of Arctic scientific
research during the twentieth century, as well as deeper insight into the
shifting meaning and significance of the northern landscape as colonialism was
replaced by cold war military activities and ultimately increased native
autonomy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Within the CEE collaboration the US project,
Constituting the Arctic Environment: How U.S. Military Patronage after World War
II influenced the Environmental Sciences in the Far North, will examine role of
the military in shaping public understanding of the Arctic and influencing the
environmental sciences. In 1947, the Pentagon became interested in polar warming
and global climate change. It did so not because of concerns about the natural
environment, as these became generally understood by the 1980s and 1990s, but
because of pragmatic defense issues: the prospect of climate change in high
latitudes left military authorities worried about the United States' ability to
confront the Soviet Union in the high Arctic, where a hot conflict with its
emerging cold war adversary seemed increasingly possible. Pentagon officials
also saw polar warming as a broader kind of threat: a warming Arctic climate
meant that the Soviet Union might obtain new advantages in developing its
agriculture and deploying its fleet from high-latitude ports. By the late 1940s
the polar region had become, as never before, a potential theater of war. State
concern with the Arctic environment helped to shape U.S. Army, Navy, and Air
Force scientific planning and tactical studies through the 1950s.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In parallel ways, military fascination with the Arctic
influenced the earth sciences research community in post-World War II America,
creating new institutions and new funding to address broad interdisciplinary
problems. It helped shape a distinct form of the environmental sciences in the
United States before the environmental movement (which emphasized the biological
environmental sciences including ecology, genetics, and natural history) gained
ground in the 1960s and early 1970s. Pentagon officials sought knowledge about
the upper atmosphere (for missiles and long-range communications) and the oceans
(for submarine warfare) as well as about climate change, producing unprecedented
volumes of data about environmental conditions. Military patronage created a
distinct form of the environmental sciences that stressed utilitarian and
operational concerns. Yet the hope of military planners and civilian researchers
to create comprehensive cross-disciplinary studies of this bounded geographic
region - linking the biological and physical branches of the environmental
sciences - initially proved difficult to achieve.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"Constituting the Arctic Environment" is not only a
history of science in the north, but will increase our understanding of the rise
of the physical environmental sciences in the twentieth century. This research
will examine how U.S. earth scientists, working closely with military patrons
and planners, developed research programs to understand the northern
environment, requiring often-challenging interdisciplinary collaborations
between glaciologists, meteorologists, and oceanographers. It will illuminate
the creation of permanent new institutions that undertook and shaped research in
these environmental science fields. It will also investigate the intimate
knowledge certain scientists had of how Washington worked, and how the military
services operated, developed research programs in the Arctic and elsewhere, and
were responsive to both the Pentagon and the state. While the cold war has
ended, the role that national security concerns played in determining what kinds
of knowledge were valued or not, profoundly shaped what we now know about the
natural environment. Understanding this history is important today in
understanding the development of new disciplines and how science can actively
have influence on public policy.