* 0922358
* Search and Learning in Export Markets
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* James Tybout, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 06/30/2013
* USD 412,920.00

&lt;br/&gt;The project investigates the process through which firms enter into
and maintain relationships with buyers in foreign markets. It will provide
microfoundations for understanding how macroeconomic shocks such as exchange
rate changes, trade liberalizations, and financial crises affect trade patterns.
It will also provide an empirical description of the formation of new cross-
border business relationships, and of the ways in which exporters and importers
adjust their behavior as their relationships mature and they learn about
themselves and each other. The research will be based on newly-available data
sets that describe all legal merchandise trade between Colombia and the United
States. These data will be merged with establishment-level information on the
exporters and importers who do business with one another. The resulting data set
will allow project participants to model exporter-importer search and matching,
the dynamics of post-match shipments, and the conditions under which buyer-
seller matches break up.&lt;br/&gt;In exploratory work with these shipments
data, project investigators have documented some striking patterns. In a typical
year, one-third to one-half of Colombian exporters are new, that is, they were
not exporting to the U.S. in the previous year. The great majority of these new
exporters ship tiny amounts, service a single buyer, and disappear from the U.S.
market in the following year. But a small fraction survive and grow very
rapidly, both in terms of sales per buyer and in terms of number of buyers. To
explain these patterns the investigators have developed a dynamic search and
learning model of exporter behavior. In this model, producers who hope to sell
in a particular foreign market devote resources to identifying potential buyers
there. When they find one, the value of the resulting sales conveys a noisy
signal about the appeal of their products in this market. Taking stock of this
new information, firms update their beliefs about the scope for export profits,
and adjust the intensity of their search for more buyers accordingly. Thus, in
addition to responding to exchange rate and cost shocks, firms' exports reflect
their endogenous efforts to add new buyers to their client
base.&lt;br/&gt;Project investigators plan to extend their work in three ways.
First they will generalize their proto- type model to (a) allow firms to learn
from the experience of competing exporters, and from their own experiences in
other (non-U.S.) markets, and (b) allow the history of each business
relationship to affect its future evolution (duration and sales trajectory).
Once these generalizations have been made, they plan to move toward formal
econometric estimation of the model's parameters. Second, rather than viewing
matches as purely random, they plan to treat them as reflecting assortative
matching, and to characterize econometrically the "mating" process, drawing on
the marriage literature. Finally, to inform their modeling efforts, the
investigators intend to conduct interviews with personnel at Colombian
manufacturing firms with export experience, as well as with personnel at firms
in the U.S. that are part of the potential client
base.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. The research will provide a
framework for assessing quantitatively how macroeconomic policies affect the
export participation of individual producers over time, reconciling observations
at the transactions level with aggregate data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact. The framework will address questions about how individual firms react
to, and benefit from, the opportunity to trade. It will provide a set of tools
to assess a wide set of policy questions concerning macroeconomics and trade
policy, and innovation. The models developed may also shed light on the way that
intra-national business relationships form and evolve.