* 0922816
* MRI: Acquisition of an Ultra High Performance Liquid-Chromatography Tandem Mass-Spectrometer for a Multi-user Core Mass-Spectrometry Facility
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Jihong Cole-Dai, South Dakota State University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2012
* USD 552,613.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) program, the
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at South Dakota State will acquire an
ultra high performance liquid-chromatography tandem mass-spectrometer for
advanced analysis of small molecules and large bio-molecules. This will support
ongoing and proposed interdisciplinary research projects in chemistry,
biochemistry, pharmacy, biology and microbiology, as well as other research
projects from several other departments on campus. It will be used in a broad
range of research projects including, analysis of perchlorate from Greenland ice
cores to determine natural and anthropogenic sources of perchlorate in the
environment; identification of proteins in complex mixtures, including
investigations of protein-protein interactions; identification of biomarkers of
important diseases, and determination of proteins of key importance to specific
biological phenomena. Other projects include analysis of chemical warfare agent
exposure, bioengineering of bacteria, and investigation of differences in
chemical exposure related to cultural and lifestyle practices. It will be used
in a water analysis outreach project that connects all levels of education
(K-12, undergraduate, graduate, and faculty) with the help of cyber-enabled
technology. This acquisition will also provide support to a number of state-wide
collaborations and research centers.

Mass spectrometry (MS) is used to identify the chemical composition of a sample
and determine its purity by measuring the mass of the molecular constituents in
the sample after they are ionized and detected by the mass spectrometer.
Chromatography is an isolation technique that precedes the mass spectrometry
analysis. It separates a mixture into its several constituent chemicals which
are then analyzed by the mass spectrometer. These are widely used analytical
techniques to identify and quantify the chemical composition of a sample. It is
important for students to be trained in the technique using modern
instrumentation. These instruments will be an integral part of teaching as well
as research.