* 0922743
* Development of Dynamic Risky Decision Making: Behavioral Phenomena and Neural Underpinnings
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Elke Weber, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Rigdon
* 08/31/2012
* USD 250,587.00

Adolescents are prone to take risks that result in elevated levels of traffic
accidents, infections from sexually transmitted diseases, or substance abuse.
The proposed research investigates neural mechanisms that give rise to such
risk-taking behavior, which are currently not well understood. Recent research
has proposed that affective/emotional processes might be crucial to better
understanding risk taking in adolescents and other individuals known to seek
risks, such as substance abusers or pathological gamblers. Behavioral and brain
activation (BOLD in fMRI) data to investigate how different forms of dynamic
versus static decision-making situations influence the involvement of affective
versus deliberative modes of processing and the levels of risk taking in
children, adolescents, and adults. One primary hypothesis to be tested is that
dynamic choice situations trigger affective processing more than static choice
situations, which trigger predominantly deliberative processing. A second
hypothesis is that adolescents are prone to take greater risks than children and
adults because of differences in the maturation rates of their deliberative and
affective systems, differences that result in teens relying more on affective
processing to make decisions. In addition, a large internet-based study will
extend the age range of our investigation to middle-aged and older-aged adults
in order to investigate later developmental changes in dynamic risk taking,
studying it effectively across the life span.

A better understanding of the behavioral and neural mechanisms underlying risk
taking and risky decision making will help with the development of better
prevention and intervention strategies. These strategies can be targeted at
adolescent at-risk populations and other populations with deficits in risky
decision making, including substance abusers and pathological gamblers. A better
understanding of both the triggering situational characteristics and the
differential role and interplay of affective and deliberative decision processes
can lead to policies and interventions that help people make better decisions in
everyday life. For example, at-risk individuals can be helped to learn what
situational characteristics lead them to take dangerous risks. On a broader
level, people can be trained to better integrate affective and deliberative
reactions in their decisions. Policy makers can learn how to communicate risks
and describe decisions in a way that triggers an optimal balance of the two
types of decision processes.



