* 0922965
* MRI: Equipment acquisition for WMU accelerator lab upgrade
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* John Tanis, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Bradley D. Keister
* 08/31/2011
* USD 294,044.00

The Western Michigan University (WMU) accelerator laboratory plays a key role in
helping the department of physics meet its research and educational goals,
providing the basis for faculty research, Ph.D. dissertation and M.A. thesis
research, undergraduate laboratories, and outreach activities. Department of
physics faculty utilize the accelerator for a broad spectrum of research
projects in the areas of atomic physics, condensed matter physics, nanoscience,
nuclear physics, and physics applications, with much of this research receiving
external support. Accelerator research has resulted in numerous publications in
leading journals and has formed the basis for several graduate and undergraduate
student research projects. The accelerator is functional and heavily used, but
the existing ion sources are obsolete and unreliable. Acquisition and
implementation of the proposed ion sources will greatly improve accelerator
operation and reliability, make more beamtime available, and complement the
recent installation of a Pelletron charging system (purchased with funds from an
earlier NSF-MRI grant). Moreover, the new ion sources will enhance the
capabilities of the laboratory by providing a wider array of ion beam species
with higher intensities. The training of future scientists is a particularly
important function of the laboratory. In this regard, students are provided
unique hands-on experiences with major research instrumentation in close
collaboration with faculty mentors. Such experiences are not often available to
most physics students, especially those at the undergraduate level or those
still in high school.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;During recent years, the laboratory
has formed the basis for several Ph.D. dissertation projects, M.A. thesis
projects, Honors College thesis projects for physics majors, and the senior
mentorship projects of high school students from the Kalamazoo Area Mathematics
and Science Center. Apart from these research and research training uses, the
laboratory has been used every semester for more than 30 years as an
instructional tool in connection with the department's undergraduate modern
physics laboratory that is typically taken by sophomore level students, and as
part of an advanced laboratory course taken by upper level undergraduate physics
majors and graduate students. Additionally, students from area high schools and
colleges visit the laboratory to make use of the accelerator as part of their
physics curricula. During its history the accelerator has served as an
educational resource for literally thousands of university and high school
students. It is anticipated that, in addition to expanding the research and
educational uses of the accelerator, the upgraded facility will help in the
recruitment of students to the university and help to attract additional outside
collaborators. Presently, researchers from other institutions, nationally and
internationally (Argonne, Michigan State University, the Hahn-Meitner-Institut,
Berlin, Jagiellonian University, Krakow, Poland, and the Institute for Nuclear
Research, Debrecen, Hungary), come to WMU to collaborate with department faculty
on projects utilizing the laboratory and its resources. Through its diversity of
uses and applications, the WMU accelerator laboratory closely integrates
research with education in a manner that is rarely encountered at most
universities. The upgraded facility will help to enhance the learning
environment with greater access to state-of-the-art instrumentation.