* 0922961
* MRI:  Project Summary - Acquisition of equipment to support environmental materials characterization at the University of Vermont
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2010
* Mickey Gunter, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Thomas J. Boyd
* 08/31/2010
* USD 145,306.00

0922961&lt;br/&gt;Druschel&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This MRI proposal seeks funding
to acquire materials characterization equipment. Requested are a wavelength-
dispersive spectrometer (WDS), and energy-dispersive spectrometer (EDS), and an
electron-backscatter-diffraction unit (EBSD) to be added to an existing electron
microscope. In addition, the PIs are requesting an x-ray diffractometer (XRD),
and x-ray fluorescence spectrometer (XRF), a Raman spectrometer, and an optical
microscope with digital imaging capabilities. Instrumentation will be put to use
in NSF, EPA, USDA, NOAA, DoD, DOE and other agency-funded research. Major
research areas involve understanding mineralogical controls on nutrient
availability and mobility in watersheds, characterizing microbial-mineral and
water interactions in watersheds and the critical zone, characterizing mixed
phase materials such as zeolites and other microporous mineral matrices,
understanding mineral distributions at mining sites, and physicochemical
condition control by mineralogical microstructure. The fundamental research to
be undertaken here will advance the state of knowledge for how mineralogical
surfaces impact contaminant and natural compound movement and distribution in
groundwaters, watersheds and in the critical zone. The studies will server as a
foundation for education and training for environmental science and engineering.
Equipment will be incorporated into classes and workshops. The equipment will be
placed in recently-renovated existing laboratory space within the Department of
Geology. The PIs will comprise the management team and will arrange training and
administer day-to-day usage. Funded researchers will be charged a small fee to
use the instrumentation. Online scheduling software will be used to solicit
instrument use. The EDS will upgrade an existing EM, which is administered by a
full-time technician.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;