* 0922747
* Cereal Drought Stress Response and Resistance Networks
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2009,11/30/2011
* Andy Pereira, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 11/30/2011
* USD 2,400,000.00

PI: Andy Pereira (Virginia Polytechnic and State University)
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Co-PIs: Ruth Grene and Oswald Crasta (Virginia Polytechnic
and State University), Yinong Yang (Pennsylvania State University), Niranjan
Baisakh (Louisiana State University Agricultural
Center)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborators: Guy Davenport and Jianbing Yan
(CIMMYT, Mexico), Hei Leung (IRRI, Philippines)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Water
scarcity causing drought during essential periods of plant growth can limit
stable crop production. Cereal crops such as maize, wheat, rice and barley are
most affected by drought during the time of flowering and initiation of grain
formation, causing drastic yield losses. The goal of this project is to develop
a systems biology view of drought responses in cereals to understand this
complex process and improve drought resistance and water use efficiency. Genome-
wide comparative transcriptome analysis of drought responses in rice and maize
will be integrated into a cereal drought gene interaction network, using
ortholog information to predict conserved functional relationships as a basis
for cereals. Conserved orthologous regulatory genes between rice and maize
involved in drought responses and resistance will be identified comprising
transcription factors (TFs), protein kinases and phosphatases, genes in hormone
signaling pathways, chromatin binding proteins, protein degradation and small
RNA pathways. As proof of principle, a set of these putative conserved rice and
maize genes will be tested by genetic analysis of mutants and natural allelic
variants, assessing them for altered drought response phenotypes and
perturbation in the drought gene interaction network. These analyses will
validate and improve the cereal gene interaction network predictions, and
provide candidate genes for improvement of drought resistance/tolerance in
cereals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With respect to broader impacts, this project
will contribute through the generation of information key to the development of
stable food production systems worldwide and through the creation of a
transdisciplinary educational environment. Scientifically, the project will
demonstrate the use of an integrated network approach to understand complex
plant responses such as drought response and resistance. Outreach and training
activities are integrated within the transdisciplinary plant-lab-bioinformatics
project and will be made accessible to high school and underrepresented
undergraduate students from institutions across Virginia and North Carolina
through established programs at Virginia Tech and other nearby universities. An
outreach program developed as part of a NSF-Cyberinfrastructure Training,
Education, Advancement, and Mentoring for Our 21st Century Workforce (CI-TEAM)
project will provide modules for quantitative data analysis for teachers and
students using socio-environmental case studies from research data. An
integrated mentor program for postdoctoral researchers will be used to
facilitate career development. International research collaborations with the
Generation Challenge Program and CGIAR institutes involved in drought research
will add capacity building to agricultural systems worldwide. Plant genotypes
and all data developed in the project will be made available through a project
website (http://cereal-drought.vbi.vt.edu/) that will allow interactive access
to data and networks. Other publicly available genetic stocks used will be
distributed by the respective originators with long term public repositories.
Microarray and EST data will be deposited at GEO and NCBI, respectively. All
functional genomics data generated will be periodically deposited in Gramene and
other public databases.