* 0922111
* Competition and the origins of diversity:   Experimental evolution of resource polymorphism, character displacement, and reproductive isolation in viruses
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2009,09/30/2013
* David Pfennig, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 09/30/2013
* USD 561,396.00

The emergence of novel infectious diseases is a serious societal problem. This
project will improve understanding of the emergence of novel virus pathogens by
testing predictions of the ecological and evolutionary theory for the origin of
species. A central premise is that the emergence of novel infectious diseases
can be attributed to ecological change, particularly changes in the ecological
interactions within and between species. The project's aims are to (1) determine
whether competition for hosts promotes the origin of novel host-use strategies,
(2) determine whether such competition also causes divergence in host-use
strategies between viral populations, and (3) investigate the effect of such
divergence on the movement of genes between viral populations. The research is
unique in studying experimentally the entire process by which new species arise,
from the initial divergence of newly emergent viruses to the eventual formation
of reproductive isolation between emergent and source virus
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop an experimental
model system, an RNA virus that infects bacteria, for studying the role of
ecological interactions in the emergence of new infectious diseases. Graduate
and undergraduate students will receive interdisciplinary training through
participation in the research. The project includes outreach and education for
K-12 students, their teachers, and the public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).