* 0922769
* Proteins Altered in Maize Hybrids Exhibiting Different Levels of Heterosis
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Brian Mooney, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* scott jackson
* 08/31/2014
* USD 499,978.00

PI: Kathleen J. Newton (University of Missouri, Columbia)&lt;br/&gt;CoPI: Brian
P. Mooney (University of Missouri, Columbia)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cross-breeding
of inbred varieties within a species often leads to more vigorous and higher-
yielding hybrid offspring. The phenomenon of hybrid vigor (heterosis) has been
harnessed by plant breeders to improve world food production, but the underlying
mechanism is still undefined. Despite several investigations showing that
expression of many genes change in hybrids, the changes that are most important
for the heterotic response have not yet been identified. Heterosis is especially
prevalent in corn (maize). Progeny from crosses between different inbred maize
lines can vary in the extent of vigor observed. To increase vigor and yield, the
bioenergetic processes of photosynthesis and respiration must be optimized.
Therefore, the hypothesis is that mitochondrial respiration plays an important
role in heterosis. This project will examine maize hybrids exhibiting low,
medium, and high heterosis to identify specific proteins whose amounts are
altered with the magnitude of heterosis. Quantitative experiments based on
proteomics techniques will identify the protein targets that are changed in the
different hybrids. Two-dimensional gel electrophoresis and liquid
chromatography-coupled mass spectrometry will be used to identify and quantify
the proteins. The expected outcome will be discovery of the molecules and
machinery that underlie heterosis, as well as identification of validated
protein markers for heterosis. The ultimate impact of the research is related to
crop improvement and it is hoped that the proteins identified will become
specific targets for improving the productivity of crop plants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful identification of target proteins and
bioenergetic processes that are consistently increased in moderate and high
level heterotic hybrids will provide major clues as to the underlying molecular
and biochemical explanations for the phenomenon. All the results from the
project will become publicly available on a dedicated University of Missouri
website and NCBI-peptidome (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/projects/peptidome/).
Additionally, this project will provide integration of research and education at
several levels. Training and mentoring of a postdoctoral associate and multiple
undergraduates will be provided. A "capstone" course in plant genomics will be
developed for undergraduates. Educational outreach will include instruction for
high school teachers and students in Missouri. Communication with the general
public about issues in plant genomics and proteomics, including the topic of
heterosis, will occur in two venues: the popular "Saturday Morning Science"
lecture series held at the University and in "science caf√©" discussions off-
campus.