* 0922457
* The Physiological Genomics of Panicum: Exploring Switchgrass Responses to Climate Change
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2009,12/31/2015
* Christine Hawkes, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Anne W. Sylvester
* 12/31/2015
* USD 5,840,136.00

PI: Thomas E. Juenger (University of Texas - Austin)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CoPIs:
Christine Hawkes (University of Texas - Austin), Timothy H. Keitt (University of
Texas - Austin), and Philip A. Fay (University of Texas - Austin/USDA - ARS
Grassland, Soil and Water Research Lab)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Senior
Collaborators: James A. Kiniry and Mari-Vaughan Johnson (USDA - ARS Grassland,
Soil and Water Research Lab)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major challenge facing the
world is the growing demand for energy and the negative consequences of
increased energy use on the environmental condition of the biosphere. In
particular, increased atmospheric CO2 resulting from fossil fuel use is thought
to be a major driver of climate change. Biofuels are one promising path for
sustainable replacement of fossil fuels that may minimize anthropogenic climate
change. However, biomass accumulation is constrained by physiological processes
as well as environmental conditions, and productivity is very likely to be
directly limited by increased drought stress associated with future climate
change. Switchgrass (Panicum virgatum) has been championed as one promising
biofuel species. Despite a long history of field trials and agronomic
development, surprisingly little is known about the basic stress physiology of
switchgrass and few genomic tools have been developed to facilitate its
improvement. This project explores the physiological and genomic responses of
Panicum to environmental conditions as predicted under current climate models.
The project includes screens of switchgrass germplasm, genetic mapping of
physiological traits, genomic and ecological studies of responses to field
imposed drought stress, and modeling of switchgrass performance under future
climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will expand the knowledge and
tools needed to fully develop switchgrass as a biofuel crop as well as
facilitate ongoing efforts to engineer crops for higher performance under
drought conditions, one of the major limitations in agricultural productivity
worldwide. In addition, the project will train the next generation of biofuels
researchers through a novel undergraduate science training program, the Freshman
Research Initiative (FRI), at the University of Texas - Austin. The FRI program
involves the development of a multiple semester "research stream" for
undergraduate students. Each research stream immerses young scientists in both
the "big ideas" and the everyday tools needed to be a successful researcher,
using a combination of traditional coursework, hands-on training, independent
research, and close interaction with faculty mentors. This project will develop
a new FRI stream on the "Biology of Biofuels" incorporating content and research
projects on plant physiology, genetics/genomics, plant breeding, environmental
biology, and climate change under the umbrella of switchgrass as a model
biofuel. All data will be available through the project website and long-term
through established data repositories (Gene Expression Omnibus, GEO,
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/; NCBI Short Read Archive, SRA,
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sites/entrez?db=sra) as well as through Gramene
(www.gramene.org). Germplasm will be made available through the USDA National
Plant Germplasm System (http://www.ars-grin.gov/npgs/). The results of this
research will be published in peer-reviewed journals and presented at
international meetings.