* 0922680
* MRI: Development of a Holographic Fabrication and Characterization Instrument for Materials Research and Educational Outreach
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* David Grier, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 09/30/2013
* USD 767,788.00

0922680&lt;br/&gt;Grier&lt;br/&gt;New York U.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This award
is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary: This proposal requests support
to develop an integrated all-optical instrument for characterizing fluid-borne
objects such as colloidal particles, nanowires and biological cells, and for
assembling them into three dimensional structures for applications in materials
science and engineering. The instrument is based on two complementary techniques
that were developed in the Principal Investigator's laboratory: quantitative
holographic video microscopy, and dynamic holographic trapping. The former can
track hundreds of moving objects simultaneously with nanometer resolution in
three dimensions, while simultaneously measuring their dimensions and optical
properties. The latter can trap hundreds of microscopic objects independently
and organize them into any specified three-dimensional structure. Together,
these core technologies provide unprecedented control over the microscopic
world. Optimized optical and mechanical design will enable the proposed
instrument to characterize and process materials that are too sensitive or too
challenging for existing proof-of-concept instruments. Consequently, it will
have immediate applications for rapid prototyping of soft-matter-based photonic,
electronic and optical electronic devices, and also will be used for
micromechanical assays of bacterial biofilms. Its accessible layout and
anticipated ease of use also will facilitate rapid adoption for fundamental
research in physics and biophysics. The proposed instrument will be developed
and operated out of New York University?s Center for Soft Matter Research, and
will serve as a core facility for NYU?s recently inaugurated Materials Research
Science and Engineering Center. Its open and modular design and robust computer-
driven interface will be ideal for hands-on demonstrations during regularly
scheduled K-12 classroom visits to the CSMR laboratories, and will be featured
in the award-winning Scientific Frontiers educational outreach program at
NYU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Summary: Assembling microscopic building
blocks into three-dimensional functional structures is one of the outstanding
challenges of materials science. Picking the right objects out of chemically
synthesized mixtures, putting them together, and verifying the outcome has been
all but impossible. The proposed instrument addresses the assembly problem by
using forces exerted by computer-generated holograms to arrange microscopic
fluid-borne objects into any specified three-dimensional configuration. It
complements this holographic optical trapping capability with video-rate
holographic imaging to track the objects? motions in three dimensions and
simultaneously to measure their physical properties, thereby solving the
selection and verification problems. Together, holographic micromanipulation and
holographic characterization make it possible to build up complex three-
dimensional structures from chemically-synthesized components. Immediate
applications include assembling optically active colloidal spheres into
artificial opals with optically-switchable optical properties, building three-
dimensional circuits out of chemically grown nanowires, and crafting microscopic
lasers out of colloidal components. The same instrument also will used to study
the micromechanical properties of bacterial biofilms. The proposed instrument?s
unique combination of capabilities will provide a core facility for New York
University?s recently awarded Materials Research Science and Engineering Center.
It also will take center stage in NYU?s award-winning Scientific Frontiers
Program, which annually hosts hands-on laboratory tours for hundreds of New York
City K-12 schoolchildren. The instrument?s open design, real-time visual
feedback and robust computer-driven interface will encourage students of all
ages to reach into the microscopic world and explore.