* 0922392
* ADoctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Estimating the Costs of an Epidemiological Externality from Malaria Control through Indoor Residual Spraying in Uganda
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Randall Kramer, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Niloy Bose
* 06/30/2010
* USD 14,980.00

Indoor residual spraying (IRS) of insecticides on interior surfaces of
residential structures is currently one of the most cost-effective means of
reducing transmission of mosquito-borne human diseases such as malaria. However,
IRS remains a controversial malaria control strategy because of the potential
environmental and human health impacts of the insecticides utilized.
Traditionally, Dichloro-Diphenyl-Trichloroethane (DDT) has been the preferred
insecticide in IRS. The acute and chronic impacts of DDT exposure in humans
remain uncertain. The negative environmental impacts from the widespread
transport of DDT through ecosystems, while still uncertain, have been more
clearly demonstrated, yet the costs of these impacts, when considered against
clearly established costs of malaria-induced mortality and morbidity remain
difficult to assess. Due to these uncertainties, policymakers must understand
the conditions under which IRS is effective at reducing malaria transmission. In
particular, a coverage rate of 85% of households is widely thought to be
necessary to achieve significant, sustainable transmission reductions using IRS.
If there are household-level costs associated with allowing IRS, then one would
expect a household?s decision whether to accept IRS in their home to be a
reflection of these costs as compared to the perceived benefits of malaria
reduction, which are largely determined by the IRS decisions of other
households. Thus this type of vector control strategy presents potential for an
?epidemiological externality.? This research will implement discrete
choice&lt;br/&gt;experiments (DCEs) using 600 household surveys in 4 to 6
internally displaced person (IDP) camps in the Ugandan district of Gulu?where
the malaria burden is particularly high and IRS has been heavily emphasized in
vector control?to elicit preferences regarding the acceptance of alternative IRS
programs and thereby (a) improve acceptance rates and (b) evaluate the potential
for an epidemiological externality.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;While
other economic and epidemiological research has produced theoretical models of
epidemiological externalities, there is little applied work which quantifies the
welfare impact of such a market failure in a specific epidemic or endemic
context. The use of DCEs to estimate an econometric model that can be used for
counterfactual analysis of such an externality is an important methodological
innovation, which is of interest to development, environmental, and health
economists.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Currently, the U.S. President?s
Malaria Initiative has emphasized the importance of IRS as a major strategy for
malaria control, and the World Health Organization (WHO) recommends DDT as the
most cost-effective insecticide in IRS. Because of their costs and uncertain
impacts on human health and the environment, it is important that IRS operations
achieve the highest disease reduction possible and reflect the informed
preferences of the targeted households. Moreover, understanding the confounding
potential of epidemiological externalities can point to cooperative strategies
to improve IRS efficacy. Thus, this research will aid policymaking by enabling a
more precise targeting of well-designed IRS programs in areas where the most
benefit&lt;br/&gt;is likely to be achieved.