* 0922512
* Exploring the Role of Noncoding RNAs in Heterosis
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Stephen Moose, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* scott jackson
* 08/31/2014
* USD 499,979.00

PI: Matthew Hudson, University of Illinois Co-PI: Stephen Moose, University of
Illinois

Heterosis or hybrid vigor is a scientific term to describe the more vigorous
progeny from a genetic cross between parents that are not closely related.
Hybrid vigor is one of the main foundations for greatly increased crop yields
during the 20th century, especially in corn (maize). However, the reasons why
the offspring of a cross between distantly related individuals tend to grow
larger than their parents are still poorly understood. One popular and promising
hypothesis is that hybrid vigor results from a combination of genes from both
parents that control growth rate and stress tolerance. Noncoding, small RNAs are
recently discovered regulatory molecules encoded by genes that may fit this
hypothesis. Some small RNAs are known to control shoot development and others
stress-responsive genes. Preliminary experiments have shown that several small
RNAs are altered in their expression in hybrid corn plants when they are
compared to the inbred parents. In addition, the machinery that produces these
small RNAs may also be altered in its function in hybrids when compared to
inbred corn. These results also hold true in the model plant Arabidopsis,
indicating that small RNA may be involved in a common mechanism of hybrid vigor
in all plants. This project will investigate further the effect of small RNA on
hybrid vigor in both corn and Arabidopsis, focusing on the genes that control
small RNA production and on whether small RNA levels can predict the performance
of different hybrid combinations of corn plants. These populations represent
current and historical genetic diversity in corn, and include inbred lines that
are major contributors to commercially important maize varieties. A more
complete understanding of the mechanisms of heterosis, and how these mechanisms
relate to the increased crop yields that result from it, is anticipated from
this research.

The greater vigor observed following hybridization is one of the most easily
visualized genetic effects and is commonly observed in everyday life. The use of
hybrids in plant and livestock breeding has greatly increased agricultural
productivity with significant benefits to global society. However, the benefits
of hybrids are currently unevenly spread, with corn benefiting more than any
other crop. The research will provide insight into the mechanisms of heterosis,
with potential improvements in crop yields, especially in crops where hybrids do
not currently provide a major increase in yield. Increased yields of major crops
have the potential to reduce pressure on the environment and decrease the need
to convert more wild land into agricultural land. The maize germplasm used in
this project is intentionally chosen to be free from intellectual property
protections and the seed are freely available from the Germplasm Resource
Information Network (GRIN, http://www.ars-grin.gov/). Experimental lines of
maize and Arabidopsis produced as part of this project will be supplied to
public repositories, the maize genetics co-op
(http://maizecoop.cropsci.uiuc.edu/) and the Arabidopsis Biological Resource
Center (http://www.arabidopsis.org/abrc/). Sequence data generated will be
submitted to GenBank (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Genbank/index.html) and made
available on the laboratory website (http://stan.cropsci.uiuc.edu). This project
will also offer a number of educational opportunities. By using commercially
relevant maize germplasm in this project, graduate-level education will be more
relevant to the type of research conducted in commercial seed companies,
enhancing the relevance of the research to modern agriculture. Young scientists,
including a summer intern, will be offered excellent opportunities to learn and
apply some of the most recent advances in plant genomics research. Because
heterosis is a topic of high general interest, research results will be
communicated broadly through publications, presentations, and public educational
efforts that emphasize the positive impacts of plant genome research. Specific
examples include distribution of an educational kit of seeds that exhibit strong
seedling heterosis; living demonstrations of hybrids and their inbred parents to
the public via field days; presentations at high schools and community colleges
and an educational web page (hosted on http://stan.cropsci.uiuc.edu and also
contributed to Wikipedia) on the importance of hybrid vigor