* 0922719
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Neutron Single Crystal Diffractometer
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Tibor Koritsanszky, Middle Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2013
* USD 1,831,600.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) program, Tibor S.
Koritsanszky and colleague Flora Meilleur from Middle Tennessee State University
(MTSU) in collaboration with colleagues Robert Blessing from Hauptman-Woodward
Medical Research Institute (HWMRI) and Bryan C. Chakoumakos from Oak Ridge
National Laboratory (ORNL) will acquire a single-crystal neutron diffractometer
(IMAGINE) capable of combining Laue or broad-band-pass quasi-Laue geometry with
a large cylindrical image plate detector. This instrument will yield up to two
orders of magnitude gain in performance compared to traditional diffractometers
utilizing a monochromatic beam. IMAGINE will be tunable in wavelength to match
the requirements of crystals from various samples. It will allow rapid data
collection from single crystals of small volume (~0.1 cubic mm) and will
accommodate a wide range of sample environment equipment, including cooling
devices, furnaces, high-pressure cells and cryo-magnets. The diffractometer will
be placed at a beamline having a cold-neutron source at Oak Ridge National
Laboratory and it will be co-managed by Middle Tennessee State University and
ORNL. This supra- and macromolecular quasi-Laue neutron diffractometer for
materials research and discovery will support a combined group of researchers at
MTSU, North Carolina State University, Hauptman-Woodward Medical Research
Institute and Oak Ridge National Laboratory, with 13 additional minor users from
US industry and academia. The acquisition will have broad scientific impact and
community use, providing new tools, capabilities and methods for the analysis of
light atom positions in materials that will be of interest across the diverse
fields of chemistry, structural biology, pharmacology, condensed matter physics,
nano-structured materials, and in the environmental, biomedical and geological
sciences. This diffractometer will fill a gap in US neutron diffraction
capabilities since no similar capability or instrumentation is currently
available at a US neutron reactor source. Research is described in 1) bio-
macromolecular crystallography applied to small protein structural
determinations; 2) extreme and variable environmental applications such as high
temperature and pressure applied in materials science research to metal-organic-
framework compounds with potential applications in trapping hydrogen or carbon
dioxide; 3) charge and spin density studies to characterize electronic and
magnetic properties of crystalline solids.

The technique of single-crystal neutron crystallography allows accurate and
precise determination of the full three dimensional structure of a molecule,
including bond distances and angles, and it provides accurate information about
the spatial arrangement of molecules relative to the neighboring molecules. It
is especially useful for the determination of hydrogen atom positions which the
related technique of X-ray diffraction is not. Because of the high intensity
neutron source, studies of compounds that produce relatively small crystals will
be facilitated. These studies will have an impact in a number of areas ranging
from systems of medium size molecules of biological interest to large molecules
containing metal organic frameworks useful in materials research. This
instrument will be an integral part of teaching as well as research.