* 0922582
* MRI: Acquisition of a Transmission Electron Microscope for Research and Education
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Supriyo Bandyopadhyay, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2012
* USD 406,268.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) program, the
Department of Physics at Virginia Commonwealth University will acquire a
Transmission Electron Microscope (TEM) for use in interdisciplinary
nanomaterials research. Research work will be conducted in a variety of fields
including 1) Nanoparticle Photolithography, 2) Optical Properties of Metal &amp;
Semiconductor Nanoparticles, 3) Organic Spintronics, 4) Core-Shell Magnetic
Nanoparticles, and 5) Functional Amphiphilic
Polymers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Transmission electron microscopy is a widely used
technique that provides a microscopic image of a thin sample formed from the
interaction of a beam of electrons transmitted through the specimen. A TEM
provides higher resolution than optical microscopes. It is used in materials
research and biological fields among others to examine the structure and
properties of these materials under high resolution. The TEM acquisition will
benefit the research and training of students in four different departments
(Chemistry, Physics, Electrical Engineering and Chemical Engineering). It will
broaden collaborative activities with local industry and national research
facilities, and strengthen existing ties with two historically black colleges,
Virginia Union University and Norfolk State University. It will be integral to
the infrastructure of the new VCU interdisciplinary doctoral program in
Nanoscience and Nanotechnology.