* 0922650
* An Integrative Study of Nitrogen Cycling and Storage in Poplar
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2015
* Gary Coleman, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 08/31/2015
* USD 3,230,632.00

PI: Gary D. Coleman, University of Maryland - College Park&lt;br/&gt;CoPI:
Ganesh Sriram, University of Maryland - College Park&lt;br/&gt;CoPI: Jianhua
Zhu, University of Maryland, College Park&lt;br/&gt;CoPI: George N. Ude, Bowie
State University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Poplar is a fast-growing, temperate
deciduous tree that has potential to be an economically viable, non-food source
for biofuels and biomaterials. Nitrogen storage and cycling is an important
trait that has been identified to have the potential to enhance sustainable
yield and quality of biomass from trees. Nitrogen storage and cycling is also a
fundamental process important to the adaptation, growth and productivity of
trees and occurs over a wide range of time frames. Advancing our knowledge of
tree nitrogen storage and cycling is necessary to understand how trees grow, how
their biomass is partitioned as well as how they compete and function in an
ecosystem. Toward this goal, this project will elucidate, on a genomic level,
metabolic, regulatory and signaling pathways and gene networks that regulate
nitrogen storage and cycling in poplar. This project will employ genome-wide
transcript profiling, isotope-assisted metabolic flux analysis and
characterization of the phosphorylation status of proteins. By integrating the
results of these analyses, candidate genes and transcription factors that
regulate nitrogen storage and cycling will be identified, which will then be
used in functional studies that rely on reverse genetic approaches. This project
will provide an unprecedented view of how nitrogen storage and cycling is
coordinated in trees and is expected to advance and accelerate the potential
development of trees with improved nitrogen use that will enhance productivity
and sustainability, while addressing future energy
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is interdisciplinary as it builds on
synergies between several disciplines including tree genomics, plant physiology,
metabolic engineering, biochemistry and systems biology. Although progress has
been made in understanding the linkages and interaction between carbon and
nitrogen metabolism in herbaceous plants, little is known in woody plants. The
results from this project will allow for comparisons between herbaceous and
woody plants and contribute to advancing an overall understanding of carbon and
nitrogen metabolism in plants as well as defining differences between annual and
perennial plants and their adaptive significance. Broader impacts through the
integration of research and education will be accomplished by training graduate
students and postdocs, as well as by establishing a genomics training lab at
Bowie State University (BSU), a Historically Black College and University (HBCU)
in Maryland. This genomics training lab will enable establishing the lab
component of "Applied Biotechnology", a proposed course at BSU. An intensive
summer training course will be established at BSU and offered to undergraduate
students at nearby HBCUs and high school teachers in Prince George County,
Maryland, dramatically enhancing their competitiveness in the biotechnology job
market and postgraduate education programs. Each year, three students, who are
graduates from these training programs, will be selected to work in one of the
PI/CoPIs' labs. This will expose the BSU and other HBCU undergraduates to the
post-graduate program opportunities at University of Maryland, while also
providing the graduate students and postdocs on this project an opportunity to
work with and mentor a diverse group of undergraduates. The data and methods
that result from this project can be accessed by the public on the project
website which will be hosted at http://www.psla.umd.edu/faculty/coleman.cfm. In
addition, all microarray, proteome, flux data and experimental details will be
permanently deposited in NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO;
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/)and in the digital depository at the University
of Maryland (DRUM; http://www.lib.umd.edu/drum/).