* 0922833
* MRI: Acquisition of PPMS EverCool Dewar, and Heat Capacity and Thermal Transport Probes for Research into Disordered Magnetic Materials at a Predominately Undergraduate Institution
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2011
* Paul Shand, University of Northern Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Thomas P. Rieker
* 09/30/2011
* USD 364,569.00

0922833&lt;br/&gt;Kidd&lt;br/&gt;University of Northern
Iowa&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This award is funded under the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary: The PPMS-based instrumentation to be purchased with this grant will be
used to measure key magnetic and electronic properties (magnetization,
susceptibility, resistivity, specific heat, and thermopower) in low-dimensional
materials such as intercalated transition-metal dichalcogenides. The focus will
be on materials with relatively simple crystal structures but which provide the
ability to tune their physical properties through controlled incorporation of
selected impurity atoms. We will examine how disorder and the addition of
chemical impurities influence phase transitions or even give rise to new
electronic or magnetic ground states. Our intent is to elucidate the fundamental
ingredients required for the existence of magnetic and electronic states. In
addition to its value for scientific research, the new dewar will drastically
reduce liquid helium costs for low-temperature measurements. This will enable
the instrument to be used in advanced undergraduate laboratories and summer
workshops involving high school teachers and high school students from
traditionally underrepresented groups through partnerships via a partnership
between the university and the Upward Bound Program. By exposing our
undergraduate students to the exotic physics of low temperature systems we will
be preparing them not only for scientific careers, but also a world in which
nanoscale and other advanced materials will play an ever increasing role in
everyday life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Layman Summary: The study of the magnetic
and electronic properties of new materials is essential for the continued growth
of the U.S. and other modern economies that are based upon the processing,
interpretation, and distribution of information. For example, significant
improvements in microprocessor speed and magnetic information storage capacity
can only be effected by exploiting the knowledge gained through experimental and
theoretical investigations of new and existing materials. Materials will also
play an essential role as the U.S. and other modern economies move from fossil-
fuel-based to renewable energy sources. Examples are higher-efficiency and
cheaper solar cells and better (and cheaper) batteries. This project seeks to
carefully investigate the magnetic and electronic properties of relatively
simple materials with constituents that can be controlled to produce desired
behavior. The studies will be carried out under a wide variety of conditions,
including low temperatures and high magnetic fields, in order to fully
understand the microscopic interactions that give rise to the observed
properties. After acquiring a deep understanding of the properties of these
materials, we will be in an excellent position to exploit these properties for
various applications, including those mentioned above. The equipment that is
being requested will allow a wide array of magnetic and electronic measurements
while at the same time dramatically lowering the cost of low-temperature
measurements through the use of cutting-edge refrigeration technology.
Undergraduate students, high-school teachers, and high-school students will be
involved in all aspects of the project. Special effort will be dedicated to the
engagement of high-school students from underrepresented groups in science-
related fields with a view to increasing their participation in such fields at
the undergraduate level and beyond.