* 0922697
* MRI:   Acquisition of a Transmission Electron Microscope for the Core, Multi-User Microscopy Facility at Appalachian State University
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Chishimba Mowa, Appalachian State University
* Standard Grant
* Joyce Fernandes
* 07/31/2012
* USD 509,620.00

The Dewel Microscopy Facility (DMF) in the College of Arts &amp; Sciences at
Appalachian State University (ASU) is using a new transmission electron
microscope (TEM) to improve and enhance faculty, staff, and student research and
teaching at ASU and in western North Carolina. A TEM is an essential tool for
studying internal cellular and ultra-structures of animal and plant tissues, as
well as microorganisms. It also is very important for teaching and research in
many other scientific disciplines, including physics, chemistry, geology and
materials science. The acquired instrument is the JEOL JEM-1400 TEM. The DMF is
a core, multi-user microscopy facility for all Appalachian State University
departments as well as community colleges, high schools and industry in the
Appalachian region of western North Carolina. Some of the immediate applications
where this instrumentation has significant impact for researchers include
investigation of the roles of microtubules in root development and
morphogenesis; localization of plant stem cells producing reactive oxygen
species under high light stress; characterization of microvascular alterations
during cervical remodeling in mice; ultrastructural localization of proteins in
the gills of fishes; and studies of metallic nanostructures on end-faces of
optical fibers for chemical sensing applications. In addition, this new TEM will
significantly improve the teaching quality of biology and physics microscopy
courses at Appalachian State University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Appalachian State
University is a fast growing public university located in western North
Carolina, many of whose students are first generation college attendees.
Therefore, one of the main goals in the application of this new instrumentation
is to train many motivated undergraduate students across biology, physics,
chemistry, geology, and other disciplines. The new TEM will also play a vital
role in several current outreach programs, including the Appalachian Student
Experience-based Education (AppalSEED) Academy, which is a year-long program and
focuses on training home-schooled students and high school students from
underrepresented groups, including women and African-American students, in
western North Carolina. Lastly, the new TEM will enhance service capabilities of
the DMF for the surrounding communities and further strengthen collaborations
among biologists, physicists, and other scientists, as well as faculty and
students at other universities in western North Carolina. The project outcomes
are available for public viewing on a dedicated page at the DMF website
(http://www.casmifa.appstate.edu/index.html).