* 0922114
* A new regional paleo-precipitation proxy: oxygen isotopes in desert nitrate
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Greg Michalski, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 07/31/2013
* USD 335,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

A new regional paleo-precipitation proxy: oxygen isotopes in desert nitrate

Gregory Michalski Purdue University EAR - 0922114

ABSTRACT Perhaps the most important unanswered question facing the
climatologists, policy makers, and humanity at large is how will the anticipated
global warming impact regional rainfall patterns? Our best tool for assessing
how precipitation patterns in arid regions are likely to change in a warmer
world is by using proxy validated global and regional climate models. Therefore
it is imperative that new climate proxies that reflect local-regional
precipitation variations over time and space be developed. The proposed research
will demonstrate how 17O isotopic anomalies in soil nitrate can be used as a
sensitive new proxy of mean annual precipitation in 36Cl dated Atacama Desert
soils that are ~ 1,000,000 years old. This new proxy will be used to assess El
Nino climate anomalies over the past million years at approximately 3,000 year
resolution. This resolution if fine enough to capture climate change impacts
arising from orbital precession and axial tilt, and at the same time lengthy
enough to capture the last 5 orbital eccentricities (the full Milankovitch
cyclcle), a feat few terrestrial proxies can capture. The proposed research
links atmospheric chemistry to climatology and will provide real data to assess
coupled chemical transport-meteorological models such as WRF-Chem, currently
under development by NOAA, EPA and other NGO¡¦s. The research will highlight the
new applications using ?´17O anomalies to a wider science community. The main
outcome is a better understanding of how regional precipitation might change
with the anticipated global warming in the coming decades.