* 0922340
* Quality of Life, Productivity, and the Value of Amenities across Cities: Theory and Applications
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* David Albouy, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2013
* USD 267,491.00

This project develops and applies measures of quality of life, firm
productivity, and amenity values across cities. The value of amenities to
households, which determine quality of life, is inferred by the cost of living,
adjusted for the local income level, which households accept to pay to enjoy
more those amenities. The value of amenities to firms is inferred by the input
costs firms are willing to pay in order to take advantage of those amenities.
The theoretical model is applied using data on wages and housing costs from the
U.S. Census to determine the economic value of amenities (or disamenites) that
vary across cities, broadly interpreted to include city characteristics such as
climate, pollution, taxes, and public infrastructure. Overall quality of life
and productivity for metro areas is also calculated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
theoretical model in this project improves on the standard model, often
attributed to Rosen (1979) and Roback (1982), by making several improvements.
First, federal taxes and transfers on income, including housing-tax deductions,
are included. Second, households earn income from land and capital, as well as
labor. Third, cost-of-living differences account for both housing and non-
housing costs. Fourth, the market for housing is modeled separately from the
market for land. Fifth, predictions of the model on local employment and other
non-price quantities are derived and considered. These adjustments above lead to
more accurate measures of quality of life, productivity, and overall amenity
values. In practice they require that greater weight be put on housing costs
relative to wages in determining input-cost and wage-adjusted cost-of-living
indices. Furthermore, they account for how amenities influence federal tax
revenues as well as local land rents. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The model is applied
to address five very policy-relevant issues in the United States. First, the
quality-of-life of households and the productivity for over 200 metropolitan
areas is to be measured over several decades. Second, the value of public
infrastructure to households and firms, and its impact on welfare and federal
tax revenues, is estimated. Third, it will be determined whether smaller metro
areas are nicer places to live than larger metro areas, and whether this
difference is changing over time. Fourth, the values of climate amenities, such
as mild seasons, sunshine, and precipitation are estimated and used to estimate
the costs of climate change to measurable income and harder-to-measure quality
of life. Fifth, the impact of regulations on residential and commercial land use
on housing costs and welfare will be estimated using additional data on office
rents and land rents. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This research will
help other investigators estimate the value of all types of local
characteristics with various data sources in the U.S. and other countries,
improving on previous measures. Estimates of quality of life and productivity
will shed light on the question of whether consumption amenities or employment
opportunities are more important in deciding where people locate. The research
applications should produce results that benefit society by providing estimates
directly related to important and urgent policy areas. Revised estimates of the
value of public infrastructure illustrate that the value of these investments
were seriously underestimated in previous research, and may demonstrate that
large-scale public investment may have beneficial long-run microeconomic effects
as well as beneficial short-run macroeconomic effects. Estimates of the impact
of urbanization on welfare, and its changes over time, will shed light on the
impact that urbanization from economic growth and policy has on welfare both in
the short and long run, which is an especially pressing issue in developing
countries. The application of hedonic methods to climate change promises to find
economically significant and directly applicable estimates of the impact of
climate change that could help inform policy formation on this pressing issue.
The project also promises to shed light on the costs and benefits of land-use
regulation from an inter-city perspective, an issue which has received much
descriptive, but little normative attention &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;