* 0922345
* MRI: Acquisition of Stable Isotope Instrumentation for the Biogeosciences at Princeton University
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Daniel Sigman, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2012
* USD 516,086.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The PIs are requesting funds to acquire a suite of
instruments for stable isotope (N) research, including a denitrifier-based,
natural abundance isotope system, a tracer isotope system, and general purpose
natural abundance peripherals for an existing mass spectrometer. Specific
instruments requested include a Thermo Electron MAT 253 stable isotope mass
spectrometer, a Thermo DeltaVAdvantage stable isotope mass spectrometer with
peripherals, an EA peripheral for combustion-based isotope analysis, and a
GasBench II carbon dioxide preparation and purification system. The proposed
instrumentation would enable research efforts examining natural stable isotope
abundances that include ocean biogeochemistry and paleoceanography, terrestrial
biogeochemistry, carbon isotopes in Precambrian Earth history. Stable isotope
tracer research would include nitrification, nitrogen fixation, and carbon
partitioning during biostimulation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The PIs state that the proposed instrumentation would expand
the research capabilities of the institution and specifically the Departments of
Geosciences and Ecology and Evolutionary Biology. The improvements to the
denitrifier method will also serve to expand the capabilities of the ocean
research community at large. Additionally, the proposed instrumentation will
enable method development and provide training for undergraduate students at the
institution and those participating in a collaborative effort with the
University of Cape Town.&lt;br/&gt;