* 0922418
* Genomic Approaches to Identify Insect Resistance Genes in Poplar Trees
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Matias Kirst, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 07/31/2013
* USD 824,005.00

PI: Steven G. Ralph (University of North Dakota)

Co-PIs: Wenhao (David) Dai (North Dakota State University); Matias Kirst
(University of Florida (UF)

As sedentary organisms, plants cannot avoid or escape biotic (e.g., herbivorous
insects and opportunistic pathogens) and abiotic (e.g., drought and extreme
temperature) stresses in their local environment. Instead, plants have evolved
an enormous diversity of anatomical structures and chemical defenses to protect
themselves. In response to attack by feeding insects, plants deploy multiple
defense mechanisms that are tightly regulated at the molecular level. One of the
most successful approaches to identify genes responsible for variation in a
trait of interest is to produce mutants that are then screened for alterations
in the traits of interest. In previous studies, several dozen mutant lines in
poplar trees (Populus spp.) were identified as resistant to feeding by
defoliating insects. In this project, the modified gene in at least 10 of these
insect resistant lines will be identified. The roles these genes play in
mediating insect resistance will be systematically examined in poplar through
both gene knock-down and over-expression studies. Furthermore, mutant plants
will be subject to thorough phenotypic characterization that includes evaluation
of global changes in gene expression and measurement of insect feeding
performance and larval development. It is expected that these studies will
provide new insight into the genes and pathways that enhance resistance to
feeding insects. Identification of specific insect resistance genes will
facilitate breeding of improved tree varieties in the future.

This project will be performed by a team of scientists, graduate students and
undergraduates from three universities. Students will receive intensive training
in genomics, bioinformatics and biotechnology through participation in all
aspects of the research. A new computer lab course in genomics will be developed
at the University of North Dakota that will introduce undergraduate and graduate
students to hands-on training in bioinformatic analysis of microarray data.
These invaluable experiences will prepare students for future careers as
professional biologists and educators. The long term goals of this project are
to elucidate genetic mechanisms underlying insect resistance in perennial
plants, and to incorporate this knowledge into existing tree breeding programs
for better forest health. A detailed description of the results and protocols
derived from this project can be viewed at
http://www.und.edu/dept/biology/ralph/ralph.htm. All DNA sequences will be
deposited in GenBank and microarray data will be accessible through the Gene
Expression Omnibus (GEO; http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/projects/geo/) and the
PopGenIE database (http://www.popgenie.db.umu.se/popgenie/). Biological
resources generated in this study will be publicly available upon request.