* 0922979
* MRI:  Development of a Dynamically Adaptive Autonomous Antarctic Low-Power Geophysical Instrument Array for Space Science Research and Education
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2015
* Tamal Bose, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Carrie E. Black
* 07/31/2015
* USD 1,999,999.00

An interdisciplinary team of space scientists, computer scientists, and
engineers will develop, test, and deploy a network of autonomous and dynamically
adaptive, low-power geophysical measurement stations along the 40 degree
magnetic meridian in the Antarctic. The network will consist of five new
stations to be developed and manufactured over a four-year period. The goal is
to provide an autonomous, low-power instrument platform capable of remote
unattended operations in the Antarctic for at least three years. Each of the
platforms will support a fluxgate magnetometer, an induction coil magnetometer,
and a dual frequency GPS receiver. The new capabilities to be developed include
(1) incorporation of an innovative new software-defined-radio based dual
frequency GPS receiver capable of measuring ionospheric total electron content
and scintillation characteristics, (2) dynamic adaptive data mining, (3) inter-
station communication and dynamically adaptive data collection strategies, (4) a
flexible interface to connect other low-power geophysical instruments, and (5)
alternative satellite data retrieval and system control options.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientific motivation for the network is driven by the
value of establishing a magnetically conjugate chain to the already existing
chain of magnetic observatories operated by the Danish Meteorological Institute
along the west coast of Greenland. The conjugate arrays will enable global (from
the Antarctic to the nominally conjugate regions in the Arctic) investigations
of the complex, multi-scale, electro-dynamic system that comprises the space
environment of Planet Earth. Transformative science is likely to result from
these new data sets that enable the development of our understanding of the
fully coupled solar wind - magnetosphere - ionosphere - atmosphere system that
incorporates both hemispheres realistically. This is the next major step
required in the development of global space weather models, and the observations
that will be provided from this new facility are fundamental to the adequate
validation of these models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Among its broader impacts, the
new instrument platform will be of great value to other Polar geophysical
measurement programs. The network will contribute data that are important to
several major research initiatives of national importance including the NSF GEM,
CEDAR programs, the National Space Weather Program, the NASA Living With a Star
program, and the NASA THEMIS satellite program. Space weather affects a variety
of technologies on which society relies, and there are increasing needs for
reliable and accurate now-casts and forecasts of Space Weather. The data
obtained from the network will be made available to researchers and students
worldwide via web access through the Polar Experimental Network for Geospace
Upper-atmosphere Investigations (PENGUIn) data portal. The project has an
Education and Outreach component that, amongst others, will host 2 undergraduate
students from minority institutions each summer to participate in the project.
Graduate students will be employed by the project and mentored by the
investigators on the project thus helping to prepare the next generation of
geophysical scientists and engineers.