* 0922648
* MRI: Acquisition of a NanoSIMS
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Steven Boxer, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2012
* USD 2,296,630.00

MRI: Acquisition of a NanoSIMS&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stanford researchers in over
10 departments recognize a shared need to identify composition with nanoscale
spatial resolution and have joined together to establish a NanoSIMS user
facility for research and education. NanoSIMS combines the high mass resolution,
isotopic identification, and sub-parts-per-million sensitivity of conventional
SIMS with spatial resolution down to 50 nm. The NSF will maintain oversight
through the Stanford Nanofabrication Facility (SNF), a node of the National
Nanotechnology Infrastructure Network (NNIN). Internal and external users will
carry out distinctive and high-quality science and develop methodologies that
exploit the NanoSIMS? distinctive capabilities. The majority of the research
will be carried out by students and postdoctoral scholars, providing excellent
training for our Nation?s new scientists and
engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stanford has a variety of programs designed to
increase participation of women and minorities, and the PI and co-PI?s have a
history of training diverse researchers and educators. The NanoSIMS will be
available for a range of formal courses at Stanford and at partner schools.
Industry research and development personnel rely on the Stanford facilities and
research environment, and we are committed to building up a remote access
capability to allow more widespread access for both research and classes. In
addition, we will continue to place a high priority on the publication of
technique papers, anticipating an explosion of interest in the unique
capabilities of the NanoSIMS for many exciting research areas.&lt;br/&gt;