* 0922775
* MRI: Acquisition of a 400 MHz NMR spectrometer for undergraduate research and research training
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Marion Gotz, Whitman College
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2012
* USD 388,940.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award from the Major Research
Instrumentation (MRI) program, Marion Gotz and colleagues Allison A. Calhoun,
Marcus A. Juhasz and Timothy Machonkin from Whitman College will acquire a 400
MHz NMR spectrometer to support research in areas of 1) medicinal chemistry
including design, synthesis and evaluation of inhibitors for a variety of
proteases, 2) bioinorganic chemistry such as in determination of metal-ion and
substrate binding in a metalloenzyme family, 3) physical chemistry such as
effects of hydrotropes on micelle structure and chemistry, and 4) physical
organic chemistry such as design and synthesis of carboranes as weakly
coordinating counterions of strong acids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nuclear Magnetic
Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools available to
chemists for the elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is used to
identify unknown substances, to characterize specific arrangements of atoms
within molecules, and to study the dynamics of interactions between molecules in
solution. Access to state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential to chemists
who are carrying out frontier research. The results from these NMR studies will
have an impact in synthetic organic/inorganic chemistry and biochemistry. This
instrument will be an integral part of teaching as well as research.