* 0922401
* Market-based Environmental Regulation of Industry: An Empirical Approach
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2015
* Stephen Ryan, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 06/30/2015
* USD 465,537.00

Market-based emissions trading programs ("cap-and-trade") have moved to the
front and center of industrial environmental regulation. When designing an
emissions trading program, one of the most contentious issues a policymaker
faces is the question of how to allocate emissions permits to stakeholders. How
permits are allocated can have significant implications for both who bears the
costs and how the required emissions reductions are achieved. Although the
theoretical literature addressing the efficiency and distributional implications
of permit allocation design has become quite sophisticated, empirical research
is limited. The proposed work brings a detailed understanding of the electricity
and cement industries, two major polluters, careful empirical analysis of firm-
level decision making, and state-of-the-art econometric methods to bear on this
first-order policy question.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;This project
advances the literature at the interface of industrial organization and
environmental regulation in several important ways. First, the researchers
propose a novel source of exogenous variation to identify the effects of the
permit allocation design decision on short-run firm behavior by exploiting panel
data variation in allocation rules in the NOx Budget Program (NBP). This
provides a unique opportunity to cleanly estimate the short-run response of
firms to a full range of allocation mechanisms. The proposed research also
investigates long-run dynamic effects of these regulations. Previous work in
this area has largely focused on non-strategic simulation models of the industry
using calibrated parameters. This project extends this literature through the
use a fully-strategic equilibrium model of industry behavior based on
econometrically-based parameters. Finally, the project makes an important
contribution in its application of methodologies developed in the industrial
organization literature on dynamic games to policy-revelent questions in the
field of environmental economics.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Social
Impact: Research findings would directly inform the design and implementation of
future market-based environmental policies. The research provides evidence on
the magnitude and direction of firms' responses to alternative emissions permit
market designs. The proposed integration of empirics and applied theory will
yield insights into how the permit allocation design decision can affect
producer profits, consumer welfare, and the ability of the permit market to
efficiently coordinate emissions abatement activities in real-world regulatory
environments.&lt;br/&gt;Educational impact: Students working on this project
will acquire hands on experience working with rich firm-level data sets, and
build core competencies in applied econometrics and industrial organization.
Both researchers will present research findings at academic and policy
conferences and look forward to integrating research results into their graduate
course curricula. Both MIT and UM have programs designed to integrate
undergraduates into ongoing research. This project will nicely complement these
undergraduate research&lt;br/&gt;programs.