* 0922199
* When do boulders move in steep mountain streams?
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Michael Lamb, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 06/30/2013
* USD 349,547.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 11-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most of the rivers in hilly and
mountainous landscapes have small, steep channels, which are typically mantled
by boulders that rarely move. In these channels, boulders moderate the rate of
river incision, roughen the flow creating local patches of gravel , and provide
crucial habitat for a variety of organisms such as salmon and steelhead
spawning. Coarse sediment can also become entrained by river floods, which rush
down slope with considerable destructive consequences. No current theory or
empirical model exists that successfully predicts the threshold of movement of
boulders or their organization by river processes. This research project
addresses this fundamental gap in basic knowledge through a combined
theoretical, experimental and field-based approach. A semi-empirical theory for
boulder mobility and step-pool formation will be developed and tested using a
newly constructed state-of-the-art laboratory flume at the California Institute
of Technology. The flume experiments will allow exploration of channel slopes
(up to 30%) and grain sizes (up to 10 cm) that have been severely limited in
past studies. Experiments will be designed to investigate the conditions under
which boulders move and the mechanisms responsible for boulder organization into
steps and pools. Data from these experiments will be used to test and validate
predictive models for boulder transport and step-pool formation. The
experimental and theoretical findings will be compared to observed flow
conditions during boulder movement events in tributaries of the South Fork Eel
River in the University of California Angelo Coast Range Reserve. The result
will be a robust method for calculating boulder transport dynamics in steep
mountain streams, with implications for predicting landscape evolution, the rate
of movement of sediment through steep channels, critical habitat conditions, and
the beneficial use of boulders in restoration projects.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results from this research project will have
significant implications for basic science and a number of practical concerns of
societal relevance. Results from this project will aid in restoration and hazard
mitigation efforts where assessing boulder mobility is needed for restoring
stream habitat (e.g., salmon spawning) and functionality, as well as mitigating
flood and debris flow hazards in steep urban areas. This research project
includes mentoring undergraduates, a PhD student, and a post-doctoral researcher
in experimental, field and theoretical science. Research from this study will be
uswd to design a 1-day workshop for area high-school teachers. The goal will be
to give teachers the necessary skills to teach their students simple ways to
assess flood and debris flow hazards that can result in loss of life and
property in the Los Angeles area.