* 0922263
* MRI: Acquisition of Magnetoencephalography (MEG) Scanner for Brain Research at MIT
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,05/31/2011
* Robert Desimone, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2011
* USD 1,365,000.00

This award provides funds which permit Drs John Gabrieli and Robert Desimone to
purchase an Elekta Neuromag system for human brain imaging. The instrument will
be integrated into the Martinos Imaging Center at MIT and will complement the
Center's existing neuroimaging capabilities currently based on magnetic
resonance imaging. The Neuromag has 306 MEG channels plus up to 124 channels for
simultaneous EEG. Magnetoencephalography (MEG) is a powerful technology for
noninvasive imaging of human brain activity. It measures magnetic signals given
off by active brain cells and it combines good spatial with very high temporal
resolution. In particular, MEG makes it possible to study the flow of
information through the brain during cognitive tasks and can reveal the high-
frequency oscillations which are fundamental to the physiological mechanism by
which different brain areas communicate with each other. The technique therefore
is extremely well suited to answering a wide range of basic questions about
human brain function. For example it has made important contributions in areas
such as somatosensory and auditory processing, and particularly in the study of
language, a distinctively human capability for which the rapid neural processes
involved are not well resolved by fMRI. It is also possible to use this
technique on children, including newborns, and this approach has the potential
to transform understanding of early brain development including development of
perceptual abilities, language and many other aspects of brain function.

Although the justification for purchase of this instrument rests on the basic
research which will be performed and the insights into normal brain functioning
which will result, MEG also has clinical applications. It is a potentially
powerful tool for translational research, for example for identifying patterns
of brain activity that might serve as biomarkers for brain disorders. The
instrumentation can also be used to study the neural effects of educational
interventions in such areas as reading or musical training and as a basis for
developing human brain-machine interfaces.