* 0922573
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Communicative Citizenship and Participatory Democracy
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,02/28/2011
* Nancy Postero, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 02/28/2011
* USD 14,885.00

University of California at San Diego graduate student, Ana Paula Pimentel
Walker, under the guidance of Dr. Nancy G. Postero, will undertake research on
participatory democracy. Her focus will be on why some instances of
participatory democracy are more effective than others in distributing state
resources among competing social classes and interest groups. Social science
findings regarding the efficacy of participatory institutions are often
inconsistent. To explain these inconsistencies, this research will explore the
hypotheses, that 1) a political party's ideology of participatory democracy has
an impact on the redistribution of state resources; and 2) different designs of
participatory institutions produce disparate redistributive outcomes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be conducted in Brazil, where several
forms of participatory institutions are now mandatory. However, the
municipalities implementing them are governed by political parties that disagree
about the goals of participatory democracy, which allows for a comparative
research design. The comparative fieldwork will be done in two districts in the
Sao Paolo Municipal Area, which differ in their views of participation. The
researcher will begin with a sociolinguistic analysis of the communicative
interactions and discursive practices that take place at participatory meetings,
where ideas of what constitutes a good citizen are developed as what the
researcher terms "communicative citizenship." In addition to sociolinguistic
analysis, the research will include direct and participant observation at
meetings; analysis of policy documents, census information, and budget data;
textual analysis of political tracts; interviews with residents of both
districts; and a survey. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Besides clarifying some of the
contradictory findings of the participatory democracy literature, this study
will provide further insight into the relationship between institutions,
ideologies, and locally-situated understandings of citizenship and entitlements.
Research findings can also aid policymakers and activists in promoting
institutional reforms. Funding this research also contributes to the education
of a social scientist.