* 0922998
* International Collaboration in Chemistry: Transition Metal-Mediated C-C Bond and C-Heteroatom Bond Formations via C-H Activation in Organic Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Chuan He, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2012
* USD 413,000.00

This project will explore the development of new methods for the formation of
C-C and C-N bonds via platinum-catalyzed C-H activation reactions. Although
platinum complexes are known to mediate C-H activation to form alkyl-platinum or
aryl-platinum species, few studies have been directed toward formation of C-C or
C-N bonds from these intermediates. Development of new platinum-mediated methods
for formation of C-C and C-N bonds from direct functionalization of C-H bonds
will be undertaken. The reaction mechanism will be elucidated and the new
methods will be employed in the synthesis of complex molecules. Applications of
these new reactions in the synthesis of natural products will be performed by
Professor He's Chinese collaborator, Professor Yong-Qiang Tu, of Lanzhou
University. Professor Tu's work is separatately supported by the National
Science Foundation of China (NSFC). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This International
Collaborations in Chemistry award, funded by the Organic and Macromolecular
Chemistry Program and the Office of International Science and Engineering, will
support the work of Professor Chuan He, of the Department of Chemistry at the
University of Chicago. Professor He's research efforts revolve around the
development of facile C-H activation methods for the formation of C-C and C-N
bonds. Such chemistry will contribute to energy efficient and environmentally
benign synthesis of various chemical and pharmaceutical agents.