* 0922754
* Improving Scenario Discovery
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Robert Lempert, Rand Corporation
* Standard Grant
* erik herron
* 06/30/2013
* USD 349,994.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scenario Discovery is a valuable
approach to participatory, computer-assisted scenario development. It is useful
for many hard, deeply uncertain policy problems such as climate change and
energy planning. This project aims to advance scenario discovery methodology by
applying novel algorithms that can provide significant new capabilities and then
evaluating how decision makers respond to the results. It, thus, will
simultaneously improve both the technical capacity of the modeling and the
ability for decision makers to work effectively with the models.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To be more specific: Scenarios represent sets of plausible
future states of the world that represent vulnerabilities of proposed policies,
i.e., cases where a policy fails to meet its performance goals. Scenario
discovery characterizes such sets by helping users to apply statistical or data-
mining algorithms to databases of simulation-model-generated results in order to
identify easy-to-interpret combinations of uncertain model input parameters
highly predictive of these policy-relevant cases. The approach has already
proved successful in several high impact policy studies, but its broad
application to many policy areas is currently limited by the capabilities of
current scenario discovery algorithms and the existing understanding of how
decision makers interpret their results. This project will improve the
algorithmic capabilities of scenario discovery by identifying and modifying
existing adaptive sampling algorithms to address sparse sampling issues and by
employing Principal Component Analysis methods to transform the simulation
generated-databases into new coordinate systems that existing scenario discovery
algorithms can interpret more successfully. The project will also improve the
understanding of how decision makers can best use scenario discovery by
conducting a series of workshops and interviews with decision makers to: i)
assess the degree to which the proxy measures of interpretability used by the
algorithms correspond to results that decision makers can actually interpret;
and ii) evaluate decision makers? views on the usefulness of scenarios of
different levels of complexity. The workshop results will guide the development
of the algorithms considered in the project.