* 0922481
* MRI: Acquisition of a Liquid Chromatograph-ion Trap Mass Spectrometer for Undergraduate Research and Research Training
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Gerald Van Hecke, Harvey Mudd College
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2012
* USD 234,310.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) program, the
Department of Chemistry at Harvey Mudd College will acquire a liquid
chromatograph-ion trap mass spectrometer. It will be used in various research
areas including, 1) natural product chemistry, specifically the chemotaxonomy of
the soft coral genus Alcyonium, as well as chemical explorations of California
endophytic fungi; 2) synthetic natural product chemistry, namely biomimetic
cyclizations in the synthesis of endiandric acids; 3) organometallic chemistry,
specifically catalyst design for asymmetric hydroamination; 4) organic
chemistry, concerning stereocontrol in reactions of singlet oxygen; 5) the
physical chemistry of liquid crystals, describing the thermodynamic behavior of
asymmetric 2,7-diacyl fluorine liquid crystals; and 6) physical inorganic
chemistry and materials science, focusing on experimental investigation of
electronic coupling in metalloporphyrin dimers, as well as coupling and electron
injection in dye-sensitized solar cells using zinc porphyrins on nanostructured
zinc oxide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mass spectrometry (MS) is an analytical
technique used by chemists and biochemists to identify the chemical composition
of a sample and its purity by measuring the mass of the molecular constituents
in the sample. Chromatography is an isolation technique that precedes the mass
spectrometry analysis. It separates a mixture into its several constituent
chemicals which are then analyzed and identified by the mass spectrometer. This
modern instrumentation will improve the education and training of undergraduate
students in research. In addition to research projects at Harvey Mudd College
and the Joint Sciences Department of the Claremont Colleges, the requested
instrument will serve a consortium of undergraduate colleges in the area,
providing much needed support to projects encompassing the study of natural
products and biochemistry.&lt;br/&gt;