* 0922445
* Dissertation Improvement Grant: Watershed Management in the Wake of Emigration:Transnational Flows of Remittances and Capital in Rural Households and Communities
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2010
* Rebecca Zarger, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 12/31/2010
* USD 14,555.00

Carylanna Taylor Bahamondes, doctoral student at the University of South
Florida, supervised by Dr. Rebecca K. Zarger, will investigate how remittances
sent home by transnational immigrant workers affect natural resources in the
home country. Community-based natural resource management projects, such as
those governing national parks, tend to treat communities as spatially bounded
localities contained within physical watersheds. In contrast, Bahamondes will
explore the possibility that transnational immigration stretches community and
park boundaries and changes behaviors that impact natural resources within and
beyond local watersheds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researcher will carry out a
year of field research in Azul Me√°mbar National Park in Honduras, and among
Honduran immigrants in the United States. The researcher will address the
following questions: 1) How do the funds (economic remittances) and ideas,
perceptions, and values (social remittances) that emigrants send to their
households of origin affect household, village-community, and watershed-
impacting practices? 2) How do remittance-driven changes in social and economic
capital affect the distribution of power among households to impact decisions
about community and park resource management? Building on prior research, the
study begins with a village-wide survey to document immigration, remittance-
receipt and expenditure, practices, and economic and social capital. Three case-
study families will keep remittance budget diaries and all family members,
including those who immigrated to Honduran cities and the United States, will be
interviewed to reconstruct and contextualize the flow of funds and ideas. She
will use participant observation of family, village, and park activities in
Honduras and in-depth interviews with case-study family immigrants to the United
States to document their experiences with and discourse about remittances and
watershed impacting activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is important
because it brings together research on transnationalism and on political ecology
to understand how transnational movement tangibly affects home environments. The
research findings will be shared with park communities and managers so that they
may consider immigration and remittances in future planning to improve
conservation and development practice. The research also contributes to the
education of a graduate student.