* 0922621
* Ancient Plant Diet at Farmana: A Starch Grain Perspective
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2010
* Steven Weber, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2010
* USD 36,215.00

With the National Science Foundation support, Drs. Steve Weber and Arunima
Kashyap will use starch grain analysis to better understand plant processing and
dietary practices within the Indus civilization. Knowledge of plant use to date
in this region is based on macro-botanical record preserved through
carbonization. Direct evidence, whether recovered from human remains or the
surfaces of implements used for food processing, cooking, serving and storage,
is significantly limited or missing from analysis. This project will address
these issues by collecting and analyzing starch grains extracted from the
calculus of human teeth, stone tools, and pottery vessels.

The Harappan site of Farmana, located in Haryana, India offers a unique
opportunity to carry out such a study. Its size, length of occupation (3500 to
2000 B.C.), extensive structural and material remains, and the recently
identified cemetery make it one of the most important Harappan sites in the
region. During the 2008 and 2009 excavation seasons, samples were collected from
stone tools, pottery vessels and human teeth. With support from the National
Science Foundation, these samples will be processed and examined microscopically
for the presence of starch granules which can serve as unique species markers
and provide direct evidence for plant use.

The intellectual merit of this project is threefold: First, it will not only
develop an analytic technique of wide archaeological applicability and value in
the Old World but will also provide the first comprehensive, comparative
collection of starch grains from South Asia. This collection will be made
available, through the internet, to all scholars researching South Asian plants.
Second, the project will demonstrate the importance and value of starch grain
analysis as a form of direct evidence for plant use. For the first time there
will be unambiguous evidence for human use and consumption of a specific set of
plants recovered from the Indus civilization. This project will not only open up
new avenue of archeological research in South Asia, but it will help clarify
biases that that might exist in the archaeobotanical record by exposing
additional plant species that are not necessarily preserved in the carbonized
seed record. Lastly, this project will reveal patterned relationships between
plants, their use and material culture. The project will address whether
distinct foods are associated with specific ceramic vessels or tool types, and
whether shifts in pottery style reflect shifts in plant taxa.

This is a pilot project, aimed at demonstrating that starch grains can be
successfully recovered from a variety of surfaces, are well preserved, and can
thus provide direct evidence of the ancient Harappan diet. The broader impact of
the study will be to provide a test case for the analysis of starch grains at
other Harappan sites and help lay the foundation for future studies across South
Asia that seek unambiguous evidence of human dietary behavior, and link artifact
surfaces to specific plant related activities.