* 0922618
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Shared MR Instrument for Interdisciplinary Work on Cognition, Decision-making, Child development, Education, Perception and Emotion
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Brian Wandell, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2012
* USD 2,558,188.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award permits Dr. Brian Wandell
and his collaborators at Stanford University to purchase a 3T functional
magnetic resonance imaging scanner. The shared instrument will be the
centerpiece of a new facility, The Center for Neurobiological Imaging, designed
to advance scientific research and training on topics spanning human decision-
making, cognition, perception, child development, education and emotion. The
instrument will be used to support research that advances understanding of the
human brain and also offer the opportunity to integrate teaching about brain
functions and systems into the curricula of students in a variety of fields. The
instrument will increase the efficiency and quality of a broad array of
scientific research efforts that aim to understand human brain function, and
ultimately apply this new knowledge to the development of effective social,
economic, educational and legal systems. The research approach involves a
partnership between basic scientists and engineers. The advances in imaging over
the last fifteen years are still in an early phase and within the next ten
years, scientists believe, it should be possible to measure the distributions of
particular molecules within the brain, trace brain development in detail and
measure properties of the neuroglia. The close proximity in the laboratory
between magnetic resonance physicists, statisticians, psychologists and other
social scientists will make it possible to explore collaboratively new imaging
modalities and transform technical advances into scientific insights. The
instrument and related software and analysis tools will also be used to train
graduate students and post-doctoral fellows in advanced methods for
understanding the human brain.