* 0922676
* MRI:  Acquisition of a 500MHz NMR Spectrometer for Research at California State University Sacramento
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Cynthia Kellen-Yuen, University Enterprises, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2012
* USD 655,125.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award from the Major Research
Instrumentation (MRI) program, Katherine D. McReynolds and colleagues Cynthia J.
Kellen-Yuen, Claudia G. Lucero, James A. Miranda and John D. Spence from
California State University - Sacramento will acquire a 500 MHz NMR spectrometer
and an autosampler for an existing 300 MHz spectrometer. This equipment will
support research in 1) the synthesis of glycodendrimers; 2) the synthesis and
study of the photoreactivity of highly conjugated arenediynes; 3) the microwave
synthesis of nitrogen heterocycles; 4) the study of vinylcyclopropane
monoradical cyclization-fragmentation; 5) the synthesis of chiral silyl ethers
from ketones and the total synthesis of kavain and 6) the elucidation of the
biochemical pathway to the marine neurotoxin domoic acid. The instrumentation
will also be used in teaching and training of a diverse group of undergraduate
and graduate students at this university.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nuclear Magnetic
Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools available to
chemists for the elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is used to
identify unknown substances, to characterize specific arrangements of atoms
within molecules, and to study the dynamics of interactions between molecules in
solution. Access to state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential to chemists
who are carrying out frontier research. The results from these NMR studies will
have an impact in synthetic organic chemistry and biochemistry. This instrument
will be an integral part of teaching as well as research.