* 0922447
* Exploiting Chromatin Landmarks to Characterize Complex Plant Genomes
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2009,02/28/2014
* Steven VanNocker, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* scott jackson
* 02/28/2014
* USD 1,001,958.00

Progress in the science of genomics is no longer limited by the technologies
that obtain genomic DNA sequence, but rather by the ability to interpret this
information and uncover biologically relevant features of the genome. In
addition, DNA sequence is only one component of the information content of the
genome. Additional information - called epigenetic information - is encoded
partly by the protein-containing matrix called chromatin in which the DNA is
packaged. Specific modifications to the histone proteins, which make up the bulk
of chromatin, are closely associated with the characteristics of the genes to
which they are affixed. The objective of this project is to evaluate novel
approaches to facilitate sequence analysis of gene-rich regions in plants with
complex genomes, identify chromatin landmarks useful for genome annotation, and
identify polymorphic sequences most useful for genetic map construction,
utilizing a wild apple species as a reference. The project is expected to help
uncover how epigenetic information is linked to gene activity, add accuracy to
annotation efforts, and uncover cryptic and previously unanticipated features of
the plant genome.

The broader impacts of this project include its potential as a training
opportunity in the biological sciences for students and scientists at multiple
levels, including postdoctoral, graduate, undergraduate, and K-12. The project
will provide numerous opportunities to link researchers interested in genomics,
gene expression, plant physiology, development, biotechnology, plant breeding
and bioinformatics. The studies will establish a wild apple species as a simple
model for genomics and genetics of the agriculturally important M. domestica,
thus enabling tractable functional genomics, rapid forward and reversed genetic
analyses, and comparative genomics in apple. In addition, the project will
provide the foundation for identification of alleles governing interesting
traits seen in wild apples that could be deployed in new cultivars optimized for
low-input, high-volume 21st-century production methods. Finally, as epigenetic
mechanisms are well conserved across multicellular organisms and have been
implicated in human disease and stem cell dynamics, the project has obvious
impacts for advancement of human medicine. The project will generate resources
needed by the plant research community, including genic sequence across much of
the euchromatic gene space, an exhaustive transcriptome (EST) database, and
detailed gene expression atlas of development. These results will be made
available to the public through the Genomic Database for the Rosaceae (GDR;
http://www.bioinfo.wsu.edu/gdr/), a dedicated project website, and from the
National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI).