* 0922608
* Problem Categorization as an Interdisciplinary Foundation to Improve Problem Solving
* EHR,DUE
* 11/01/2008,06/30/2010
* Kathleen Harper, Denison University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 06/30/2010
* USD 39,736.00

Interdisciplinary (99) Most problems that students encounter in science courses
present exactly the information needed to solve a problem that has a single
unique correct solution. However, outside the classroom environment, there are
three types of problems: those with either no answers, or a single answer or
multiple answers. Additionally, accompanying the problem may be insufficient
information readily available to find a solution; exactly the information
required or more information available than is necessary to solve the problem.
This project is teaching mathematical problem solving that more nearly reflects
"real world" situations. Using the situations described above, a 3 by 3 matrix
characterizing nine possible problem categories can be created. The typical
classroom problems populate only one cell in this matrix; those that contain
within the problem the exact information needed to solve for the single correct
answer. Problems to populate the other eight cells of the matrix are being
generated. Students are being exposed to all nine problem types and receiving
appropriate instruction to determine if this instructional method will lead to
improved problem solving abilities.

There is an absence of rigorous studies on this approach to developing higher
problem solving skills. The research being conducted is expected to make a
significant contribution to understanding how students' problem solving
abilities can be improved. The outcomes of the study have the potential to
influence future textbooks and pedagogy. .