* 0922535
* Existence of Equilibria in Bayesian Games, Strategic-Form Games, and Extensive-Form Games with Infinite Action Spaces
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Philip Reny, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2012
* USD 149,643.00

Auctions are a ubiquitous means for allocating resources, both in the private
and in the public sectors. A key question of interest is whether auctions are
able to allocate resources effciently. This question has been studied by many
authors since at least the early 1960s. Not surprisingly, auctions work well
only when the bidders competing within them bid carefully, taking into account
not only their own private information about the value of the object(s) for
sale, but also the information they would infer if they were to win one or more
objects. Previous research has shown that auctions can produce effcient outcomes
when better information leads to higher bids. When this occurs, we&lt;br/&gt;say
that bidders employ monotone bidding strategies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The idea
that monotonicity of strategies leads to more effcient outcomes can be applied
to other settings as well. For example, one might hope that in an oligopoly
setting, the competition of the market will lead firms with lower costs to
produce more output. And indeed, this will be the case when firms employ
monotone strategies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thus, monotonicity of strategies in
economic settings provide important information about how well markets work. One
of several goals of the present research is to understand, quite generally, when
economic settings haracterized by strategic interaction possesses Bayesian Nash
equilibria&lt;br/&gt;in which the participants employ monotone pure strategies.
The results we expect to obtain will provide the most general answer to this
question to date, and so will provide useful information about the efficiency
properties of a large class of economic environments.