* 0922062
* Identification Results in Interaction Models with Nonparametric Payoffs and Weakly Consistent Beliefs
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Andres Aradillas-Lopez, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2013
* USD 192,834.00

There exists a continuously growing literature focused on identification and
estimation of static, strategic-interaction models. This proposal focuses on a
simultaneous discrete choice model where a collection of actions are decided by
expected-utility maximizing agents. The beliefs of are subjective probability
functions over the space of others' choices. This project obtains bounds on the
probabilities of agents that are valid: (i) Whether or not there is complete
information in payoffs among agents; (ii) regardless of the specific features of
the underlying equilibrium selection mechanism; (iii) for any collection of
payoffs functions that satisfy the nonparametric restricts and (iv) whether or
not beliefs are correct (e.g, as in Nash equilibrium) as long as they are weakly
consistent. The papers produced by this proposal would be the first ones in the
literature on econometric analysis of interaction models to explicitly aim for
this range of robustness. Besides characterizing bounds for probabilities, this
proposal also describes nonparametric bounds involving Nash equilibrium
profiles. These include bounds for the probability that an arbitrary choice
profile is a Nash equilibrium (either mixed or pure), as well as bounds for the
probability that a given profile is selected by the agents given that it is a
Nash equilibrium. These bounds are valid for any collection of payoff functions
that satisfy the nonparametric assumptions. The nonparametric bounds for Nash
equilibrium selection are also a contribution of this proposal to the
literature. All probability bounds in the proposal satisfy sharpness conditions
given the set of assumptions made. The papers resulting from this proposal would
also be th first ones to characterize nonparametric bounds for equilibrium
selection probabilities in discrete interaction models (both for Nash and the
more general behavior).

Broader Impact: The proposal would create an advanced topics course at the Ph.D
second-year level on the subject of Robust Inference in Structural Interactions-
Based Microeconometric Models. The target audience for this course would be
students interested in microeconometric models, empirical industrial
organization, and more generally all those interested in applied microeconomics
research with structural models in general. This course is intended to produce
dissertations centered around robust inference (both in the parametric and/or
behavioral sense) in structural models of economic interaction. The project
organizes workshops and seminars, where leading authors in related fields
present and discuss their most recent work and their connection to the goals and
objectives of this proposal.