* 0922661
* Discovery of Genes and Networks Regulating Tomato Fruit Morphology
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2015
* Esther Van der Knaap, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 08/31/2015
* USD 3,818,288.00

&lt;br/&gt;PI: Esther van der Knaap (The Ohio State
University/OARDC)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CoPIs: Brian McSpadden Gardener (The Ohio
State University/OARDC), Carmen Catal√° (Boyce Thompson Institute), and Sofia
Visa (The College of Wooster)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborators: Carri Gerber
(The Ohio State University/ATI), Yuji Kamiya (RIKEN, Yokohama Japan), Kazuki
Saito (RIKEN and Chiba University, Chiba Japan), Simon Gray and John Ramsay (The
College of Wooster)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Genetic variation within tomato
resulted in distinct varieties that produce round, flat, elongated, pear,
torpedo and even bell pepper-shaped fruit of various sizes. This morphological
diversity offers unique opportunities to study the formation of fruits and their
growth into different shapes. The main objectives of this project are i) to
identify and characterize genes controlling tomato fruit shape and size, and ii)
to discover the underlying molecular networks that control fruit morphogenesis.
To do so, transcript, metabolite and hormone profiles will be generated for
genes controlling tomato morphology while new shape and size genes will be
genetically mapped and cloned. Furthermore, tomato fruit shapes will be
described in mathematical terms to aid standardization and classification of the
diverse fruit types. Lastly, models of the molecular networks present in tomato
connecting gene expression, hormone and metabolite accumulation with morphology
will be generated. The broader impacts resulting from this project will be a
significant increase in the knowledge of the processes controlling fruit
morphogenesis in plants. Such information will offer crucial insights into the
fundamental aspects of plant growth and development. In addition, the outcomes
of this research will provide clues of how shape and size of produce can be
improved to benefit growers, processors and consumers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
interaction among post doctoral researchers and graduate students on the
multidisciplinary project will provide excellent opportunities to integrate
bioinformatics and statistical modeling with biological, biochemical and
molecular laboratory skills. These activities will engage researchers and
teachers at major research institutions, agricultural experiment stations, a
community college, a liberal arts college and high schools. Undergraduate
researchers will be engaged in laboratory and field studies related to fruit
morphology analyses, training in bioinformatic skills as well as improvement of
the Tomato Analyzer software application (http://www.oardc.ohio-
state.edu/vanderknaap/tomato_analyzer.htm). These activities will also extend to
the local community by the inclusion of high school students in workshops that
will be held at Ohio State and laboratory experiments conducted at their
schools. The ultimate goals of these efforts are to provide a fully integrated
approach to research and education that will increase the appreciation of plant
science-based activities in general and crop diversity in particular. Data will
be publicly available at the SGN site (http://sgn.cornell.edu/) and the Plant
MetGenMAP database (http://bioinfo.bti.cornell.edu/cgi-bin/MetGenMAP/home.cgi)
as well as in GEO (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ geo/).