* 0922834
* MRI: Acquisition of a Quartz Crystal Microbalance and a Dynamic Light Scattering Apparatus for Undergraduate Education
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Karen Buchmueller, Furman University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2012
* USD 260,866.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award from the Major Research
Instrumentation Program (MRI), Jeffrey T. Petty, Karen L. Buchmueller and
Timothy W. Hanks of Furman University will acquire a quartz crystal microbalance
and a dynamic light scattering apparatus. The primary research applications of
the instruments will be: (1) characterization and supramolecular assembly of
Janus nanoparticles, (2) surface modification of polypyrrole films for biosensor
construction, (3) measurement of the competition between small molecules and
proteins for DNA binding sites, and (4)investigation of how Ag+ influences the
aggregation of the ribonucleotide guanosine 5-monophosphate
(5GMP).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The quartz microbalance measures mass changes with
a sensitivity that is ~100 times greater than an electronic balance. It will be
used to monitor the structural, thermodynamic, and kinetic changes that
accompany association reactions. The dynamic light scattering instrument will
exploit the efficient scattering of visible light by nanostructures to
understand how local molecular interactions drive the assembly of larger scale
assemblies. Besides Furman faculty, three faculty mentors and their students
from local technical and community colleges and an industrial collaborator will
participate in the research program at Furman and use the instruments. This
research environment will serve as the testing ground for innovations in the
physical chemistry, biochemistry, and materials science courses that emphasize
structural and thermodynamic analysis of molecular interactions.