* 0922945
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Spectropolarimeter: A Chiro-optical Spectroscopy Workbench
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Jeffrey Watson, Gonzaga University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2012
* USD 181,155.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Through this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) program,
Professor Matthew Creemins and colleagues Tomaso Vanelli and Jeffrey M. Watson
of Gonzaga University will acquire a spectropolarimeter. Examples of
undergraduate research projects that will employ the instrument include, (1)
characterization of neuropeptides, (2) characterization of the stability of
siderocalin mutants and their complexes with bacterial siderophores, (3)
characterization of the structural and sequence requirements for thermal
stability of an arsenite oxidase enzyme, and (4) characterization of an
enzymatic mechanism for a HMG-CoA reductase by assessing the effects of
substrates and substrate analogues on the folding of a key structural element of
the enzyme.

Circular dichroism spectrometers are a valuable tool in modern laboratories for
assessing the chiral properties and the changes in such properties of proteins,
DNA, and small molecules. The spectrometer measures the optical activity of
compounds which results from their differential response to light of different
polarizations. The instrument will be used in undergraduate research and
laboratory courses. It will incorporated into Native American and high school
outreach projects and used by researchers at Whitworth University.