* 0922550
* Aggregate Risks and Aggregate Allocations
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2015
* Harald Uhlig, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 07/31/2015
* USD 272,529.00

What do asset markets signal about future macroeconomic developments? How are
macroeconomic risks generated and allocated and what frictions may prevent a
first-best solution? What are the appropriate policy responses to upheavals on
financial markets? The proposed research seeks to contribute to answering these
questions, pursuing three projects in particular. The first project investigates
the interrelationship between macroeconomic shocks and financial markets
empirically, identifying shocks by their explanatory power for forecast error
variances. The second project investigates the allocation of macroeconomic risks
and several frictions with the help of dynamic stochastic general equilibrium
models, capable of delivering appropriate risk premia. The third project seeks
to understand the 2008 financial crisis as a systemic bank run, in which
tradeable bank assets become illiquid. It also examines the case for a fiscal
stimulus in a financial crisis.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit of Proposed
Activity&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research extends the existing literature in a
number of dimensions. The first project provides a new method for identifying
shocks based on their contribution to explaining future variance, which should
be useful more generally. It applies this methodology to examine the interaction
between key shocks moving asset markets and macroeconomic aggregates, thereby
deepening our empirical understanding of these relationships. The second project
extends and/or streamlines the literature, which seeks a joint
model&lt;br/&gt;for asset markets and macroeconomic allocations. Generic
formulations for preferences and technologies provide restrictions on
elasticities which should prove generally useful. The role of key frictions and
features shall be clarified. A DSGE model suitable for studying monetary policy,
while delivering key asset market observations, extends the existing literature.
The third project is motivated by recent events. While reminiscent of a classic
bank run, a key difference is that the assets of shaky financial institutions
are marketable at least in principle. The proposed research contributes to the
literature of constructing a model of a systemic bank run, filling this gap in
our understanding. The proposal furthermore contributes to the literature of the
special role of fiscal policies during a financial crisis.&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact of Proposed Activity&lt;br/&gt;The interrelationship between asset
markets and financial intermediaries on the one side and macroeconomic behavior
on the other as well as appropriate policy responses to disturbances in the
financial sector have become a topic of considerable general interest. This
research hopes to contribute to a deeper understanding of the issues involved,
which may be of help for the relevant policy institutions.