* 0922046
* Nonparametric Identification and Estimation of Distributions of Unobserved Heterogeneity in Economic Choice Models using Mixtures
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2010
* Jeremy Fox, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 09/30/2010
* USD 160,025.00

Structural economic choice models show how individual agents (firms, consumers,
workers) make choices under different choice sets. There is no reason to believe
that the parameters of these models are the same for all agents: agents will
make different choices when faced with the same choice set. As the parameters
vary across agents, the goal of empirical work with these models is to estimate
the distribution of unobserved heterogeneity, or the distribution of random
coefficients. This distribution is needed to calculate the welfare effects of a
policy (say consumer surplus from a tax policy) or to compute demand for a new
good, out of sample. In terms of statistical theory, a model with unobserved
heterogeneity is called a mixtures model. The statistics literature has focused
attention on mixtures of distributions in some parametric class, such as
mixtures of normals. Much less attention has been paid to using the tools of
mixtures to study more complex nonlinear statistical models, such as structural
economic choice models. Nonparametric identification shows that one particular
distribution of unobserved heterogeneity is consistent with limiting information
on conditional outcome probabilities. We show identification using cross-
sectional data on agents facing different choice sets. The statistics literature
establishes that linear independence of the class of models being mixed over is
necessary and sufficient for identification. This condition is difficult to
algebraically verify for economic choice models. This project introduces a new
condition, reducibility, that is sufficient for linear independence and hence
identification. Reducibility is a property of economic models that can be easily
verified, as is shown for a group of models of wide empirical use in economics.
After showing identification, parametric or nonparametric distributions of
unobserved Heterogeneity can be more confidently estimated. The most common tool
for estimating mixtures models is the EM algorithm, which is certainly
applicable. However, the EM algorithm has numerical issues and may be
inappropriate for economic choice models that themselves require complex
calculations, such as dynamic programming models. This project introduces a new,
computationally simple mixtures estimator to resolve these issues. The estimator
is nonparametric.

BROADER IMPACT: The main broader impact will be to make the identification and
estimation of distributions of unobserved heterogeneity (random coefficients)
much simpler. This is done on two fronts: making the conditions for showing
identification of new models easier to verify and introducing a computationally
simple estimator. Models of choice by economic agents are used every day in
thousands of empirical applications. For example, the decision of a married
woman to participate in the labor market induces a selection problem: wages are
observed only for the women who do work. The preferences and job opportunities
of those observed to work are not representative of those who do not work.
Jointly estimating the participation and wages decisions is necessary to resolve
this selection problem. Understanding this process is necessary for
understanding changes in the gender-wage gap over the last 30 years. For another
example, consider the environmental economics problem of forecasting electricity
use for appliances. The only data available on an appliance?s electricity use
are for those consumers who buy the appliance, a selected sample. Changing the
prices (say from a tax) of the appliances or of electricity itself will shift
both the set of consumers who buy the appliance and electricity use conditional
on buying. Estimating the distribution of heterogeneity is necessary for
computing welfare measurements of the effect of the tax. One of the
investigators has used these methods to estimate the consumer welfare
implications of mergers of wireless carriers, the response of teacher attendance
in India to financial incentives, and the job mobility response of experienced
engineers to wage offers from competing firms. Overall, we see showing
identification as making economists and statisticians more comfortable with
estimating complex models. We hope to place these models on firm theoretical
ground, so policymakers and other researchers treat results from these models
with more confidence. We also expand the class of models that will be estimated.
As parametric versions of some of these methods are in constant use in empirical
work, we see this work as having tremendous impact of all areas of applied
economics and related fields. One of the investigators has taught a mini course
to graduate students and established researchers on these techniques at INSEE-
CREST / ENSAE in Paris, France. Both investigators are teaching these techniques
to PhD students at their home institutions and will do so more intensively for
the undergraduate and graduate students funded by this grant.