* 0922576
* Collaborative Research:   LiT:  Effects of environmental oxygen on growth and physiological performance in the American alligator: A case study in experimental paleophysiology
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Kevin Middleton, University Enterprises Corporation at CSUSB
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 06/30/2013
* USD 59,619.00

The atmosphere serves as a source of oxygen (O2) for all organisms that rely on
O2 to power their metabolism. Today, the level of atmospheric O2 is
approximately 21%, however over the past 550 million years O2 levels may have
risen as high as 30-35% and dropped as low as 12%. Geologists have long
recognized that large-scale fluctuations in atmospheric O2 would have had
significant effects on the physiology of contemporary organisms and have
hypothesized that changes in the ancient atmosphere resulted in significant
behavioral, physiological and ecological adaptations. This collaborative
research will recreate ancient atmospheric O2 conditions in order to investigate
the effects of chronic hypoxia (low oxygen) and hyperoxia (high oxygen) on
embryonic development, physiological function and the skeletal system of the
American alligator. Alligators are a "cold blooded" representative of a large
vertebrate group, Archosauria, which also includes dinosaurs and bird.
Archosaurs originated in the Late Permian (ca. 280 million years ago) when the
atmosphere was O2 rich and experienced the Late Triassic (circa 220 mya) when
the atmosphere was O2 poor. Alligators obviously survived (and thrived) despite
large-scale fluctuations in atmospheric O2. This will be the first such study in
a post-embryonic vertebrate animal engaging in a wide variety of natural
behaviors (rest, voluntary and forced activity, recovery from exercise,
digestion, fasting) chronically exposed to different O2 levels. Alligator eggs
will be incubated under six treatments: hypoxia (12 and 16%), normoxia (21%) and
hyperoxia (25, 30 and 35%). Developmental progress, incubation time, hatching
success and whole- embryo metabolic rate will be recorded. After hatching, some
alligators will continue growing under the same conditions as during incubation.
Others will be transferred between treatments, in order to determine whether
(and how) the O2 environment of the embryo constrains the anatomy and physiology
of the hatchling. This collaborative project will bring together three
laboratories with different scientific emphases - whole-animal physiology, bone
histology and molecular biology - and will broaden our understanding of how
interactions of physiological, anatomical and biochemical processes are
integrated to determine overall organismal performance. This project will train
undergraduates, graduates and postdoctoral fellows, and provide a framework
within which to analyze systems in terms of environmental influences on
organismal form and function, and to place research results within developmental
and/or evolutionary trajectories. Results from this project will find direct
industry application by improving alligator farming methods, and the wealth of
data and tissue samples generated by our experiments will be shared with other
researchers via the Alligator Tissue Bank at UC Irvine. Finally, this project
will include a strong outreach component to both K-12 students and their
teachers, primarily from schools representing high-minority and low
socioeconomic areas in Southern California. The integrative nature of the
project will allow us to design inquiry-based demonstrations and educational
modules, using raw data generated from experiments, which address several life
and earth science educational content standards.