* 0922186
* Paleoecologic gradient analysis of the Frasnian/Famennian extinction and recovery
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Andrew Bush, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 08/31/2012
* USD 182,411.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Paleoecologic gradient analysis of the
Frasnian/Famennian extinction and recovery&lt;br/&gt;Andrew M. Bush and
Christophe Dupraz&lt;br/&gt;University of Connecticut&lt;br/&gt;EAR -
0922186&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT &lt;br/&gt;A number of times during life's
history, biodiversity was decimated by mass extinctions that wiped out a large
proportion of the Earth's species. The five largest mass extinctions of the
prehistoric world are known as the "Big Five" (the dinosaurs died out in the
fifth and most recent), and the present-day, human-induced extinction has been
called the "Sixth Extinction". This ongoing extinction, along with the
environmental changes that are causing it, will have important effects on
biological communities in the coming decades?for example, as the climate changes
and as competitors or predators go extinct, species' geographic and ecological
ranges may shift, leading to new communities composed of unexpected combinations
of species. We would like to predict the nature of these changes?after all,
these communities provide us with habitat and resources, and the shifting of
species has important economic consequences. One way to forecast biotic
responses to extinction and environmental change is to study past responses to
similar changes?that is, to study mass extinctions in the fossil record. Did
extinctions simply produce "thinned out" communities that were similar to
previous ones, merely with some species removed? Or did species expand into new
habitats and ecological niches once predators and/or competitors were
eliminated? Perhaps a changing environment produced communities composed of
novel combinations of species.&lt;br/&gt;Some mass extinctions were probably too
large and catastrophic to provide close analogues to the modern world (e.g., the
Permian-Triassic extinction); a less severe extinction in which a greater
proportion of species survived provides a more direct model. The Late Devonian
extinction (specifically, the event at the Frasnian-Famennian boundary) provides
a reasonable comparison, and this project will contrast fossil assemblages that
formed before and after the extinction. Collected in New York and Pennsylvania,
these assemblages are the fossilized remains of communities that lived in a
shallow sea that covered the area in the Devonian. PIs will combine ecological
gradient analysis with a sedimentological analysis to document the environments
in which each species lived before and after the extinction, and any changes
through time. They will also examine any changes in co-occurrence patterns among
species. The results will cast light not just on biotic changes in the Devonian,
but also, hopefully, on those in the coming century.