* 0922879
* MRI:   Acquisition of LTQ-Orbitrap High Resolution Mass Spectrometer
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Mark Running, Donald Danforth Plant Science Center
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2012
* USD 869,695.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). Award Abstract

A grant has been awarded to the Donald Danforth Plant Science Center to acquire
high-resolution mass spectrometry for research in proteomics and metabolomics.
The Proteomics & Mass Spectrometry Facility (PMSF) at the Danforth Center will
house the NSF-supported acquisition of a Thermo LTQ Orbitrap MS, an Eksigent
2D-nanoLC, and an Advion Triversa nanospray robot to support research of
scientists at the Danforth Center, our partner institutions, and collaborators.
As the depth and breadth of current biological research continues to expand, the
ability to detect, identify, and characterize biomolecules remains an essential
component in the elucidation of complex cellular processes. High-resolution MS
capabilities are essential for full characterization of both small (metabolite)
and large (peptide/protein) molecules. Examples of projects supported though
this proposal include: analysis of the mechanism and function of lipid post-
translational modification of proteins, the analysis of metabolic flux in the
development of third generation biofuel systems, the analysis of the formation
of diverse isoquinoline alkaloids that will be studied in both the animal and
plant kingdoms, and the direct and collateral consequences of proteome
alterations, and the determination of the alkaloid metabolome of transgenic
opium poppies.

This project seamlessly integrates state-of-the-art research and education. It
supports the training of undergraduate and graduate students, postdoctoral
associates, and senior personnel in the ever-growing analytical field of mass
spectrometry. This instrumentation will promote interdisciplinary research
leading to increased knowledge in the areas of plant proteomics and
metabolomics. The capabilities afforded by a high resolution mass spectrometer
will be accessible to and utilized by a large audience through placement in PMSF
and through outreach programs at the Center and participating universities.
Knowledge gained through utilization of this equipment will, per the Danforth
Center mission, enhance the nutritional content of plants to improve human
health, increase agricultural production to gain a competitive edge over
commodity crops and harness agriculture research to create new and increased
value for farmers, and support research to create new biofuels and biorenewable
products that contribute to an expanding "growing green" initiative that will
have local, regional and national impacts.

Project outcomes, including information regarding the instrumentation and
publications resulting from projects using the instrumentation, will be
available on the PMSF website: http://www.danforthcenter.org/pmsf/.
Additionally, peer-reviewed publications resulting from this funding will be
posted on the corresponding NSF award website.