* 0922964
* Brain Diversity Develops at the Boundaries
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Jeffrey Streelman, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* James Deshler
* 08/31/2012
* USD 300,000.00

The brain is one of the best-studied vertebrate organs, and yet biologists know
very little about how the diversity of brain structure evolves. In this project
the primary investigator and team members will use the techniques of
developmental biology to ask (i) when variation in brain size and shape is first
observed and (ii) which gene networks contribute to this variation. Experiments
will be conducted on cichlid fishes from Lake Malawi, East Africa, where brain
diversity is comparable to that seen across mammals. The investigators will test
the hypothesis that brain diversity develops early in development as major
neural boundaries are established. This project provides training opportunities
for minority graduate students and provides educational opportunities for
undergraduate and graduate students worldwide. The project involves faculty,
postdocs, graduate students and undergraduates participating in
interdisciplinary biology training programs. Presently, the research team is
heavily invested in community education, employing cichlid biological diversity
as a model to develop teacher education programs and high school curricula,
geared to address new Georgia Performance Standards. In the future students will
build lecture modules to be posted at the web resource Connexions
(http://cnx.org/). These lecture modules can be shared with students globally
and can be compiled into web-based courses.