* 0922691
* MRI:  Acquisition of a 400 MHz NMR Spectrometer to Enhance Undergraduate Research and Research Training
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Brian Johnson, College of Saint Benedict
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2012
* USD 364,681.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award from the Major Research
Instrumentation (MRI) program, Edward J. McIntee, Kate Graham, Brian Johnson,
Thomas Jones and Chris Schaller from the College of Saint Benedict will acquire
a 400 MHz NMR spectrometer to support chemical research of faculty and their
undergraduate research students. Proposed research spans a number of areas in
chemistry, including: 1) the synthesis and development of a biomarker for
Benzo[a]pyrene exposure; 2) the development of low molecular weight protein
tyrosine phosphatase inhibitors; 3) the synthesis of models for the trinuclear
site in multicopper oxidases; 4) the development of organometallic catalysts; 5)
the study of natural products isolated from fungi; and 6) the study of alkynoic
acid cyclization reactions. The instrumentation will be available to chemistry
students at the College of Saint Benedict (a women's college) as well as Saint
Joseph's University, and other nearby institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nuclear
Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools
available to chemists for the elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is
used to identify unknown substances, to characterize specific arrangements of
atoms within molecules, and to study the dynamics of interactions between
molecules in solution. Access to state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential
to chemists who are carrying out frontier research. The results from these NMR
studies will have an impact in synthetic organic/inorganic chemistry and
biochemistry. Students receiving training with this instrumentation will be
prepared for post-baccalaureate work in chemistry and for careers in science and
technology.