* 0922528
* The integration of cellular stress response, immune function and aging in long- and short-lived ecotypes of garter snake
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2009,12/31/2014
* Anne Bronikowski, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kimberly Hammond
* 12/31/2014
* USD 656,563.00

Aging is the predictable and persistent breakdown of physiological processes
with advancing age. In humans, this is marked by many changes such as: muscle
atrophy, central obesity, slowed metabolism, loss of bone mass, decreasing
neurological function, increasing risks of geriatric cancers, increased risk of
infectious disease, etc. Many laboratory studies (e.g., on mice, rats, non-human
primates) have shown that individuals vary in how quickly they senesce
(deteriorate with advancing age) and that much of this individual variation is
due to differences among individuals in cellular stress responses and immune
function. Moreover, certain populations of humans have been identified that are
very resistant to senescence, and the underlying genes - when identified, are
often involved in stress response and immune function. In this project, the
investigators will conduct experiments in a group of organisms that are highly
resistant to senescence (reptiles). The focus is on natural populations of
garter snakes that have evolved different lifespans. They will generate a new
model to study aging, and in doing so uncover the mechanisms that link
individual deterioration to overall organismal health in a system of populations
exposed to natural hazards. Specifically, they will answer the question of how
the immune and cellular stress response systems modulate senescence in a life-
history framework, both as independent systems and as synergistic interacting
systems. In addition, they will train high school teachers, high school
students, undergraduates, and post-graduates in a variety of physiological
assays to measure aging, and expand their exposure to the biology of aging. This
research will add to the body of scientific knowledge to elucidate the
physiological mechanisms that underlie aging rates in vertebrates, including
humans.