* 0922087
* Village Democracy in China
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Nancy Qian, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 09/30/2013
* USD 285,084.00

Objectives and Methods to be Employed: The purpose of this project is to
assemble data on the economic and political history of rural China since the
early 1980s. In 1987, an Organic Law on Village Committees was approved, which
included several institutional reforms, the most important of which was the
introduction of democratic village elections. Gradually put into effect during
the 1980s and 1990s, these reforms and their implementation provide an
unprecedented setting for the study of political and economic reforms. The
Research Center of Rural Economics (RCRE) in China has been conducting yearly
economic surveys on over 300 randomly selected villages across rural China. For
this project, the China Center for Economic Research (CCER), in collaboration
with the RCRE, will conduct a survey on the history of political reforms of
these villages, and match the survey data to existing panel data that is not
generally available for public use. As a consequence, a comprehensive new
dataset with a panel structure stretching across two decades will be created.
This unique dataset will address several research topics. This proposal
highlights two: 1) the impact of increased accountability on economic
performance; and, 2) a study to identify the social, economic and political
circumstances that are conducive to the adoption of
elections.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit of the proposed activity: The two-way
relationship between economic and institutional development is one of the most
fundamental topics in political economy and comparative politics. Most previous
studies use cross-country comparisons. This is problematic, because
democratizations typically involve many simultaneous institutional changes and
often occur amidst economic and political turmoil. As a consequence, estimates
of the effects of democratization from these settings are typically confounded
by the influences of other factors. The controlled environment of China?s
dramatic rural reforms provides an unprecedented opportunity to estimate the
causal effect of introducing elections in an environment where democracy did not
previously exist; and separately identify the effects of different dimensions of
democracy. At the local level, the results from this study will shed light on
the effect of local democracy on public goods provision which will be relevant
for poverty alleviation and development beyond the Chinese context. At a broader
level, applying results from this study to other contexts must be done with
caution. However, China?s experience in gradual democratization and economic
growth should interest those who study political and economic transitions,
especially those who wish to find contrasting examples for other post-communist
countries. The results from China can also potentially shed light on the role
that grass-roots level democratic elections can play in non-democratic societies
more generally, an observed phenomenon that has not been rigorously documented
or studied quantitatively on a broad scale.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts resulting
from the proposed activity: Several aspects of this project fall under the
broader impact criteria defined by the NSF. This project bridges the fields of
political science and economics. It forges partnerships between academic
institutions in the U.S., an academic institution in Europe, and academic and
government institutions in China, a country that has historically been closed to
non-Chinese researchers. These partnerships will prove invaluable for future
data collection. Data collection and analysis for this project will provide
opportunities to support and train research assistants at Brown University, the
NBER, and Peking University. In addition to being of scientific interest, the
results will be extremely relevant for policy makers at organizations such as
the World Bank and the UNDP who are interested in implementing electoral reforms
and institutional development in non-democratic countries. Finally, an important
by-product of this project is a new dataset that can be used for a variety of
other studies of comparative politics, development economics and political
economy. Currently, there is no large scope data on the history of political
reforms in rural China. In addition to electoral reforms, the survey will also
contain questions regarding changes in other policies that need to be controlled
for in the statistical analysis and will give rise to future projects