* 0922330
* Collaborative Research:  Identification in Incomplete Econometric Models Using Random Set Theory
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2012
* Francesca Molinari, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2012
* USD 229,081.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This project would contribute to the literature on identification and inference
in incomplete econometric models. An econometric model may be incomplete when,
for example, sample realizations are not fully observable, or when the model
asserts that the relationship between the outcome variable of interest and the
exogenous variables is a correspondence rather than a function. In these cases,
the sampling process and the maintained assumptions are consistent with a set of
values for the parameter vectors (or statistical functionals) characterizing the
model. This set of values is the sharp identification region of the models
parameters. When the sharp identification region is not a singleton, the model
is partially identified. The investigators use the tools of random sets theory
to study identification in incomplete econometric models. These tools are
especially suited for partial identification analysis, because they provide
conditional and unconditional .probability distributions and expectations for
random sets, that allow researchers to characterize the identified features of a
model in the space of sets, in a manner which is the exact analog of how this
task is commonly performed for point identified models in the space of vectors.
The methodology that the investigators aim to develop focuses on a specific
class of incomplete models, for which it provides a computationally tractable
characterization of the sharp identification region. An incomplete model belongs
to the class treated in the proposed research, if it predicts a convex set of
conditional probability distributions of outcomes given covariates, rather than
a single conditional probability distribution. Examples of models in this class
include: static, simultaneous move finite games of complete information in the
presence of multiple mixed strategy Nash equilibria; and polychotomous choice
models with interval regressor data. These examples are explicitly analyzed in
the proposal. A computationally tractable characterization of the sharp
identification region of the parameters of models in this class was considered
unattainable in the related literature.

Partially identified models are ubiquitous in the recent theoretical and
empirical literature in economics. Although it sometimes is easy to characterize
their identification region explicitly, there exist many important problems in
which a tractable characterization is difficult to obtain. It may be
particularly difficult to establish sharpness, that is, to show that a
conjectured region contains exactly the feasible parameter values and no others.
Basing inference on a conjectured region which is not sharp may significantly
weaken the ability of the researcher to make useful predictions, and to test for
model misspecification. The intellectual merit of this proposal is twofold: (1)
To provide a methodological framework to obtain a computationally tractable
characterization of the sharp identification region of a model; (2) To provide
practitioners with ready to use software to apply this methodology and conduct
estimation and inference when point identification is not available.

Broader impacts: The proposed methodology for characterization and computation
of the sharp identification region enables practitioners to evaluate the
credibility of existing policy studies, and compare the results of different
approaches to policy research, by addressing both the identification aspects, as
well as the statistical inference aspects of the problem. This research program
aims to integrate teaching and research through research experience for
undergraduates, the use of graduate assistants, and the instruction of a
graduate course on inference in partially identified models using random sets
theory.