* 0922560
* Macromolecular Networks Underlying Chloroplast Biogenesis
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Alice Barkan, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 08/31/2014
* USD 4,021,469.00

PI: Alice Barkan (University of Oregon - Eugene)&lt;br/&gt;CoPI: Klaas van Wijk
(Cornell University)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chloroplasts are a defining feature of
plants, with diverse metabolic functions that profoundly impact plant yield and
response to environmental stress. Photosynthesis is the primary raison d'etre of
the chloroplast, and involves complex machinery whose biogenesis requires a
series of functionally and physically-connected gene expression and assembly
processes. The goal of this project is to advance understanding of the network
of DNA/RNA/protein interactions that underlie the biogenesis of the
photosynthetic apparatus in chloroplasts. Macromolecular assemblies selected for
study are anticipated to be rich in proteins of unknown function, and will be
dissected through concerted genetic, proteomic, and ribonomic analyses. Maize
will be the primary experimental organism because its attributes make it
especially well suited for these methods - it is an important crop species and a
prime model for understanding C4 photosynthesis. Selective comparisons with
Arabidopsis will facilitate extrapolation of results to both monocot and dicot
species. Nuclear genes required for chloroplast biogenesis will be discovered
through a high-throughput forward-genetic strategy that combines next generation
sequencing technologies with a deep collection of non-photosynthetic maize
mutants. Existing phenotypic data that place mutants into understudied
functional classes will be used to select 100 lines for this analysis. Protein
components of immunopurified macromolecular assemblies will be identified
through high sensitivity mass spectrometry. Antibody targets will include:
nascent peptide chains associated with translating polysomes to immunopurified
"factories" for the synthesis and assembly of chloroplast-encoded proteins;
proteins associated with the chloroplast chromosome; and proteins at the
interface of the chloroplast gene expression and protein folding/assembly
machineries. Newly-identified proteins will be functionally characterized by
reverse-genetics and phenotypic analyses, and by identification of their nucleic
acid ligands (where relevant). Finally, genome-wide RNA/DNA co-
immunoprecipitation assays will be used to identify the nucleic acids associated
with nucleic-acid interacting proteins identified via the genetic and proteome
approaches, and to explore the functions of organelle-dedicated RNA binding
protein families.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will be integrated with the
education of students at all levels. A summer research program for high school
students that centers on experiments integral to the goals of this project, and
that provides mentorship training for undergraduate and graduate students who
serve as teaching assistants will be developed at the University of Oregon. The
project will participate in existing programs at Cornell/BTI to provide research
training for undergraduate students from small institutions and to participate
in curriculum development workshops for high school teachers. Community
resources to be generated include: (i) interaction data, protein
identifications, and genetic data, all of which will be submitted to public
database repositories and used to develop functional annotations for several
hundred maize genes; (ii) ~100 mutant maize lines with an identified mutation
and characterized mutant phenotype, as well as several thousand sequence-indexed
transposon-insertions and associated maize stocks; and, (iii) maize organellar
microarrays and antibodies to various chloroplast proteins. The interaction data
will contribute to community efforts to develop a high quality plant interactome
data set. Interaction data and gene annotations will be disseminated through
centralized resources that include Gramene (http://www.gramene.org/), MaizeGDB
(http://www.maizegdb.org/), PlantGDB (http://www.plantgdb.org/), and the Plant
Proteome Database (PPDB; http://ppdb.tc.cornell.edu/). Maize stocks will be
provided to the Maize Genetics Coop Stock Center for distribution. Microarrays
and antibodies will be made available at cost by request.