* 0922985
*  MRI: Acquisition of a 3-Tesla Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI)
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Nathan Fox, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2011
* USD 1,936,855.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Studying activity of the human brain
non-invasively is a major scientific challenge, yet it is essential for
enhancing our understanding of the neural bases of action, emotion, and thought.
A major technological advancement in studying the neural basis of behavior has
been the development of functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), a
hemodynamic technique based on the tight coupling between neuronal activity and
oxygenated blood flow. fMRI is a powerful tool for non-invasively measuring
local changes in the brain with high spatial resolution (~1 mm) in the blood
oxygen level dependent (BOLD) signal. Additionally, structural imaging using MRI
can characterize volumetric differences in brain tissue and specify major
pathways of neural processing and transmission. These approaches can be combined
with other neuroimaging data examining the temporal dynamics of brain activity,
to establish a more complete understanding of the human brain and the neural
processes underlying human cognition, action, and emotion.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A state-of-the-art 3-Tesla Magnetic Resonance Imaging
(MRI) scanner will provide access to this powerful technology to the University
of Maryland College Park community for studying human brain activity. The MRI
scanner will serve as the centerpiece of the Brain Imaging Center at Maryland
(BICAM) and will transform the research and educational environment at the
University of Maryland. The scanner will provide the foundation for research in
cognitive and affective neuroscience, with specific foci on human development,
attention and memory, decision making and risk, motor-control, and language and
communication. The center will also create opportunities for innovations in
signal processing and magnetic resonance physics. The center and its shared
instrumentation will foster an intensive learning environment through the
integration of research and education within the University of Maryland and
through its partnerships in the local community. The MRI scanner will enhance
graduate and undergraduate education through directed research projects, courses
with a hands-on focus in functional neuroimaging, and accessibility to students
from underrepresented groups. The center will also sponsor a summer institute in
developmental cognitive neuroscience which will bring experts in the study of
brain development and neuroimaging to the University of
Maryland.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BICAM is part of the Neuroscience and Cognitive
Science (NACS) program at the University of Maryland. This program consists of
faculty from traditional behavioral and neuroscience departments such as
Psychology, Human Development, Linguistics, Hearing and Speech, and Kinesiology,
as well as faculty from Computer Science, Physics, Applied Mathematics, and
Electrical and Computer Engineering with expertise in imaging, signal
processing, and the physical basis of magnetic resonance technology. Acquisition
of the new scanner will lead to broad interdisciplinary collaboration in areas
of the basic physical and behavioral sciences with the goal of understanding the
neural bases of behavior.