* 0922631
* MRI:   Acquisition of a multi-photon imaging and electrophysiology rig
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Roger Sloboda, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 07/31/2013
* USD 730,184.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The combined use of microscopy and high-resolution fluorescence imaging is a
fundamental tool for exploration of the physical and biological world. This
Major Research Instrumentation grant from the NSF provides the Dartmouth
community with a state-of-the-art multi-photon microscopy facility that will
drive three broad lines of scientific inquiry. The first research area is
exploring fundamental properties of the mammalian central nervous system,
including neural development and neuronal signaling, in vitro and in vivo. A
second line of research is investigating fundamental aspects of cellular
biology, including cellular signaling and intracellular trafficking of proteins.
A third avenue of research will explore novel uses for multi-photon imaging for
biological and non-biological applications. All of these research areas benefit
from the increased quantum efficiency and reduced phototoxicity and photo-
bleaching that are inherent in multi-photon imaging. The NSF-provided multi-
photon imaging facility greatly enhances and expands the research capabilities
of a broad range of laboratories at Dartmouth, and is fostering new
collaborative research projects among a diverse group of users. New findings
will be disseminated through journal publications, conference presentations, and
local media. In addition to facilitating research, the multi-photon imaging
facility is advancing the education and training of the next generation of
scientific investigators. Training in advanced optical techniques is made
available to more than 200 laboratories across the institution, including more
than 250 graduate students. Access to this new instrumentation increases the
research opportunities and experiences available to Dartmouth graduate students
and postdoctoral fellows.