* 0922525
* Molecular Evolution of Hominoid Proteins
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Michael Jensen-Seaman, Duquesne University
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 08/31/2013
* USD 293,918.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The underlying genetic basis behind
anatomical, physiological, or behavioral adaptations arising during the
evolution of humans and great apes (hominids) remains largely unknown.
Observable change may come from changes to protein-coding genes, from changes in
the regulation of genes, or changes in the way proteins are modified after their
production. One such physiological adaptation whose molecular basis is unknown
is the unique species-specific characteristics of proteins which correlate with
social structure and mating systems among hominid species. This study will
examine the rates and patterns of molecular evolution at male reproductive genes
in hominids, determine the relative abilities of different species' promoters to
drive transcription at ten genes that code for specific proteins, identify the
protein constituents from several species, and use patterns of variation within
species to make inferences regarding the mode and tempo of natural selection
acting on important reproductive genes. This may shed light on our understanding
of the evolution of human social behavior. A particularly unique aspect of this
research is its multifaceted approach to examining the evolution of a
physiological system by examining changes in protein-coding portions of genes,
changes in gene regulation, and changes in amounts of proteins and their
modifications, in a cross-species comparative context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
multifaceted approach to studying this relatively simple physiological system
may serve as a model for addressing the more general question of how, at the
molecular level, do complex human phenotypic adaptations evolve, including our
large brain and bipedalism. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A broader impact is that this
this comparative view may lead to a better, and more holistic, understanding of
human reproductive biology. This project will support one postdoctoral
researcher and one graduate student as well as provide training for several
undergraduates in molecular techniques and evolutionary theory.