* 0922589
* RAPID: Pre-disturbance surveys of wood loads in headwater streams of the Colorado Front Range
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2010
* Ellen Wohl, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 05/31/2010
* USD 30,435.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Wood plays a critical goal in regulating the flow dynamics of headwater streams
in mountain areas. The pine beetle is currently making its way across the
forests of the Colorado Rocky Mountains and threatens to change the amount and
distribution of wood in these stream environments. The speed of beetle
infestation and tree die-off makes it imperative to quickly document pre-
disturbance conditions in relatively unaffected headwater streams, not least
because the recovery times of these streams are likely to be at least a century.
The presence of numerous standing dead trees will initially increase wood load
to adjacent stream channels, but the lag created by slow forest regrowth will
eventually result in substantial decreases in wood load. Creation of baseline
inventories of wood loads now, prior to widespread beetle die-off enable an
analysis of the effects of forest changes on stream flow and geomorphology. This
research will focus on a widespread survey of existing wood loads along
undisturbed headwater streams of the Colorado Front Range. Additional objectives
are to relate observed variations in wood load to geomorphic and ecological
variables and to develop guidelines for use of wood in restoration of streams
following timber harvest of beetle-killed trees.

Since wood is so important in regulating the environment of headwater streams,
stream restoration following timber harvest is likely to include artificial
reintroduction of wood to channels. This project will provide needed information
about optimal restoration strategies by carrying out a widespread survey of
existing wood loads in a range of undisturbed headwater channels during summer
2009. The primary objective is to document wood loads along undisturbed
headwater streams of the Colorado Front Range. Additional objectives are to
relate observed variations in wood load to geomorphic and ecological variables
and to develop guidelines for use of wood in restoration of streams. The project
will conduct basic wood surveys along 20 stream reaches, each of which is 10 km
in length. The significance of this project includes: development of the first
extensive regional database for the semarid Rocky Mountains on spatial
variations in wood load within undisturbed headwater streams; education of
students; development of guidelines for management and restoration of instream
wood; and outreach to the public regarding the effects of beetle kill and timber
harvest on headwater streams.