* 0922344
* Swept under the rug:   A systematic analysis of genetic background effects in Drosophila
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Ian Dworkin, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 08/31/2013
* USD 479,999.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is well known that mutations in a
sequence of DNA can have profound physical (phenotypic) effects. However, it is
less well appreciated that the phenotypic consequences of such mutations depend
on more than just the changes in the DNA sequence of that gene. Although the
changes in the DNA are important, their phenotypic consequences can be modified
both by the environment and by the genetic make-up of the individual possessing
the mutation. In other words, two individuals possessing exactly the same
mutation may not show the same phenotype, given that they have experienced
different environments, and that the remainders of their genomes may be quite
different. The consequences of the differences between their genomes are known
as "genetic background effects", and while well known among geneticists, they
have rarely been the focus of scientific studies. In this project, a series of
mutations in a set of Drosophila melanogaster genes will be used to address
several outstanding questions pertaining to the effects of an organism's genetic
background. First, the genetic modifiers contributing to genetic background
effects will be mapped to determine how they contribute to other phenotypes. The
second goal of this project is to understand how pervasive such genetic
background effects are in other genetic analyses. Finally, technologies that
allow for the simultaneous examination of the transcriptional activity of all of
the genes in the genome will be used to compare and test models pertaining to
the consequences and causes of genetic background effects and variation in the
strength of the mutations under study. The results from this research should
help to provide a framework for a broader understanding of the spectrum of
effects for a given mutation, and for series of mutations within and between
genes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal intellectual merit of this project is
that it will provide a systematic analysis of the consequences of genetic
background effects, and thus will address the importance of genetic background
effects for genetic studies and analyses. If the planned work confirms the
preliminary results, this research could change how genetics is taught and how
genetic analyses are performed. In addition, graduate students working on the
project will receive mentoring and training, thus developing technical
analytical skills in genetics, genomics, and statistics. To help to correct
public misconceptions pertaining to genetics, the principal investigator has
initiated a "blog" for genetics education for the general public. The blog will
focus on correcting the misconception that genes encode traits, rather than
variants of genes (alleles) that influence phenotypes. In addition, using recent
examples "translated" from the literature (genesgonewild.blogspot.com), the blog
will also discuss conditional effects of mutations and alleles, and the context-
dependence of these effects (context referring to environment and genetic
background).