* 0922327
* Identification and Inference in Some Econometrics Models
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Elie Tamer, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2013
* USD 234,794.00

This proposal furthers the investigator?s previous work on identification and
inference in econometric models and involves a detailed research agenda. The
emphasis in this agenda is on the identification and estimation problems which
arise in parametric models with plausible and easily interpretable assumptions.
This proposal consists of four projects that study identification and inference
in empirically relevant models. The proposal provides empirical researchers with
a richer menu of approaches to tackle problems using more robust methods, and
hence advances the econometric literature in relevant and important
directions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research projects in this proposal
provide an array of econometric models that are practical, useful, and of
immediate relevance to empirical work. The proposed econometric models advance
research on identification and estimation of the identified features in
important classes of parametric models. For example, in the first project
generalizes the classical selection model of Heckman and Gronau to the
multivariate case with multiple decision makers where the participation stage
represents a game of complete information. This model is highly relevant to
empirical economists estimating differentiated product demand for example in
that it allows them to examine the effect of selection, or endogenous product
qualities, on parameter estimates. The second project plans on providing methods
to conduct inference in semiparametric likelihood models that are robust to
failure of point identification. This project is relevant to a wider class of
models that are used in both labor and industrial organization. This sensitivity
analysis approach to inference is important and can be used to answer similar
questions in a wide variety of partially identified models. The third project
introduces the novel concept of median uncorrelation that parallels the familiar
and heavily used concept of mean (linear) uncorrelation. We then easily show
that this concept leads to transparent estimators for linear instrumental
variable regressions with quantile restrictions. This is a widely used area in
empirical economics. The fourth project furthers the work of the investigator on
inference in nonlinear models with generalized forms of censoring by providing
new ways to estimate Roy type selection models with panel data. This class of
models is very important and empirically relevant and illustrates this approach
in an empirical example using real world data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts of the proposal: The research described in this proposal provides a new
framework for inference, and outlines practical empirical strategies that can be
widely used. It provides applied economists and policy makers with a richer set
of tools to conduct robust inference and influence policy. This proposal also
integrates the research agenda on identification and inference in econometric
models into an educational plan that will not only directly benefit graduate
students, but will also provide research opportunities for outstanding
undergraduates, and involve and interest computational economists and computer
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;