* 0922045
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Motives for Consuming, Sharing and Trading Wildlife in Urban Cameroon
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2009,11/30/2010
* Shannon Randolph, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 11/30/2010
* USD 15,000.00

Doctoral student Shannon Randolph, under the supervision of Dr. James Holland
Jones and colleagues at Stanford University, will undertake research on the
social dimensions of the African wildlife trade in urban Cameroon. Preliminary
ethnographic research in the Cameroonian capital, Yaound√©, indicates that elite
consumers may gain prestige and alliance benefits in the covert trade of
increasingly rare forest animals. If confirmed, this finding would challenge the
prevailing notion that urban poor Africans are the primary consumers and traders
of wildlife. The explanation for this difference may lie in the distinction
between the market for rare species, which involves elite consumers and high
prices, versus common species and everyday
trading.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Randolph will use ethnographic methods to
investigate the role of kinship, social status, and economic status in the
distribution and consumption "bushmeat." She also will collect data to construct
ego-centric networks through which she will study social and demographic traits
of consumers and sellers, hidden social aspects of the urban trade, and the
cultural prestige benefits derived by individual consumers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the segmentation of the bushmeat trade will
enable more effective partnering of conservation and development policies to
simultaneously address urban livelihood issues for traders and targeted trade
regulation for threatened and endangered species. Additionally, because bushmeat
consumption has been linked to a variety of health issues, the project will
contribute to public health policy. This project is particularly significant
because of the urban focus of the research, an aspect of African wild game
market studies that remains largely unstudied. Through collaborative efforts
with the Johns Hopkins Cameroon Program and the training of Cameroonian
university students as research assistants, this research will also contribute
to capacity building and shared knowledge with African partners, as well as the
training of an American social scientist.