* 0922531
* Global Prices and Incomes 1200-1950 - Stage 3
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2009,04/30/2014
* Peter Lindert, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 04/30/2014
* USD 485,796.00

The Global Price and Income History (GPIH) Group expands its mission of
supplying data and reinterpreting global patterns in incomes and purchasing
power in three ways. First, the Group continues building its supply of
downloadable data sets on prices, wages, and income distributions. A key
advantage of these data sets is that all historical measures are reported in
standard metric equivalents, as well as in the units of the primary historical
sources. This facilitates comparisons between distant places, instead of the old
specific index numbers. Second, several GPIH group members continue to shift
toward interpretations of the global data patterns revealed through this
project. Three members have books coming out soon, and are moving on to further
interpretive books and articles that should enrich the study of world history.
Third, this project shifts toward more national income accounting from the
income side (as opposed to the expenditure or production sides). The income-side
approach offers fresh insights into the history of income distribution. Its use
of nominal incomes and new GPIH Group price deflators is also a valuable
crosscheck on the real product measures offered by past scholarship.
Specifically, this project uses archival materials to develop new measures of
income, wages, and prices in these historical settings: pre-revolutionary
Russia, pre-Revolutionary China, Vietnam since 1880, ancient Japan (1000-1600),
South Africa 1650- 1800, eight countries of Latin America 1700-1910, and the 13
colonies/United States 1774 and 1800.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;Ten research collaborators are just starting their careers, and stand
to gain from the research experience of this project. All the investigators
serve as teachers and mentors. Knowing the material standards and the price
incentives that humans faced around the world over eight centuries will offer
enormous new insights for environmental history and health history, in addition
to social science history. The investigators are happy to offer their results in
formats and writing styles accessible to non-scientists. Our data-supplying
services should be especially useful for scholars in countries that lack access
to extensive libraries or research centers. Undergraduate readers around the
world will also soon benefit from Global Economic History, currently being
written by Robert Allen for the Very Short Introduction series of Oxford
University Press. This will use the Groups global wages and prices to pursue the
question of why some countries are rich and others poor since 1500. In addition,
the projects estimates will eventually hook-up to the income estimates of the
International Comparisons Project (Penn World Tables), which are disseminated
through the UN, the World Bank, and the OECD, and other public agencies