* 0922728
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: The Effects of Marketing Systems on Market Knowledge
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2011
* Liliana Goldin, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 06/30/2011
* USD 10,317.00

Graduate student, Courtney M. Dowdall, supervised by Dr. Liliana Goldín (Florida
International University), will investigate the effects that different marketing
structures have on producer market knowledge. The research will be conducted
with three coffee producing cooperatives in the Western Highlands of Guatemala.
She will examine coffee producers' efforts to alter the commodity chain for
coffee. She will conduct a comparative analysis of three different forms of
market participation (FairTrade certification, non-certified fair trade, and the
national coffee organization) and compare middlemen and producer knowledge in
each form. The fair trade movement represents one potential solution to unequal
exchange relationships, but it is unclear if it is successful.

Dowdall will use multiple qualitative and quantitative social science methods,
including participant observation, semi-structured interviews, and cognitive
knowledge assessments. These data will allow her to document (1) how trade
partnerships are established, (2) the number and tasks of firms involved in the
commodity chain of each cooperative, (3) the value of the coffee product upon
leaving each successive firm, and (4) the relationship between the composition
of commodity chains and the market knowledge of cooperative members.

The research is important because it will contribute to better theorizing of the
middle-levels of economic globalization. It also will contribute to improved
economic development policy making by expanding understanding of commodity
prioducer options, decision-making, and knowledge sources. The award also
supports the education of a social scientist.