* 0923292
* MRI: Development of Rapid Annealing and in situ Characterization System
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2015
* Susil Putatunda, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 09/30/2015
* USD 454,457.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This instrument development project by a multi-
disciplinary team from Wayne State University creates a Rapid Annealing and
Characterization System (RACS) capable of rapidly annealing thin film samples
and nanomaterials prepared externally and then characterizing these samples in
situ using a variety of non-invasive techniques. With this highly flexible
system, the researchers will develop and improve techniques to characterize how
a variety of defects modify the materials properties. Defects, including
dislocations, grain boundaries, impurity dopants, and vacancies have been found
to dramatically alter the magnetic, electrical, and optical properties of
materials. These defects are important in establishing the properties of
nanomaterials, owing to the much higher surface to volume ratio than in bulk
systems. The eventual goal of this study, which will focus on nitrides and
superconducting thin films, is to control the type, density, and the
distribution of defects to enable the synthesis of materials having specifically
tailored properties. The custom designed vacuum chamber with rapid annealing
capabilities coupled to a Scanning Electron Microscope with Wave Dispersion
Spectrometer (WDS) using a proprietary airlock developed by JEOL will allow
researchers to modify the defect structure by thermal annealing in one chamber
and then conduct studies on the materials properties and defect structure in the
second chamber, all without exposing the samples to ambient conditions. The WDS
spectrometer is an important component of this study, as it will allow
researchers to determine the concentration of oxygen vacancies, which is
exceedingly difficult to determine using other techniques. The unique
capabilities of RACS will be utilized to systematically probe the effects of a
variety of defects on the fundamental properties of nanoscale systems, leading
to a deeper understanding of how to tune the materials properties in
nanostructured materials. Establishing the processing parameters for optimizing
materials properties using RACS would allow the development of scalable
fabrication protocols, which would promote the incorporation of these novel
nanostructured materials into commercial devices. The development of this system
will provide valuable training for a postdoctoral researcher as well as graduate
and undergraduate students, specifically including underrepresented minorities
in the Detroit metropolitan area.&lt;br/&gt;