* 0923642
* Control of Cerebral Cortical Proliferation
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Maria Donoghue, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* James Deshler
* 06/30/2012
* USD 528,869.00

The vast majority of the neurons of the mammalian brain are generated during
embryonic development. Thus, precise regulation of developmental cell division
is necessary so that the correct number of cells populates each part of the
brain in maturity. The cerebral cortex is the largest part of the brain and its
development is especially highly ordered: a combination of innate genetic
programs and environmental influences act together to control cell division
during the formation of the cortex. This project will focus on the role of one
kind of communication between dividing cell in controlling the extent of
cortical cell division. In particular, it will assess the influences of
signaling via the Eph receptor tyrosine kinases and the ephrin ligands in
modulating cerebral cortical cell division. The project uses cells in culture or
animal models, genetic and epigenetic approaches, and gain- and loss- of
function paradigms to investigate the role of Eph signaling in producing the
proper cellular composition in the developing mouse cerebral cortex.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will serve to train future scientific thinkers.
Housed in an undergraduate Biology Department, the Principal Investigator
teaches, mentors, and trains college students, both science and non-science
students, as well as Neuroscience graduate students. In addition, the PI is
actively engaged in promoting careers in science and increasing the numbers of
traditionally underrepresented groups in science through outreach work with the
community. The studies described in this project will further our understanding
of the role of cell-cell communication in corticogenesis and will introduce a
large number of students to scientific research. &lt;br/&gt;