* 0923142
* MRI: Acquisition of an Ultra-clean, Underground Electroforming and Parts Fabrication Instrumentation Facility
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* John Wilkerson, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 08/31/2011
* USD 690,069.00

The recent discoveries in neutrino physics, astrophysics, and cosmology have
revolutionized our view of neutrinos, dark matter, and the cosmos, while also
bringing forth an intriguing set of interconnected questions concerning
fundamental symmetries, the basic interactions of subatomic particles, and the
role neutrinos play in the universe. Next generation underground experiments
searching for the extremely rare processes that probe these questions require
ultra-clean materials, containing the smallest obtainable amounts of naturally
occurring radioactive uranium (U) and thorium (Th) decay-chain contaminants.
Contaminants at these levels will produce unacceptable backgrounds in many of
the planned new experiments, such as neutrinoless double beta-decay and dark
matter searches. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will provide funds for
advanced, ultra-clean electroforming instrumentation to be installed and
operated underground at the Sanford Underground Laboratory at Homestake in Lead,
SD. The initial use will be for the production of electroformed components for
the Majorana Demonstrator neutrino-less double beta decay experiment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Among the Broader Impacts of this award, the
instrumentation and laboratory will benefit future experiments and the field in
general. An additional benefit will be the training of students, technicians,
and scientists, from both South Dakota and the US, in electroforming methods and
low-background techniques. These are important disciplines that serve as a
foundation for a substantial component of underground science.