* 0923967
* STTR Phase II:  Development of an Innovative Warm Hydroforming System for Lightweight Alloys
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Patrick Cain, Interlaken Technology Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2012
* USD 548,022.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Research (STTR) Phase II project seeks
to develop analytical techniques for finite element simulations of the warm
hydroforming of aluminum, magnesium and other metals. This project will develop
and test fixtures and instrumentation. The project objectives will be to develop
methods and a system for simulating parts and validating designs prior to
prototyping and to develop advanced research warm hydroforming tooling with
optical measurement capabilities to validate the simulation and modeling method.
Warm hydroforming is of interest because many metals have improved forming
properties at moderately elevated temperatures, 450 °C or less. Warm
hydroforming differs from superplastic forming with a focus on conventional
alloys and short forming times. Warm hydroforming also requires lower forces and
pressures so the cost of heating can be offset by reduced mechanical system
requirements.

The broader impact/commercial potential from this technology will be the ability
for manufacturers to use lighter, more fuel efficient materials without
sacrificing strength, (automotive and aerospace industries) or to obtain shapes
not possible at room temperature. The value proposition offered by warm
hydroforming is: lighter weight materials can be formed with similar strength
characteristics, allowing for more efficient and environmentally friendly
vehicles and aircraft; greater deformations can be achieved without tearing or
fracturing reducing the need for machining or joining operations; allows the
creation of many features, such as mounting points or reinforcing ribs, in a
single step; eliminate process steps no longer needed with warm hydroforming
since parts are formed in one operation; and lower up front capital costs as the
force required to form materials at elevated temperatures is much lower than at
room temperature and this translates into significantly smaller, less expensive
presses and related equipment. While automotive warm hydroforming applications
have had high visibility, many other industries such as heating and air
conditioning, recreational vehicles and building products where aluminum
components are used could benefit from this technology and by introducing this
technology into those industries may make them more competitive and efficient.

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).