* 0923119
* MRI:   Acquisition of massively deep-read sequencing technology at NCSU
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2011
* William McMillan, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Vicki Martin
* 08/31/2011
* USD 452,502.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A grant has been awarded to North
Carolina State University to purchase a next generation "deep-read" sequencer.
The machine generates over 20 billion bases of nucleotide sequence per run in
the form of more than 400 million 50-72 base sequence fragments. It is an
essential tool in ongoing research requiring i) full genome and targeted
resequencing, ii) polymorphism detection, iii) small RNA discovery, and iv)
transcriptional profiling. The new equipment will be operated by NCSU's Genomic
Science Laboratory and will serve a diverse user community interested in
understanding the connections between an organism's genotype and its phenotype,
and for identifying the variation that underlies individual differences in
survival and reproduction. The equipment will transform ongoing research into i)
how microbial communities are structured, ii) the genetic basis of complex
traits, and iii) the origins and maintenance of biodiversity. The acquisition of
the new equipment is coupled with the establishment of core bioinformatics
support to accelerate the transition to the new technology throughout the larger
research community at NCSU. Moreover, the equipment (and data generated from it)
will be broadly incorporated into undergraduate and graduate curriculum and will
strengthen established i) graduate and undergraduate training programs in Genome
Science, Bioinformatics, and Biotechnology, ii) minority recruitment
initiatives, including NCSU's NSF-funded Alliances for Graduate Education and
the Professoriate program, and iii) community outreach programs such as NCSU
Summer College in Biotechnology and Life Sciences. This new equipment and the
associated training and educational initiatives help ensure that NSCU remains at
the forefront of genomic science. Results from the NCSU sequencing projects will
be disseminated through public databases, student and faculty presentations at
regional or national meetings, and through publication of peer-reviewed journal
publications.