* 0923449
* MRI: Acquisition of a Multipurpose X-Ray Diffractometer Enhancing Single-Crystal Structural Capabilities for the Midwest Region
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Kristin Bowman-James, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2012
* USD 500,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) program, Kristin
Bowman-James and colleague Victor W. Day from the University of Kansas,
Department of Chemistry will acquire a single crystal X-ray diffractometer with
a high intensity copper source to support research in 1) anion and cation
coordination chemistry, 2) azulene-based organometallic species as platforms for
molecular charge transport systems, 3) studies of structural, electronic, and
reactivity properties of peroxomanganese(III) complexes, 4) applications of
organopalladium chemistry to new synthetic methodologies, 5) decarboxylative
metalation and cross-coupling reactions and synthesis of chemical libraries via
C-H functionalization, and 6) mechanism of heme capture by the hemophore
secreted by pseudomonas aeruginosa.

The technique of single-crystal X-ray crystallography allows accurate and
precise determination of the full three dimensional structure of a molecule,
including bond distances and angles, and it provides accurate information about
the spatial arrangement of molecules relative to the neighboring molecules. The
high intensity X-ray source will facilitate the study of compounds that produce
small crystals or those that diffract poorly. These studies will have an impact
in a number of areas ranging from synthetic organic and inorganic chemistry to
systems of biological interest and materials research. This instrument will be
an integral part of teaching as well as research.