* 0923986
* SBIR Phase II:  A Novel, High-Dimensional Touchpad
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2009,02/29/2012
* Lester Ludwig, New Renaissance Institute
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 02/29/2012
* USD 618,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase II project addresses an opportunity to build on the recent
enthusiastic market acceptance in touch interfaces with a new exciting feature-
enhanced technology. The patented high-dimensional touchpad (HDTP) employs a
tactile matrix sensors to capture nuances of finger contact that current touch
interfaces cannot detect. Machine vision techniques are used to extract control
information from measured tactile contact and direct it to control a system or
device. The HDTP has all capabilities of available touch interfaces with far
more continuously-variable parameters from a single finger and numerous new
features. The SBIR Phase II project objectives are: 1) create a working HDTP
prototype from the test system of SBIR Phase I; 2) characterize suitability of
available tactile matrix sensors for commercial HDTP products; 3) develop
expanded repertoire of touch interactions combining existing techniques with
others unique to the HDTP; and 4) conduct human studies comparing the HDTP with
other touch interfaces. Expected outcomes of this Phase II project are: a
working prototype providing eight or more useful continuously-variable
parameters (four or more in a small area); identification of best suited
sensors; an expanded range of touch interaction techniques; human study results
showing HDTP capabilities surpasses those of other touch
interfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The past eighteen months have seen the
emergence of a new generation of touch interfaces that exploit multi-touch and
gesture interactions to create user interfaces substantially more usable than
other user interfaces. With the success of the iPhone, advanced touch interfaces
are now appearing in a variety of products ranging from laptop and multi-user
table-top computers to PDAs to competing smartphones to digital cameras. The
heightened interest in touch interfaces and their increasing prevalence make
finding ways to improve them especially important. Considerable effort is now
being devoted to developing advanced touch interfaces. The proposed project will
advance that research. As a high-dimensional touch interface operated in an
intuitive way with a wide range of powerful new capabilities, a large number of
possible applications, and well-suited for use in handheld devices, the HDTP has
the potential to be very widely adopted. Because of the size and number of
potential markets for the HDTP, even a modest market share in some of them could
result in substantial profits. Further, the HDTP's sensitivity and adaptability
makes it well-suited for use as an assistive device for the disabled, thus
promoting the goal of universal access.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;