* 0923027
* MRI: Acquisition of a tandem (IT-TOF) mass spectrometer system for biological research and application
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* George Bennett, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2014
* USD 410,301.00

0923027 San

The goal of this proposal is to establish a central mass spectrometry facility
for biological research and education. To achieve this goal, a multidisciplinary
research team has been assembled. Several of these team members share the same
research interests and synergistic collaborations/interactions among the group
already exist. The facility will support a wide range of research activities,
spanning across five academic departments which include: Bioengineering,
Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Civil and Environmental Engineering,
Biochemistry and Cell Biology, and Chemistry.

The facility will provide much needed quantitative and analytical
instrumentation for a number of biological projects. They propose to equip the
facility with an ion trap time of flight (2D-nano-LC-IT-TOF) mass spectrometer.
In addition, the mass spectrometer will be interfaced with a 2-D nano-LC system
to further enhance their analytical capability.

The instrumentation requested in this proposal will provide the necessary
quantitative and analytical tools for many projects at the interface of biology
and chemistry or engineering. These projects will result in a better
understanding of biological properties and functions, better design of
biocatalysts for the synthesis of bioproducts, and better strategies for
bioremediation. In addition, the facility will also serve as an effective
vehicle to foster and strengthen multidisciplinary interactions and generate new
ideas and collaborative projects.

The projects will provide training opportunities for graduate and undergraduate
students and postdoctoral research associates. Students participating in these
types of research projects will benefit from highly interdisciplinary training
in biochemical and metabolic engineering, biosystems engineering, biochemistry
and molecular biology. In addition, new laboratory modules, which will be
integrated into existing courses, will be developed. As in the past, the
laboratories will continue to provide training opportunities for many women and
minority graduate, undergraduate and high school students.