* 0923105
* MRI: Acquisition of a High-Resolution Scanning Electron Microscope for a Central Facility Supporting Interdisciplinary Research and Training
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Joseph Goldstein, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2012
* USD 511,143.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The funding will support the
acquisition of a high-resolution scanning electron microscope (HR SEM). The
instrument will be located in a new electron microscopy facility at the
University of Massachusetts Amherst that will serve both life and materials
sciences. For scientists wishing to investigate the smallest levels of
structure, the HR SEM has become indispensable. Not only does it possess a
resolution comparable to the transmission electron microscope, preparation of
samples for imaging in the microscope is straightforward. In addition to being
able to image the surface of the sample, thereby revealing its topography, the
instrument is also able to determine which elements are present in the structure
and at what concentration. The instrument will support the on-going research of
scientists at the University of Massachusetts Amherst as well as at the
surrounding colleges (Smith, Mount Holyoke, Amherst, and Hampshire). For
example, geoscientists are analyzing the composition of minerals, thereby
improving understanding of the Earth; chemists and polymer scientists are
investigating how to build devices, such photovoltaic cells, with superior
performance by being able to manipulate components at the smallest possible
scale; and biologists are elucidating how tiny filaments made by some bacteria
can act as electrically conducting wires and how plant cell walls help guide
cell development. All of these efforts, among many others, will be enhanced by
acquisition of the HR SEM. The instrument will be used in many courses, ranging
from upper level courses in theory and practice of SEM to more basic courses,
designed to stimulate powers of observation and reasoning. The primary expected
research outcome is the use of HR SEM data in publications. The new Central
Facility will collate all such papers and will provide appropriate access on its
web page. The expected educational outcomes are both conceptual (increasing
understanding of SEM) and practical (increasing expertise in this methodology).
The Central Facility will maintain a database on all courses taught, students
served, and where possible, on the subsequent careers of student users of the
instrument. &lt;br/&gt;