* 0923188
* MRI: Development of a Hybrid Wireless Network Infrastructure for Integrated Research and Education
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,05/31/2010
* Aaron Reinholz, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 05/31/2010
* USD 198,851.00

Proposal #: CNS 09-23188&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Du, Xiaojiang; Reinholz, Aron
J.&lt;br/&gt;Institution: North Dakota State University - Fargo&lt;br/&gt;Title:
MRI/Acq.: Dev.of a Hybrid Wireless Network Infrastructure for Integrated
Research and Education &lt;br/&gt;Project Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This project,
developing a Hybrid Wireless Network (HWN) to be built on top of an existing
Heterogeneous Sensor Network (HSN) testbed, supports research in broadband
wireless networking and communication enabling high-quality and high-accuracy
performance evaluations of protocols and schemes designed for HWNs. Research
projects include&lt;br/&gt;- Efficient Quality of Service (QoS) provisioning
and&lt;br/&gt;- Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiple Access (OFDMA) resource
allocation in HWNs.&lt;br/&gt;These projects are expected to satisfy individual
user's QoS requirements while optimizing the performance (e.g., throughput) of
the overall system. Although QoS support in traditional wireless networks and
OFDMA resource allocation in cellular networks have been well studied, in HWNs
QoS routing and OFDMA resource allocation are highly correlated and the problem
lends itself to further exploration. The HWN services faculty and students in
Computer Science and Electrical Engineering and 65 staff researchers at the
Center for Nanoscale Science and Engineering at the institution and nearby
universities. The work aims at integrating various aspects of educational and
training environment with innovative research into a cohesive package for
education in wireless networking and communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: Supported education and training activities include &lt;br/&gt;-
Recruiting students of underrepresented groups to participate in the research,
as well as mentoring&lt;br/&gt;- Developing a new course in Wireless Networking
and Communications&lt;br/&gt;- Integrating research and
education&lt;br/&gt;Native American, female, low income, and first generation
students will be specifically targeted in this EPSCoR state where 31% of the
undergraduate populations falls below the threshold for low-income US citizens.