* 0923539
* Collaborative Research MRI: Acquisition of Terrestrial Laser Scanning Systems for Earth Sciences Research
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2011
* David Phillips, UNAVCO, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 09/30/2011
* USD 145,753.00

0923539&lt;br/&gt;Miller&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funds from this collaborative
grant with Central Washington University (PI: Rubin; EAR-0923539) will support
acquisition of terrestrial laser scanning (TLS) equipment that will be made
available through the UNAVCO National Earth Science Geodetic Support Facility
equipment loan pool to the broader geoscience community. The TLS systems and
ancillary equipment including a digital camera and ruggedized field laptops will
facilitate research and research training applications that will take advantage
of the unique capability of TLS for sub-cm resolution mapping of natural and
manmade surfaces (e.g., rock outcrops, vegetation, beach profiles, snow pack,
civil structures). TLS technology is based on precise time-of-flight measurement
capability from a laser photon source to a target surface and return to a
detector with scanning ranges of up to 3 km. Rastering of the laser beam allows
for rapid, precision 3-D mapping of surface features. Coupled with GPS, TLS
scans can be accurately referenced to an appropriate datum. The addition of
digital photography yields photorealistic 3D images. TLS systems are portable
and therefore suitable for a wide spectrum of user applications in many
different environments. UNAVCO will provide user training through workshops and
outreach activities. &lt;br/&gt;