* 0923278
* Acquisition of a Computational Mathematics Cluster
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2010
* Peter Blomgren, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 07/31/2010
* USD 91,065.00

This award provides funds for the purchase of a 128-core Computational
Mathematics Cluster, to support computationally demanding research and
educational projects in mathematics at San Diego State University. The proposed
research encompasses projects in the following areas. (1) Modeling coupled
nonlinear navigational devices. This NSF-funded project focuses on the
theoretical and physical development of a new generation of navigational sensors
based on a combination of global positioning technology and coupled gyroscopes
and accelerometers. The resulting system offers superior sensitivity and
resistance to interference. (2) Reaction-diffusion equations on fluxional grids.
The nonlinear dynamics of flame pattern formation will be extended to model the
effects of temperature and mechanical perturbations, applying new methods in
bifurcation theory. (3) Simulation of high-speed combustion engines. An
increasingly popular engine design, employing a fine mist of liquid fuel
droplets in a carrier gas, will be modeled by particle-source-in-cell methods on
unstructured grids. (4) Coastal current simulations. Simulations employing
curvilinear coordinates will be carried out in order to forecast ocean currents
in Monterey Bay and other coastal waters. The model will ultimately include
geologic, chemical, and biological influences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cluster
will support graduate and undergraduate student research projects, including
projects that have led directly to student fellowships and subsequent
employment. Roughly 20% of the computing capacity of the requested cluster will
be dedicated yearround to undergraduate projects, including (1) senior thesis
research projects in applied mathematics and statistics; (2) in-class and
homework projects for new courses in mathematical modeling, simulations, and
biomathematics; (3) undergraduate research carried out under an existing,
externally funded fellowship program. SDSU occupies a strong position for making
these opportunities available to minorities underrepresented in mathematical
research, as one of the top ten campuses in the nation granting bachelor?s
degrees to ethnic minorities, and with 14 distinct programs to promote the
participation of underrepresented groups in the sciences.