* 0923926
* SBIR Phase II:  Semi-Automated Sports Video Search
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Michael Fleischman, Bluefin Lab, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 07/31/2012
* USD 997,550.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project objective is to
commercialize a novel technology for indexing video. The company's approach
automatically integrates information from speech, text, and video through
algorithms that generate rich semantic indexes for video. The Phase I results
show that this approach can be incorporated into a system that indexes video
with high accuracy and at a fraction of the cost of currently used methods.
Further, during the Phase I research, the company has identified a large and
growing consumer market (sports video) in which the technology can be applied.
The technical objectives of the Phase II proposal focus on working with such
partners to roll out initial Bluefin-powered applications, such as content-based
search and video-enriched fantasy sports. Such applications are currently not
feasible because of the low accuracy of automated indexing methods and the high
cost of manual approaches to indexing video.

Millions of hours of new video content are coming online every month, feeding an
exploding demand and reshaping the nature of the Internet. Just as text-oriented
search engines were necessary to empower users to find what they needed during
the first phase of the text-centric Internet, a new generation of technology
will be necessary to organize and effectively find content in the fast-
approaching video-dominated era of the Internet. Bluefin Lab is pioneering a new
approach to video organization and search by commercializing cross-modal
algorithms developed in Academe. While this differentiated technology can be
leveraged in several target markets, the company's initial focus is on sports
media where it will power a unique experience for video search, video-enhanced
fantasy sports, and other video-centric applications.

