* 0923679
* Molecular Mechanisms of Dynamic Protein Localization in the Bacterial Cell
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Harley McAdams, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 08/31/2013
* USD 942,968.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit. The past decade has
seen a profound shift in our understanding of the bacterial cell. It is now
clear that the three-dimensional organization of the cell is an integral
component of the function of cellular regulatory pathways. The bacterial cell is
highly organized, with many specifically and dynamically localized regulatory
proteins, DNA loci, and cytoskeletal proteins. Further, the Caulobacter
crescentus cell topology, polar morphology, and the three-dimensional deployment
of regulatory and signaling proteins have been shown to be integrated into the
operation of the cell cycle genetic control circuitry. Much less is known about
the specific mechanisms that effect the dynamic localization of proteins
involved in cell cycle regulation or molecular positioning for organelle
development. In this project, molecular participants and mechanisms involved in
dynamic protein localization are being identified using a genetic screen for
mutants that mislocalize the timing or positioning of localized proteins. This
is an essential step to realization of the goal of a kinetic model of the
assembly and disassembly of localized multiprotein complexes. The insights from
this work will provide a major step forward in our understanding of how cellular
regulation operates as an integrated and spatially distributed control system.
The experimental organism is the bacterium Caulobacter crescentus, but the
insights and mechanisms identified will be generally applicable to all bacterial
cells. Indeed, since positioning of multi-protein complexes to specific
membrane-associated positions occurs in most cells, the results will apply to
all organisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. The investigator on this
grant, Dr. Harley McAdams, has been at the forefront of the emergence of
'systems biology' and development of an integrated, system-level understanding
of bacterial cell cycle regulation. His research has emphasized, first, the need
to think of the cell as an integrated entity and to identify the logical
circuitry of genetic control circuits, and, second, analysis of cellular control
systems with the methods used in engineering analysis of more familiar
information systems. The McAdams laboratory trains graduate students in the
physical and chemical sciences and engineering for careers in biological
research. This genetic screening project involves use of automation and advanced
computational analysis of cell images as well as sophisticated molecular
engineering and genetic analysis. The project involves students with engineering
and computational skills as well as students with biochemistry and genetics
backgrounds. Research in this interdisciplinary environment provides a unique
opportunity for cross-disciplinary students to acquire advanced laboratory
skills as well as skills in computational biology and modeling. Dr. McAdams
frequently speaks to engineering and physical science students about
interdisciplinary research in biology, and the career opportunities for
engineers and physicists in the biological sciences. This missionary work to the
engineering community has been effective in attracting students in engineering
and physical sciences into biological research.