* 0923132
* MRI/Acquisition:   Upgrading the Confocal Imaging Facility at the University of Puerto Rico to Enable Emission Fingerprinting
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Jose Lasalde, University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2012
* USD 255,762.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The Confocal Imaging Facility at University of Puerto Rico (CIF-UPR,
www.cifupr.org) is located at the Río Piedras Campus (UPR-RP). CIF-UPR began
operations on August 2001 sponsored by EPSCoR and NIH/NCRR grants and since then
has strengthened research and research-related education at University of Puerto
Rico-Rio Piedras and provided services to other institutions as well. The
current facility provides services to more than 10 investigators, 9 postdoctoral
fellows, 14 Ph.D. students and 17 undergraduate students. CIF-UPR will be
upgraded with a Zeiss LSM 510 META confocal microscope. This upgrade will enable
fluorescence emission fingerprinting, an innovative method for the recording,
analysis and separation of emission signals in multi-fluorescence imaging.
Indeed, this upgrade will have a major impact on a list of research projects and
applications that range from basic studies of ion channels, receptor
trafficking, regeneration in the sea cucumber to neurophysiology of mammalian
sensory structures. In addition, it will also foster and strengthen
collaborative and multidisciplinary collaborations among investigators in UPR-RP
and other institutions inside and outside Puerto Rico. Moreover, this upgrade
will impact the development of a large population of minority students that are
currently supported by fellowships or assistantships provided by federally
sponsored programs. Finally, CIF-UPR is committed to continue to support the
development and introduction of novel imaging techniques and equipment in Puerto
Rico and to promote transfer of knowledge, technology, and training in their use
within the entire University of Puerto Rico scientific community and private
minority institutions.