* 0923843
* SBIR Phase II:   Closed-Field Magnetron Sputtering with RF Plasma Enhancement for Deposition of Thin Films on Large-Area Flexible Substrates for Photovoltaics Applications
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2009,10/31/2011
* Thomas Dockstader, Kurt J. Lesker Company
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 10/31/2011
* USD 525,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase II project seeks to develop a turnkey sputter deposition system to
provide low temperature thin film deposition of transparent conductive oxide
(TCO) materials. A laboratory scale film deposition system using a closed-field
magnetron sputtering with RF plasma enhancement was demonstrated. The thin films
were grown at lower temperatures than most competing processes. One key
advantage of the deposition process developed is its ability to produce TCOs
without the need for post-treatments (to achieve both good resistivity and
transparency) thereby simplifying the process compatible for high-volume
processing of large flat polymeric substrates. The project will demonstrate the
process compatible with alternative TCO materials and with photovoltaic
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential from
this technology will be innovations in photovoltaic (PV) technology. The ability
to tap solar energy more efficiently will lead to major breakthroughs for many
devices. For years, silicon (Si) solar cells have been the backbone of the solar
industry using monocrystalline Si substrate with multiple layers of p-n junction
diodes. However, one of the main limiting factors is the shortage of silicon for
PV applications as it competes with the existing requirements in the
semiconductor industry. Many different PV alternatives are in active development
which utilizes TCO materials to provide the conductive anode, cathode, or both.
Thin film solar cells provide a good alternative to Si-based solar cells as long
as the fabrication cost can be reduced. Thin film solar cells use layers of
semiconducting materials with little micrometer thickness and deposited on
glass, stainless steel or flexible substrates. One cost-effective method to
produce PV devices is through the use of polymers. However, the current device
performance of polymer-based PV devices is low but can further be improved by
fabricating metal oxide semiconductors embedded on the polymer-based device
structure. Thus, this technology will be cost-competitive if the fabrication of
TCO thin films are proven they can be done on large-area flexible substrates at
lower temperatures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;