* 0923533
* MRI:   Acquisition of a Flow Cytometer for Research and Teaching in Cell and Molecular Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Mary-Patricia Stein, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2012
* USD 276,499.00

Support funds were awarded to purchase a flow cytometer for research and
education. Flow cytometry is a powerful technique that allows high throughput
analysis of complex biological samples. Cells can be analyzed for changes in
protein expression or localization, and even ion fluxes that signify changes in
cell activation or changes in cell physiology that are a prelude to cell death
can be measured. The Biology Department at California State University
Northridge will benefit from the acquisition of a flow cytometer in several key
ways. As a Hispanic Serving Institution, CSUN plays an important role in serving
the needs of students traditionally underrepresented in the sciences. Students
have opportunities to engage in a variety of research programs, ranging from
understanding development in model organisms such as nematodes (worms) or sea
urchins to understanding the mechanisms of cell suicide (apoptosis). All faculty
research enables students, both at the undergraduate and graduate level, to
learn and apply their knowledge to novel and significantly important scientific
questions. In addition, the incorporation of a flow cytometer in a variety of
laboratory courses, including cellular physiology, neurophysiology and serology,
will increase the number of students with hands-on research experience,
potentially attracting and engaging students in biological inquiry that may not
have otherwise been interested in careers in biology. It is anticipated that
these activities will advance student learning while preparing students for
their future endeavors. The outcomes from this project will include the
enrollment of undergraduate and graduate students in M.S. and Ph.D. programs,
the employment of students in the workforce and the publication of research
articles that advance basic scientific discovery.