* 0923754
* Mechanisms of neurogenesis in a segmented polychaete
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2009,02/28/2013
* Elaine Seaver, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Steven Klein
* 02/28/2013
* USD 403,435.00

The central nervous system is a complex organ whose proper function is critical
for coordination of locomotion, sensing and responding to environmental
conditions, and is closely tied to animal survival. Understanding how such a
complex organ develops represents a fundamental question in animal biology.
Detailed cellular and molecular knowledge of neural development is limited to
studies in model systems of two of the three major bilaterian clades, the
ecdysozoans and deuterostomes. Capitella is a segmented worm and member of the
third bilaterian clade, the lophotrochozoans. This project employs cellular,
molecular and developmental approaches to characterize development of the
centralized nervous system in this annelid model. Capitella offers several
advantages for neurogenic studies, most notably that it undergoes both embryonic
and adult neurogenesis, it exhibits robust adult regeneration and its genome has
been fully sequenced. Early stages of brain development will be investigated
using cell labeling methods, time-lapse video microscopy, and gene silencing
techniques. The origin, specification, mode of internalization, and mitotic
activity of neural progenitor cells of the Capitella nervous system will be
determined. Molecular mechanisms controlling these processes will be analyzed
using a combination of knockdown, mis-expression and pharmacological approaches.
The project will provide crucial information of how the central nervous system
is generated in polychaete annelids, fill a current gap in knowledge of the
lophotrochozoans, and yield insights into the evolution of the centralized
nervous system.

The results of this project are of interest to several fields of biology
including neurobiology, developmental biology and evolutionary biology. In
addition, the proposed work will refine and further methodology for studying
gene function in the model Capitella. The project will integrate training with
research and through a commitment by the PI to training in the laboratory
environment. Women and underrepresented groups such as Pacific Islanders will be
encouraged to participate in the nation's scientific enterprise. Results will be
disseminated through peer-reviewed publications, conference presentations and
outreach activities to the local community.