* 0923031
* MRI: Acquisition of Two REMUS Autonomous Underwater Vehicles for Multiple Cooperative Marine Vehicle Research
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Edgar An, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2014
* USD 717,662.00

Proposal #: CNS 09-23031 &lt;br/&gt;PI(s): An, Edgar Beaujean, Pierre-Philippe
J.; Xiros, Nikolaos I.&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Florida Atlantic University
&lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI/Acq.: Two REMUS Autonomous Underwater Vehicles for
Multiple Cooperative Marine Vehicle Research&lt;br/&gt;Project
Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This project, acquiring two REMUS 100 autonomous underwater
vehicles (AUVs), addresses the research challenge of multiple cooperating
vehicles systems (MCVS), which involves a fleet of AUVs and autonomous safety
vehicles (ASVs). Since successful operation of any MCVD often rests upon
efficient communication among the vehicles, the dynamic mission planning problem
(including search and classify and mapping capabilities) is studied utilizing a
fleet of heterogeneous AUVs and ASVs. This challenging problem, considering
underwater acoustic communication, navigation, and sensing constraints, differs
from those usually studied and reported in the underwater literature. The work
is contrasted to unmanned aerial or ground vehicles in which communication and
navigation capabilities are generally NOT considered significant bottlenecks.
The project capitalizes on two previous NSF achievements:&lt;br/&gt;- An
underwater vehicle network simulatorsand&lt;br/&gt;- A location aware source
routing (LASR) protocol developed for multiple communicating AUVs
subject&lt;br/&gt; to realistic underwater communication
constraints.&lt;br/&gt;Nonlinear and stochastic variations with the
environmental conditions and sensor characteristics are expected. Because a
closed form solution for an optimal controller design is not anticipated, given
that control performance tends to be cost-prohibitive, when completely via
experimentation. Hence, given the wide range of mission and environmental
scenarios and controller objectives, the problem will be studied combining
modeling, simulation, and experimentation. Some of the simulated results will be
validated by carrying out targeted at-sea field experiments using the
instrumentation. Local cost definitions will be explored as a means to constrain
individual vehicle?s maneuvering and cooperation. Attention is paid to
maximizing the overall mission efficiency while minimizing the impact of
uncertainty. Expectations include development of:&lt;br/&gt;- An advanced event-
base planning and control algorithms to improve robustness of communication and
&lt;br/&gt;navigation uncertainty, throughput, and bandwidth
efficiency,&lt;br/&gt;- An advanced multiple cooperating vehicle modeling
software to support mission performance analysis, and &lt;br/&gt;- A science
base for multiple AUVs and undersea acoustic
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;The research problems
constitute ideal topics for theses and dissertations. This multidisciplinary
field will be integrated into the existing course curriculum, providing valuable
theoretical and simulation knowledge to the students, as well as hands-on
experiences. Using underwater robotics as a primary domain application, the
existing effort, sustaining the teachers and students with interest in math and
science, will be continued giving special consideration to female and
underrepresented groups. Workshops, competitions, and summer classes are also
planned to expose students the logistics of marine vehicles. The understanding
gain is likely to provide insights to the U.S. Navy for missions using a fleet
of autonomous underwater vehicles to better search and classify in homeland
security missions.