* 0923447
* MRI: Acquisition of a PowerWall Virtual Reality System for Enabling Research/Teaching in Virtual Prototyping
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Jianren Zhou, Prairie View A & M University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Collopy
* 09/30/2012
* USD 216,779.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will fund the acquisition of
a PowerWall-Based Virtual Reality (VR) system to enable the research and
teaching in virtual prototyping at Prairie View A&amp;M University (PVAMU). The
VR system will be capable of providing life-size 3-D visualization of virtual
object enhanced by nonvisual display modalities, such as haptic feedback and
motion tracker. The major component of the VR system is the PowerWall which is a
flat, large-scale (10 ft by 7.5 ft) stereoscopic visualization
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conventional virtual prototyping techniques face
the challenges of revealing the depth information and the spatially complex
structures of a virtual prototype due to the limitation of two-dimensional
computer interface. The proposed VR system will offer considerable benefits for
researches in Virtual Prototyping by: enabling an immersive understanding of a
life-size 3-D virtual product; revealing the spatially complex structures of a
virtual prototype; and creating a virtual environment which is not possible
within physical experimental setting. The PowerWall VR system will be utilized
in four core research projects and three secondary research projects. The core
research projects that will be enabled by the VR facility are: (1) Development
of virtual sculpting system; (2) Heterogeneous material modeling; (3) Avatars?
impact on people?s behavior; and (4) Molecular modeling of the ligand
interaction. The secondary research projects include: (1) Design optimization
for propulsion components; (2) Development of carbon Nanotubes composites; and
(3) Robust control of flexible arm robot. The VR system will also be integrated
in the graduate and undergraduate curricula in Mechanical Engineering and
Computer Science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acquisition of the PowerWall system
is expected to have significant impact on research, education and infrastructure
building at PVAMU, a Historically Black Colleges and University. The equipment
will have a direct impact on six faculty members in three disciplines involved
in researches, including Mechanical Engineering, Computer Science, and
Chemistry. The infrastructure will have profound impact on students at PVAMU,
most of whom are from underrepresented groups. Approximately 175 undergraduate
and graduate students will be affected by the research training and courses. The
facilities and the related projects will be demonstrated to women students and
K-12 students through summer programs, such as Engineering and Science Concepts
Institute (ESCI), STEM PREP CAMPS program, Minority Introduction to Engineering
program (MITE), etc. The research results will be disseminated via journal
publications and conference presentations.&lt;br/&gt;