* 0923234
* MRI:    Acquisition of Instrumentation to Enhance Faculty-Student Research in Community Ecology and Biogeochemistry
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Martha Phillips, St. Catherine University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 05/31/2013
* USD 161,064.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This award provides funds to St. Catherine University to acquire a suite of
instrumentation for analysis of the nutrient content of soil, plant tissue, and
water samples. This will make possible research emphasizing the relationship
between nutrient cycling and both plant-soil and community interactions in
ecosystems. Dr. Martha Phillips will use the equipment for research focused on
invasive species and long-term plant community dynamics in wetland ecosystems.
Observed spatial and temporal patterns in invasion by Phalaris arundinacea (an
invasive grass in wetlands) suggest that nutrient availability plays a large
role in invasion risk. The equipment will be used to assess links between
nutrient status and community invasion, as well as nutrients as driving
competitive interactions between invasive and native species. Understanding the
linkages between nutrient availability and invasive species will allow for
better control of invasive species, thereby preserving biodiversity and natural
ecosystem functioning, and preventing economic damage. The work of Dr. Jill
Welter focuses on the integration of food web structure and nutrient cycling in
river networks, providing quantitative linkages between communities of organisms
and C, N, and P cycling. The quantification of these nutrient pools will further
our understanding of the influence of the availability and resource
stoichiometry of potentially limiting nutrients and food web structure on
nutrient transformation and release to downstream ecosystems. This work
emphasizes biotic interactions that may influence rates of nitrogen fixation,
differentially affecting N and P transport. This is especially important in
understanding how changes in N and P supply, so often a result of human inputs,
influence nutrient uptake and retention and are transmitted downstream. The
instrumentation will strongly enhance the intellectual scope of faculty-student
research in community and ecosystem science and will be integrated into
research-based undergraduate curricula in biology and chemistry. At the
baccalaureate level, St. Catherine University is a liberal arts institution for
women where many students (~25%) identify as multicultural and 27% are first
generation college students; thus the equipment will help us to prepare women
and students of color to succeed in graduate school and scientific careers.