* 0923310
* MRI:   Acquisition of a laser-scanning confocal microscope for multi-disciplinary research at Colgate University
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Damhnait McHugh, Colgate University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2013
* USD 495,158.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research Instrumentation
(MRI) award funds the acquisition of a laser scanning confocal microscope with
spectral detection at Colgate University. The confocal laser scanning microscope
allows for rapid high-resolution three-dimensional reconstruction of specimens,
recording of time-lapse movies, and quantitative information about the movement
of proteins and cells. Spectral imaging allows tremendous flexibility in
experimental design, as well as improving the ability to separate relevant
signals from background noise. This microscope will be used for research by an
interdisciplinary group of faculty in biology and psychology on projects that
include investigation into development and regeneration of the retina, protein
transport into the nucleus, immune responses to viral infection, function of
serotonin in crayfish, larval development of annelid worms, and evolution of
mate choice in flies. As Colgate University is an undergraduate institution, the
acquisition of a confocal laser scanning microscope brings state-of-the-art
imaging techniques to young scientists at the earliest stages in their career as
they collaborate with the faculty members on research projects throughout the
academic year and during summer research fellowships. This microscope will also
be integrated into Colgate's undergraduate curriculum through laboratory
investigations in cell biology, developmental biology, neuroscience, and insect
biology courses. Additionally, the confocal microscope will be utilized in
Colgate's "Science and Sports Camp" that serves regional and New York City high
school students, including many from backgrounds underrepresented in the
sciences. The acquisition of a confocal microscope thus augments the educational
and research missions of Colgate University at multiple levels, and serves to
enhance faculty research projects and provide new opportunities for students to
visualize complex biological systems.