* 0923960
* Improving the Quantity and Quality of Plant Metabolomics Information
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2010,12/31/2014
* Adrian Hegeman, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Anne W. Sylvester
* 12/31/2014
* USD 1,918,691.00

PI: Adrian D. Hegeman (University of Minnesota - Twin
Cities)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CoPI: Jerry D. Cohen (University of Minnesota -
Twin Cities)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Key Collaborators: Christopher P. Keller
(Minot State University), Paul J. Overvoorde, Christopher T. Calderone, Rebecca
C. Hoye, Keith T. Kuwata, and Kathryn E. Splan (Macalester College).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to quantitatively monitor the dynamics of
metabolites in an organism is critical to fully understand the complex
interactions of biology's Central Dogma: DNA to RNA to Protein to Metabolite. In
part because of the diversity of compounds found in living organisms, especially
in plants, the ability to define this critical area in the functional analysis
of living plants has been slower to develop than nucleic acid and protein
methods. This project addresses impediments to the development of techniques for
measuring metabolic dynamics in biological systems. The present limitations
include the rather low numbers of compounds that have typically been identified,
relatively insensitive procedures that yield insufficient spatial resolution and
the dearth of true quantitative methods. The specific aims are: 1) provide
improved sample preparation and derivatization methods that yield structural
information to create new spectral library resources for metabolite
identification by liquid chromatography (LC) and gas chromatography (GC) coupled
to mass spectrometry (MS), and 2) use stable isotope metabolically labeled plant
materials for isotope dilution with robust quantification by LC and GC MS and
tandem MS. The work will be focused on rice and tomato, with the expectation
that the methods and procedures will be generally applicable to many plant
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metabolomics as an emerging discipline has yet to
realize its full potential for discovery. It is important, therefore, to
continue investing in methodological development and access to resources to
collect, process and understand metabolomics data. A major component of this
project focuses on method development and as such may have its greatest impact
by providing educational resources for method implementation. The investigators
are strongly committed to recruiting and training people belonging to groups
underrepresented in the sciences and attempt to provide undergraduate and
graduate students, as well as postdocs with a multidisciplinary education in an
open minded, diverse and supportive environment. This includes quality mentoring
in professional development and research and participation in graduate and
postdoctoral programs on the campus. In addition, this proposal will expand the
core training in a summer workshop in metabolomics to be held at the University
of Minnesota. Interaction with primarily undergraduate institutions will provide
access to advanced metabolomic experiences to a wider student population. Short-
term dissemination of data, processing algorithms and methods will be
accomplished by means of the project website that will be administered and
maintained at the University of Minnesota (http://www.metabolomics.umn.edu/).
Metabolite mass spectral libraries will be deposited for long-term access with
the Biological Magnetic Resonance Data Bank (BMRB)
(http://www.bmrb.wisc.edu/metabolomics/).