* 0923572
* MRI: Acquisition of a Multi-Institutional, Multi-Departmental, Modern X-Ray Diffraction System to Anchor a Portland Area Materials Characterization Group
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2011
* Margret Geselbracht, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Sean Jones
* 09/30/2011
* USD 225,624.00

0923572&lt;br/&gt;Goforth&lt;br/&gt;Portland State U.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This
award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public
Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary: Laboratory X-ray
diffraction (XRD) techniques have long been used by researchers in diverse
disciplines to reveal structural information, which can be correlated to
chemical and physical properties to guide material and device design. However,
traditional XRD techniques are limited in their ability to analyze modern
systems, which frequently feature micro- and nano-scale thin-film and colloidal
components. Such micro- and nano-structured materials are central to our
research efforts in frontier areas of science, which include: the development of
tailored nanoparticles for applications in medical imaging, art preservation,
and electronics, as well as the optimization of battery, solar cell, or water-
splitting materials for more efficient energy generation. Techniques such as
grazing incidence XRD and small angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) are now available
for the analysis of thin films and nanoparticles, and a modern X-ray
diffractometer with both of these capabilities will benefit research and
training at both Ph.D.- and B.A.-granting institutions, Portland State
University (Ph.D.-granting), and Lewis &amp; Clark and Reed Colleges,
respectively. Additionally, the instrument will allow us to develop new X-ray
methods, e.g., the determination of nanoparticle concentration from scattering
data. The co-PIs at these three institutions have an existing mechanism for
sharing instrumentation, resources, and scientific findings. The instrument is
also critical for researchers in several academic departments at these
institutions (Chemistry, Physics, and Geology), and its shared presence will
support focused research efforts under the Oregon Nanoscience and
Microtechnologies Institute (ONAMI), thus strengthening the collaboration
amongst government, academic and industrial labs involved in this
organization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Layman Summary: Analogous to the use of
medical X-rays to assess human structural features and plan medical treatment,
analytical laboratory X-rays are vital in determining structural information for
solid samples, often leading to the rational development of improved devices and
new materials. Because of the broad utility of laboratory X-rays in diverse
research disciplines, modern X-ray diffractometers are now designed to allow the
measurement of a wider range of sample forms, including the complex materials
that are central to academic research efforts in the Portland metropolitan area.
These materials, with critical structural features orders of magnitude smaller
than the width of a single human hair, are being optimized for use as medical
imaging agents, protective coating components, or energy harvesting materials.
Using the requested modern X-ray diffraction system, researchers at
Ph.D.-granting Portland State University and at B.A.-granting Lewis &amp; Clark
and Reed Colleges will employ their knowledge of X-ray methodology to further
ongoing research while simultaneously training a diverse population of post-
doctoral, graduate, undergraduate and high school students. Additionally, taking
advantage of the requested instrument?s flexibility, new X-ray methods will be
developed. The instrument is also critical for researchers in several academic
departments at these institutions (Chemistry, Physics, and Geology), and its
shared presence will support focused research efforts under the Oregon
Nanoscience and Microtechnologies Institute, thus strengthening the
collaboration of government, academic and industrial labs involved in this
organization.