* 0923606
* Aerodynamics of Hummingbird Flight
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2010
* Bret Tobalske, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Mark R. Brodl
* 08/31/2010
* USD 123,758.00

Human understanding of the mechanisms of animal flight is entering into an
exciting new phase. Over the past century, many studies have sought to estimate
the aerodynamic function of flapping wings from patterns of wing motion measured
using high-speed film and video. A new technique, digital particle image
velocimetry (DPIV) directly reveals patterns of airflow, and thereby permits
direct measurement of the aerodynamic mechanisms produced by these wing
movements. A surprising result that immediately emerged from the recent DPIV
studies of the principal investigator is that hovering hummingbirds, long
thought to use their wings in a symmetrical manner similar to insects, depend
much more upon their downstroke than their upstroke. This finding has the
potential to completely revise thinking about the evolution of hovering in
birds. To extend this observation, this research project will explore in detail
the aerodynamics of hovering and slow-speed maneuvering in hummingbirds by
examining near-field flow. This research will be the first use of stereo DPIV in
flying birds, revealing flow in three dimensions - an advance vital for
characterizing unsteady flow patterns. These measurements will allow full tests
for the presence of unsteady aerodynamic mechanisms in birds, which have been
reported for insects. To determine the functional significance of putative
unsteady mechanisms to the force balance in hovering, the investigators will
program observed 3D hummingbird kinematics into a dynamically scaled robot, test
for the congruence in near-field/far field flow patterns, and measure moments
acting about the wing of the robot. Sampling in the near field and wake of the
robot will enable tests of the validity of using far field vortex-wake
structures to estimate time-averaged forces during flapping flight. Ultimately,
the results of this research will improve basic understanding of the extent to
which hovering hummingbirds converge with insects in wing function, refine
robotic simulations of animal flight, and determine the kinematic and
aerodynamic basis of stability and maneuverability in hummingbirds. More
broadly, the research will elucidate biological manipulation of unsteady and
quasi-steady aerodynamics, thereby providing engineers with a useful model for
the development of autonomous micro-air vehicles, and providing computational
fluid dynamicists with precise kinematic and DPIV data to incorporate into
models of hummingbird flight. The computational models may, in turn, be used to
test hypotheses regarding the evolution of hummingbird's unique flight style.
Undergraduate collaborators are involved in all aspects of this cross-
disciplinary research, and the DPIV instrumentation used in this study will
foster collaborations across regions of the United States. Because hummingbirds
in particular generate great public fascination, the project scientists will
continue active collaboration with professional artists and science writers to
disseminate DPIV images and insights about hummingbirds through artistic venues
and the popular press. &lt;br/&gt;