* 0923559
* MRI:   Acquisition of a multiphoton confocal microscope for research, training and teaching
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Steven Yellon, Loma Linda University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2014
* USD 1,018,003.00

This award for the acquisition of a multiphoton laser scanning confocal
microscope has established a shared-use imaging facility that will serve varied
and extensive research and training purposes for basic scientists at Loma Linda
University. This advanced microscopy system will provide a broad range of
imaging technologies including multiphoton and spectral analysis, as well as
real-time imaging. The system is equipped with UV and multiple lasers for
visible and multiphoton excitation, a multi-channel scanning module for
multispectral detection and point scanning, a transmitted-light detector, and 2
non-descanned detectors for multiphoton imaging. This array of excitation and
emission detection systems will provide researchers the capacity to use multiple
fluorophores for innovative multidimensional imaging studies. To promote
investigation of basic mechanisms of cellular interactions and function and
perform live-cell and tissue studies, the system will include an incubation
stage, an electrophysiology system, and myograph apparatus. The confocal
microscope will be integrated into a microscopy training program, academic
courses, and training workshops. The visual nature of the images acquired by the
proposed system make an excellent entry point for students to engage in
research. Students will be recruited through established outreach and research
internship and graduate programs at Loma Linda University that target high-
school age, undergraduate and graduate students and post-graduate trainees with
a strong emphasis on under-represented minorities. Our goal for use of the
proposed instrumentation is to facilitate multidisciplinary research and
training at Loma Linda University and in the surrounding community. This
facility and its members will provide the resource base and essential
infrastructure that meet the needs for enduring collaboration and education, as
well as serve as a catalyst that promotes basic science productivity in a
diverse academic community.