* 0923763
* Cognitive and Neural Mechanisms of Face and Word Processing: Common Principles
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* David Plaut, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Akaysha Tang
* 08/31/2013
* USD 721,380.00

Recent findings in the field of cognitive neuroscience have suggested that
specific brain areas are dedicated to specific human behaviors. The current
research examines a different brain-behavior organization in which cognition is
supported by an interactive network of brain regions, with many brain regions
participating in many behaviors in a graded, dynamic and cooperative fashion.
Specifically, the investigators will examine the neural substrates responsible
for two behaviors, namely face recognition and word recognition. The proposed
research predicts that adult individuals who acquire an impairment in face
perception (a disorder known as 'prosopagnosia') due to brain injury will also
have problems to varying degrees with the perception of words, and conversely,
individuals who acquire an impairment in word recognition (a disorder known as
'pure alexia') due to brain injury will also demonstrate some abnormality in
face recognition. Additionally, this research investigates the performance of
normal individuals with the expectation that if the right hemisphere is highly
specialized for face perception, the left hemisphere will be highly specialized
for word perception but that the balance between these two abilities might vary
in a complementary fashion across a range of individuals. The investigators will
use a combination of behavioral and neuroimaging studies of normal and brain-
damaged individuals and use computational modeling tools to test these
predictions. Findings from this research will provide support for the claim of
partial co-mingling of face and word processing in a shared network as well as
the hemispheric cooperation and competition in normal observers and associated
individual differences for face and word representation. The empirical
behavioral and imaging studies will generate data that guide the development of
a computational model of how complex behavior is mediated by the brain and the
model, in turn, will inspire further testable predictions of this account.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The critical focus of this research is to explore the
correspondences between the brain and behavior with specific emphasis on the
nature of the organization of the brain that supports rapid and efficient human
behavior. What brain systems enable us to recognize words with such accuracy and
speed? Are these the same systems that allow us to recognize faces so well? How
do we explain individual differences in the ability to recognize such
perceptually challenging visual input? To the extent this research can show how
general computational principles lead to well defined functional
specializations, it may transform our understanding of the functional
organization and specialization in the brain in general. In addition to
examining the fundamental mechanisms of visual object recognition and individual
differences in normal and disordered visual recognition, the investigators
expect that an understanding of the intact system and its breakdown will enable
the development of more effective methods for intervention and rehabilitation
for patients who suffer from visual recognition deficits. Finally, the project
will contribute to research infrastructure not only by training students and
junior investigators but also by disseminating the findings and the computer
modeling tools to the broader research community.