* 0923258
* MRI:  Development of a Plasma Dynamo Facility for Experimental Investigations of Fundamental Processes in Plasma Astrophysics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Cary Forest, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Steven J Gitomer
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,757,162.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, a Plasma Dynamo
Facility for investigating self-generation of magnetic fields and related
processes in a large, weakly magnetized, fast flowing, and hot (conducting)
plasma will be built . When completed, a major new, flexible plasma device and
associated infrastructure will become available for a new generation of graduate
students and postdoctoral researchers to carry out experiments in a previously
uninvestigated plasma regime, a regime asymptotically similar to many
astrophysical plasmas. Such laboratory plasmas have never before been studied
(most hot, fast flowing plasma experiments have been magnetized), but recent
advances in permanent magnet technology, plasma source development and new
scheme for driving flow now make it possible. The device at the core of the
facility will be a 3 meter diameter spherical vacuum vessel that uses an array
of powerful permanent magnets on the vessel wall to provide plasma confinement.
The magnets will be arranged in a multipole configuration that has a magnetic
field localized to the plasma edge and provides a spherical, 1.3 m radius,
field-free plasma volume. Recently developed large area Lanthanum Hexaboride
plasma sources (provided by UCLA) will used for ionizing and heating the plasma;
this will generate a steady-state, hot (10-30 eV) plasma. To stir the plasma,
electrostatic electrodes, together with the permanent magnet array will be used
to impart torque on the plasma in the magnetized edge region and viscously
couple momentum from the edge plasma to the unmagnetized core. Numerical
modeling has been used to show that such stirring can provide a variety of
laminar and turbulent flows necessary for generating magnetohydrodynamic
turbulence and for producing self-exciting dynamos. As part of this development
proposal, the plasma control, data acquisition, and a core set of diagnostics
will be developed. Finally, advanced plasma diagnostics will be applied, for the
first time, to dynamo studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The concept proposed here
builds upon excitement in recent years of using liquid metals to study dynamos;
un-magnetized liquid metals have been mechanically stirred and magnetic fields
spontaneously created and observed. A plasma experiment has the potential to
extend these studies to more astrophysically relevant parameters. The use of
plasma, rather than liquid metals to study magnetic field generation will allow
the magnetic Reynolds number (the dimensionless product of size x conductivity x
speed that governs self-excitation of magnetic fields) to be more than a factor
of 10 larger than in liquid metal experiments. It will also allow the viscosity
to be varied independently of the conductivity: the magnetic Prandtl number (the
ratio of the magnetic Reynolds number to the hydrodynamic Reynolds number) can
be varied from the liquid metal regime (&lt;&lt;1) to the regime Pm &gt;&gt;1
thought to be a critical parameter that governs the nature of many astrophysical
situations since it governs the onset and nature of the
turbulence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The device will be located in the Physics
Department at the University of Wisconsin, and will be operated as a multi-
investigator, multi-institutional facility. In addition to the large impact on
the UW physics program, experimental investigations in this facility are likely
to have strong national impact through connections to new astrophysics
initiatives such as the Square Kilometer Array, where cosmic magnetism is one of
four key science issues. The facility will be a major scientific infrastructure
investment at the "intermediate scale" as has recently been recommended by the
National Research Council's report Plasma 2010: Advancing Knowledge in the
National Interest.