* 0923910
* International Collaboration in Chemistry: Nanoscale Single-Crystal Ensemble Electrocatalysis for Fuel Cell Applications
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* YuYe Tong, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2013
* USD 450,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Analytical and Surface Chemistry
Program at NSF Division of Chemistry will support the international
collaborative research project of Prof. YuYe Tong of Georgetown University. A
Collaborator in the project is Prof. Shi-Gang Sun of Xiamen University, China.
Profs. Tong and Sun and their students will synthesize and characterize surface-
confined two and three dimensional self-assembled molecular architectures using
advanced scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) to provide insights into and
facilitate the "bottom up" nano-fabrication of novel molecular-based devices.
Molecular-based devices, e.g. molecules that possess the ability to act as
sensors, switches, motors, machines and memory components, when properly
designed and controlled, constitute the backbone of the nascent nanotechnology
that has the potential to revolutionize manufacturing and consumer goods in the
21st century. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This international collaborative research
project is supported jointly by NSF and the National Natural Science Foundation
of China (NSFC). The study is also supported by the Office of International
Science and Engineering (OISE) at NSF.