* 0923209
* MRI: Acquisition of a High Field Magnetic Resonance Imaging System for  Science and Engineering Research
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Michael Ragozzino, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,995,000.00

NSF MRI Proposal (R. L. Magin, P. I.)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Acquisition of a High
Field Magnetic Resonance Imaging System for Science and Engineering
Research&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description The applications of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and
spectroscopy (MRS) are rapidly expanding beyond the traditional domains of
chemistry and medicine. Engineers, biologists, and even artists are seeing their
problems in new ways through the use of non-contact, radiation free and fully
three dimensional MR imaging. The flow of fluids, the efficiency of catalysts,
the strength of polymers, and the hidden structure of developing plants can all
be viewed with micron scale resolution and in time periods as short as a
fraction of a second. Neuroscientists can probe models of memory and cognition,
while chemical engineers can study processes from the molecular to the
industrial scale. This is all achieved using special MRI techniques that encode
system structure, function, and dynamics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significance
&amp; Impact The overall goal of this proposal is to bring the imaging and
analytical power of MRI (Bruker 9.4 T imaging spectrometer) to a larger
community of engineers and scientists at the University of Illinois at Chicago
(UIC) and the Illinois Institute of Technology (IIT). We plan to operate the
system under the jurisdiction of the UIC Research Resources Center in a
dedicated campus research space. The new MRI will also be the principal imaging
system for undergraduate and graduate laboratory courses in magnetic resonance
imaging and a key asset for REU, RET and K-12 outreach programs at UIC. In this
manner we will increase the shared access of these campus communities to state
of the art magnetic resonance imaging.&lt;br/&gt;