* 0923849
* Collaborative Research: Computational Analysis of Maneuvering Flight
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Victor Zordan, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 07/31/2013
* USD 391,627.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability of an animal to maneuver
can determine its success at avoiding predators, catching food, and other
fundamental behaviors that define the margin between life and death. Most
research on the biomechanics of animal motion has concerned the initiation or
maintenance of ballistic, brief, or steady state movements because these can be
studied most readily in the laboratory. Maneuverability is therefore one of the
most important but least understood aspects of animal locomotion. Previous
research has progressed along two independent tracks: 1) Studies of animal
morphology have explained how the size and shape of the body and the limbs
influence the efficiency and dynamics of maneuvering. 2) Studies of
neuromuscular physiology have revealed the mechanisms that animals use to power
particular maneuvers. However, animals with the ability to generate substantial
muscle power, such as those that hover or fly slowly, may be able to overcome
efficiency costs imposed by suboptimal morphology to generate rapid but
inefficient maneuvers. The proposed work will test the hypothesis that the
limitations imposed by morphology are strongest when muscle power-generating
capacity is low. Research will focus on the remarkable maneuvering flight of
hummingbirds because these animals inhabit broad elevational ranges, which
provide natural experiments for varying muscle power capacity. Experiments with
Anna?s hummingbirds (Calypte anna) in California will determine the effects of
elevation and the independent influences of mechanical and metabolic constraints
on maneuvering performance. Measurements from the diverse Andean hummingbird
fauna will allow for determination of how vastly different morphologies
influence maneuvering performance across elevations.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; A
common requirement of diverse disciplines of biology is to have a means of
quantitatively describing behavior. This project utilizes a custom-designed,
automated analysis of movement to identify the fundamental building blocks of
maneuverability. Developing this approach will provide tools that are broadly
applicable for studying complex movement in animals. The educational training
will foster the scientific development of a postdoctoral scholar, graduate
students, and undergraduate students from under-represented groups. These
participants will receive integrative training in computational biology and
comparative biomechanics. The results of the research will be used to develop a
teaching module for use in upper division undergraduate courses. In addition,
results produced by the students and the PIs will be presented via scientific
conferences, scholarly publications, and public lectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;