* 0923320
* MRI-Consortium: Acquisition of a Shipboard Sorting High Speed Flow Cytometer for Research and Education
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Giacomo DiTullio, College of Charleston
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2012
* USD 1,274,295.00

Intellectual Merit The PI is requesting funds to acquire a shipboard sorting
flow cytometer facility including a shipboard van, MoFlo XDP cytometer, gas
chromatograph and accessories, and inverted microscope with stabilizing platform
for epifluorescence microscopy. The facility would be used to: identify and
isolate new oceanic microbes for cultivation and experimentation; identify and
measure various metabolic activities of microorganisms in the ocean at the
species and single cell level; and develop new approaches and applications using
a cell sorter as a micro-sampler. The facility would enable research on a suite
of efforts including: biogeochemistry of biogenic sulfur compounds;
intracellular DMSP levels in sorted marine phytoplankton in a variety of
locations; microscopic identification of sorted marine algal populations; and
toxin concentrations in sorted marine harmful algal bloom (HAB) species.

Broader Impacts The proposed acquisition will serve to enhance the research
capabilities and collaborative efforts at Hollings Marine Laboratory, an
institution that represents a partnership between five entities including the
College of Charleston, the South Carolina Division of Natural Resources, the
Medical University of South Carolina, the National Institute for Standards and
Technology, and NOAA?s Center for Coastal Environmental Health and Biomolecular
Research. Additionally, the proposal states that graduate research will involve
thesis projects using this proposed instrumentation to test new methods
involving molecular probes. Undergraduates will also have the opportunity to be
trained on and use the proposed instrumentation as part of existing REU
programs, including one focused on underrepresented groups.

