* 0923089
* MRI: Acquisition of a Tomographic Particle Image Velocimetry system for dusty plasma investigations
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2010
* Jeremiah Williams, Wittenberg University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 08/31/2010
* USD 264,699.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the acquisition of
a state of the art instrument, a tomographic particle image velocimetry system,
which would allow for volumetric measurements of dusty plasma systems. As a
result, new areas of research will be explored and a number of open issues in
the dusty plasmas will be addressed that are not accessible given the existing
diagnostic infrastructure. The scientific component of the proposed work will
use the techniques previously developed by the PI and the next generation PIV
diagnostic to make detailed measurements of the distribution of thermal energy
and the evolutions of the thermal and transport properties of a weakly-coupled
dusty plasma to address a number of open questions in the field of dusty plasmas
with a level of detail that is currently unavailable in the dusty plasma
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acquisition of this diagnostic would
represent a significant advance in the diagnostic infrastructure of the dusty
plasma community. As a result, support of this proposal will position the PI at
the diagnostic forefront of the dusty plasma community and would open a number
of collaborative opportunities. Further, because dusty plasmas are present in
many difference environments, the insight gained will have a broad impact in a
number of fields. Second, it will improve access, increase use of modern
instrumentation and provide mentored training to students at an undergraduate
institution. Third, it will make significant educational contributions to the
Physics Department at Wittenberg University through the introduction of level-
appropriate curricular material that introduce an advanced diagnostic technique
to undergraduates. Additionally, it will result in an enhanced integration of
the PI's research and teaching activities. Finally, given the strong number of
women physics majors at Wittenberg University, support of this proposal will
support recruiting efforts of underrepresented populations into STEM fields.