* 0923051
* MRI: Acquisition of a 400 MHz NMR Spectrometer to Support Undergraduate Research and Chemical Education at Towson University
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Lev Ryzhkov, Towson University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2012
* USD 307,323.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award from the Major Research
Instrumentation (MRI) program, Principal Investigators Clare Muhoro and Lev
Ryzhkov and colleagues Timothy Brunker, Barry Margulies, Ana Maria Soto and
Shannon Stitzel from Towson University will acquire a 400 MHz NMR spectrometer
to support research and teaching at their institution. Their proposed research
spans a number of areas in chemistry and biology, including: 1) the
investigation of spiropyran-based molecularly imprinted polymer sensors; 2) the
study of the binding of aminoglycoside antibiotics to RNA; 3) the synthesis,
detection and quantitation of isotope-labeled acyclovair and its metabolites; 4)
the study of the degradation of N-methylcarbamate pesticides under aquatic
conditions; 5) the study of the lifetime of primary acyloxy radicals using CIDNP
spectroscopy ; 6) the synthesis of coordination complex-based chiral molecular
switches and 6) the synthesis, characterization and application of
phosphanyl(organyl)boranes. The instrumentation will also be used in teaching
and training of undergraduate and graduate students (MS) in coursework, as well
as research at Towson. The spectrometer will play a critical role in preparing a
diverse group of students for Maryland's technical and scientific workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is one of
the most powerful tools available to chemists for the elucidation of the
structure of molecules. It is used to identify unknown substances, to
characterize specific arrangements of atoms within molecules, and to study the
dynamics of interactions between molecules in solution. Access to state-of-the-
art NMR spectrometers is essential to chemists who are carrying out frontier
research. The results from these NMR studies will have an impact in synthetic
organic/inorganic chemistry and biochemistry, as well as in the training of a
diverse group of students.