* 0923586
* MRI: Development of ASSIST:  Affordable System for Solar Irrdiance and Tracking
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Qinghua Guo, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2013
* USD 568,202.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, building and testing an
Affordable System for Solar Irradiance Sensing and Tracking (ASSIST), proposes a
tiered-architecture where a small number of expensive and highly calibrated
observatories get complimented by a larger number of inexpensive, but
uncalibrated, ASSIST nodes. &lt;br/&gt;Integrating economic stand alone wireless
global irradiance sensors with a new dome sensor that avoids having costly
moving parts and automatic solar trackers (ASTs), ASSIST nodes should adapt to
the vagaries of wireless communication channel, as well as possible failures of
many nodes in the ensemble. The work responds to a major obstacle in developing
policies that promote and take advantage of existing solar technologies, that of
lack of reliable data for ground solar irradiance (direct normal and global
irradiance). Despite well-defined and easily calculated radiation reaching outer
layers of the atmosphere, solar irradiance reaching ground level (where thermal
and photovoltaic solar collectors operate) depends strongly on localized and
complex atmospheric conditions. Hence, distributed, embedded environmental
sensor systems now enable scientists and engineers to observe environmental
systems with previously unattainable spatio-temporal resolution. The vision of
sensor systems coupled with 'smart' networking, integrated with visualization
tools by an overarching cyberinfrastructure is shared by disciplines actively
engaged in solar irradiance monitoring all over the world, and is likely to be
realized when such systems are developed ahead of the observatory efforts. The
system, developed and tested in the heart of California's Central Valley, is
coupled with well-characterized infrastructure-rich solar observatories already
deployed. ASSIST aims to serve as a model sensor and information technology
system for directly and quantitatively observing the effects of cloud cover,
aerosol content, and the presence of participating gases in the lower atmosphere
(water vapor, carbon dioxide) and in the stratosphere (ozone), all of which can
reduce the availability of direct isolation at ground level to a small fraction
of the solar irradiance that reaches the upper atmosphere. From the operational
standpoint, the balancing of supply and demand peaks in the electrical grid
requires detailed consideration of the availability of solar power as US
embraces a more renewable profile of energy utilization. Thus, forecasting the
available insolation enables information technology for the success of any
policy to include power to the power grid. Engaging students and researchers,
this end-to-end sensor system supporting the observatory scale science in solar
systems science provides a well-characterized, science-driven design test-bed in
a minority-serving university&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project
enables engineers and scientists to quantify DNI data at spatial and temporal
scales currently unavailable. The work develops distributed instruments that are
self-configurable, without the need of expensive and difficult-to-maintain
mobile parts, and significantly less expensive than current instruments in solar
observation technology. The system will be utilized for student experiences; it
provides access to important data; and its findings may be adopted by other
observatories. In addition to an expected major impact on environmental, CS,
electrical, and mechanical research and education directives, the project
services student in a minority-serving institution.