* 0923481
* MRI: Development of Reconfigurable DWDM Multi-Mode Switching Platform for Supporting Telesurgery Telemedicine and Heterogeneous Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Yuhua Chen, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 09/30/2013
* USD 587,570.00

Proposal #: MRI 09-23481&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Chen, Yuhua&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of Houston&lt;br/&gt; Houston, TX 77204-2015&lt;br/&gt;Title:
MRI/Dev.: Reconfigurable DWDM Multi-Mode Switching Platform for Supporting
Telesurgery Telemedicine and Heterogeneous
Applications&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This project,
developing a dense wavelength division multiplexing (DWDM) multi-mode switching
platform instrument, supports telesurgery, telemedicine, and heterogeneous
applications by allowing different types of messages within an application to
choose from three switching modes: (electronic packet switching (EPS), optical
burst switching (OBS), and optical circuit switching (OCS). While using the EPS
mode to transfer short robotic control messages, applications such as
telesurgery are expected to benefit from the approach by using the OBS mode or
the OCS mode to transfer the ultra high bandwidth multi-view 3-D high definition
(HD) video. The multi-mode switching platform will be developed using high
performance reconfigurable field programmable gate array (FPGA) system along
with optical switching nodes. The platform developed can be made available
remotely to networking researchers and to the GENI infrastructure. The DWDM
multi-mode switching platform enabled by the router architecture allows the
three switching paradigms mentioned above (i.e., EPS, OBS, and OCS) to be
supported on the same router platform, providing the greatest flexibility to
applications. Each DWDM channel in an optical fiber can be individually
reconfigured to a different switching mode based on the dynamic traffic load.
Additionally, the approach allows individual application or individual type of
messages within an application to be transported using the best-suited switching
mode to achieve the best performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;This work can change the way quality medical services that can be
delivered. Telesurgery and telemedicine allow medical experts and resources to
be shared remotely by residents who do not have local access to such resources.
While fostering research opportunities and collaborations in router designs,
network management, and application designs, the platform instrument under
development can provide research infrastructure to networking researchers and
potentially unify the two often-divided research communities: the electronic
packet switching and the optical switching. The female investigator serves as a
mentor in WELCOME (Women for Engineering Learning Community for Maximizing
Excellence), actively recruiting and retaining women in engineering. She is
hosting two minority Harmony Science Academy students.