* 0923918
* Role of Oxalic Acid and Reactive Oxygen in Sclerotinia Sclerotiorum Disease Development
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Martin Dickman, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 07/31/2014
* USD 500,000.00

Intellectual Merit Sclerotinia sclerotiorum is an omnivorous fungal plant
pathogen with an extremely broad host range capable of producing devastating
losses in economically important food crops, including soybeans, dry beans,
canola and potato among many others. Over 400 species of plants are susceptible
to this pathogen. Currently, there are no adequate resistance strategies against
Sclerotinia diseases (culturally or chemically) and breeding for resistance to
this fungus has not been successful. Annual losses of crops from diseases caused
by S. sclerotiorum in the U.S. are in the multimillion dollar range. The fact
that Sclerotinia is aggressive, broad in its host range, poorly controlled and
causes significant economical damage, coupled with the lack of resistant
cultivars necessitates the development of alternative control strategies. A
molecular based mechanistic approach will be used in this project to understand
why the fungus is so successful; in particular the project will examine the
roles that reactive oxygen species and oxalic acid play as key modulators of
fungal disease. The project is supported by recent observations that
demonstrated that fungal secreted oxalate induces a programmed cell death in the
plant host and recapitulates S. sclerotiorum disease symptoms. Similarly oxalic
acid induces increased reactive oxygen species levels in the plant which
correlate with, and are necessary for, programmed cell death and disease.
Results from these studies will provide information for alternative disease
control strategies based on interference with these key fungal pathogenicity
determinants.

Broader Impact The experiments described in this project offer broad and
comprehensive training for students encompassing a number of fields. Current
approaches include microbiology, plant pathology, plant biology, high throughput
gene silencing screens, molecular biology and genetics. The mechanisms
underlying fungal induced plant disease are both fundamental and of practical
importance. This is particularly noteworthy since food safety, food
contamination and food security are critically important issues nationally and
internationally. This is compounded by Sclerotinia diseases since control
measures (genetic and chemical) are largely ineffective. This research program
will provide a unique and interdisciplinary training opportunity for a graduate
student, postdoctoral fellows, and undergraduate students to participate in a
critical area of stress signalling and cell death regulation, while conceptually
addressing broader conceptual ideas as to how this particular group of important
plant pathogens achieves pathogenic success. The project also supports summer
research activities for students from Hispanic Serving Institutions and a Land
Grant University in Texas.