* 0923318
* MRI:   Development of FPALM-STORM for Live Cell Single Molecule Microscopy
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Patricia Wadsworth, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 07/31/2013
* USD 684,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proteins are nanometer-scale (one
billionth of a meter) machines found inside of cells. In order to see such tiny
objects we need microscopy. An electron microscope has good resolution to allow
visualization of such small objects, but the samples (usually cells or other
biological elements) must be fixed or frozen, so visualizing live cells is not
possible. On the other hand, light microscopy, such as fluorescence microscopy,
allows for proteins to be localized in living tissue. But, the gains in motion
dynamics are lost in resolution, since light makes nanometer objects appear as
fuzzy dots that are 100s of nanometers across. In addition, there are thousands
of proteins of the same type inside cells, so fuzzy dots give way to fuzzy blobs
that are even more difficult to resolve. This proposal aims to greatly enhance
the optical resolution using Fluorescence Photoactivation Localization
Microscopy (PaLM) and Stochastic Optical Reconstruction Microscopy (StORM). In
these techniques, we use special fluorescent molecules that can be switched on
to visualize a very few proteins at a time. Each individual fluorescently
labeled protein can be localized with high accuracy using mathematical fitting
routines. The motions can also be tracked inside cells. These molecules are
switched off, and a new set of molecules are switched on, localized, and
tracked. The analysis routines will build a map of the locations of all the
molecules to reveal detailed structural data. This new instrument will unlock
unprecedented new views of cells and scientific revelations of cellular
workings. The research scientists and students at the University of
Massachusetts Amherst will use this instrument to delve deeper into some basic
biological questions. For instance, several groups are interested in the cell
division process, which is the underlying process for organ development, tissue
and organ regeneration, and cancer cell growth. A few groups focus on plant cell
growth, which may have future implications for bio-energy. Another group studies
neuron-receptor dynamics to understand memory formation. These new glimpses of
cells will result in new information for the study of basic science and reveal
amazing images of life inside a cell. Researchers will display these images
obtained on a gallery webpage hosted by the University of Massachusetts
Department of Physics (www.umass.edu/physics). In addition the University will
share these images with the Amherst community in a display of large-format
prints of the cells. The prints will be displayed in and around the Amherst
area, including the Department of Motor Vehicles and Libraries through the
VISUAL program. The prints will include descriptions of the proteins being
imaged and the overall science being presented by the image. &lt;br/&gt;