* 0923462
* MRI: Acquisition of an Ultra-low Background Gamma Spectroscopy Platform for Measuring Ionizing Radiation
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Biswajit Das, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2012
* USD 397,316.00

MRI: Acquisition of an Ultra-low Background Gamma Spectroscopy Platform for
Measuring Ionizing Radiation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
acquire a high-sensitivity gamma spectroscopy equipment for the establishment of
a state-of-the-art research and teaching facility in the area of advanced
radiation spectroscopy. The renewed interest in nuclear energy, as well as the
growing applications of nuclear technology in a multitude of medical and
commercial fields, has created a pressing need within the scientific community
to modernize and extend low-level radiation measurement capabilities in order to
carry out research and to adequately train the next generation of nuclear
professionals. The gamma spectroscopy instrument to be acquired in this project
is of proven utility for making ultra-low radiation measurements of the type
needed over a wide range of emission energies. Presently, there are only a
handful of facilities of this caliber in the world located primarily in Western
Europe and Asia. Thus the advanced facility to be developed in this project will
have a positive impact on researchers in the United States by expanding their
ability to receive funding for their work and to carry out a wider variety of
radiation research efforts. The proposed instrument will be housed in a
dedicated room in a recently completed, multi-disciplinary research center on
the University of Nevada - Las Vegas campus and access would be tailored to
maximize the availability of this facility to a broad spectrum of researchers
and other interested parties. It is expected that subsequent operational
improvements in the system would provide additional and uniquely valuable
training, learning, and teaching experiences in the field of radiation
metrology.