* 0923583
* MRI: Acquisition of a Femtosecond Mid-Infrared Spectrometer
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Peter Griffiths, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2013
* USD 710,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award from the Major Research
Instrumentation (MRI) program, the Chemistry Department at The University of
Idaho will acquire a femtosecond mid-IR spectrometer. The instrument will have
core components that are common in many types of ultrafast spectroscopic
measurements. It will implement design features that will ease the transition
between different experimental configurations, so that a wide array of
experiments can be accommodated. Initially, the PIs are planning four very
different experiments. Fast events in RNA folding will be studied using coherent
two-dimensional infrared spectroscopy (2D-IR). 2D-IR will also be used to
distinguish equilibrium from resonance structures in homoaromatic molecules. The
instrument will be used to characterize the migration of mid-IR photons by
scattering media. The ultrafast IR transient absorption spectroscopy of nitrosyl
compounds subsequent to laser photolysis will also be investigated.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A femtosecond mid-IR spectrometer is an ultra fast
spectrometer that operates in the infrared region of the electromagnetic
spectrum. Advances in ultrafast laser technology have made the use of sub-100
femtosecond laser pulses more routine. As the field continues to grow, the
significance of molecular phenomena on time scales of picoseconds and shorter is
being realized. Arguably, some of the most fundamental processes in chemistry
(e.g., bond breaking and formation, electron transfer, and others) occur on
ultrafast time scales. This acquisition will exploit the extreme versatility of
the instrument in the growing field of ultrafast spectroscopy. The instrument is
part of a program to develop a strong ultrafast spectroscopic capability to
stimulate a number of research programs as well as to provide a base for
collaborations with colleagues at national labs and universities in the
Northwest. A number of collaborations with researchers from around the Northwest
who are interested in using the instrument have been initiated. As an
educational institution, all aspects of the work will be performed by graduate
students, select undergraduates, and postdocs as part of their academic
experience. This will provide a rich training experience in the growing field of
ultrafast methodology.&lt;br/&gt;