* 0923796
* Ethylene Signal Transduction: Proteomics and Molecular Mechanisms
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2014
* Caren Chang, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 06/30/2014
* USD 606,000.00

Intellectual merit. Ethylene is a gaseous plant hormone that has profound
effects on numerous aspects of plant growth and development, including adaptive
responses to a wide range of biotic and abiotic stresses. The current framework
of the ethylene signal transduction pathway starts with ethylene perception and
leads to changes in gene expression. Much of what is known about the ethylene
signaling pathway is based on genetic dissection in the reference plant
Arabidopsis thaliana. While great progress has been made in identifying key
players in the signaling pathway, the molecular mechanisms by which these
proteins signal remain largely unknown. A limitation is that genetic screens
cannot directly detect hormone-induced changes in protein level, activity,
localization or function, which form the basis of signal transduction. In
addition, a number of components may be recalcitrant to genetic dissection. This
project has two objectives. The first is to attain new levels of understanding
of ethylene signal transduction using proteomic methods to identify previously
unknown ethylene signaling components and their molecular mechanisms. These
methods will identify proteins that are rapidly modified in response to
ethylene, as well as proteins that physically interact in the pathway. Protein
modification and protein-protein interactions are essential to the mechanisms of
intracellular signal transduction, but have been relatively unexplored in
ethylene signaling. The second objective is to carry out analyses of mutants and
genes that are currently in hand, with a particular focus on a gene called RTE1,
which regulates signaling by the ETR1 ethylene receptor. RTE1 is a novel
membrane protein conserved in plants, animals and some protists. The cellular
role of RTE1 and how RTE1 specifically regulates ETR1 signaling will be
investigated through a combination of molecular genetics, cell biology and
biochemistry approaches. The extensive molecular genetic tools that exist for
ethylene signaling, coupled with the availability of powerful proteomic methods,
provide an exceptional opportunity to advance our knowledge of ethylene signal
transduction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. This project provides
research training and mentoring of undergraduates, graduate students, and a
postdoctoral researcher, who are typically from underrepresented groups.
Laboratory members will present their research at a variety of scientific
meetings, both local and international, and will participate in teaching
outreach. The postdoctoral researcher will follow a career development plan
supported by research training in the laboratory, student mentoring experiences
and professional development seminars and workshops. Given the fundamental
importance of ethylene in plant growth and development, the mechanistic insights
provided by the proposed studies could have an impact on enhancing agricultural
products for human nutrition and plant biomass optimization.&lt;br/&gt;