* 0923159
* MRI: Development of a Single Particle Mass Spectrometer for Field and Laboratory Studies of the Environmental Impact of Atmospheric Aerosols and Engineered Nanoparticles
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Paul Kleiber, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2013
* USD 440,595.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award from the Major Research
Instrumentation (MRI) program, Mark Young and colleagues Vicki Grassian, and
Paul Kleiber from the University of Iowa will develop a single particle aerosol
mass spectrometer. The proposed aerosol mass spectrometer will acquire
correlated size and chemical composition information on individual particles,
sampled at atmospheric pressure and in real time. The proposed mass spectrometer
will be used in a number of studies of particulate matter in the environment,
including atmospheric aerosols, bioaerosols and engineered nanoparticles. These
studies are expected to have an impact in a number of areas from climate science
to health. The project will be carried out by a diverse group of scientists,
working together in a highly interdisciplinary area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mass
Spectrometry (MS) is one of the key analytical methods used to identify and
characterize small quantities of chemical species embedded in complex matrices.
The mass spectrometer developed in this award will be able to identify the
chemical composition of single aerosol particles. Aerosols are important species
in a number of important areas including climate science, but they remain
difficult to study, as they represent only a small fraction of the mass of the
atmosphere. At the same time, they can have a disproportionate impact on the
chemical and physical properties of the atmosphere. Research enabled by the
instrumentation to be developed in this award will help to determine the impact
of aerosols on climate, atmospheric chemistry and human health. The young
scientists working with the researchers on this project will obtain valuable
training in the development of new kinds of sophisticated equipment -- training
that will be prepare them for careers in science and technology.