* 0923581
* MRI:  Development of a Chemical Ionization Time-of-Flight Mass Spectrometer for On-line Organic Aerosol Analysis
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Kimberly Prather, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 07/31/2013
* USD 586,523.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a novel
chemical ionization aerosol time-of-flight mass spectrometer (CI-ATOFMS) that
will couple the soft and selective ionization of CI, the ion trapping and
transfer properties of an electrodynamic ion funnel (IF), and a high resolution
orthogonal acceleration time-of-flight (oa-TOF) mass spectrometer to produce a
highly sensitive and selective instrument for characterizing the organic content
of atmospheric aerosols. The new instrument will complement existing measurement
methods while providing unique insights into the sources and processes leading
to the large variety of organic species that exist in aerosols. The analytical
capabilities of CI-ATOFMS include: 1) obtaining real-time information on organic
species in individual particles; 2) providing information on surface versus bulk
species; and 3) selectively analyzing specific classes of compounds. The ability
to identify the organic content of single aerosol particles and further classify
the aerosols into broad categories based on their source, age, and/or mixing
state will make possible a transformative step towards understanding the impact
of aerosols on health and the environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond
atmospheric chemistry, performing sensitive on-line CI mass spectrometry on
small complex mixtures will open new doors for the analysis of systems such as
single cells, particles in water and air (i.e., viruses, phytoplankton,
bacteria), pharmaceutical powders, nanomaterials, and allergens such as mold and
pollen. On-line analysis has the added benefit of minimal sample preparation,
high throughput and rapid screening of compounds, which are current needs in the
pharmaceutical industry, organic and biochemical synthesis, early-cancer
screening and disease detection, on-line single cell proteomics, and biological
mass spectrometry. Working on this instrument development project will provide
unique experiences to graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, and
undergraduates as the instrument is designed, built, and tested. From an
analytical chemistry perspective, students will be trained in the analysis and
deconvolution of complex mixtures using state-of-the-art instrumentation and
computational tools. All members of the principal investigator's group are
proactive in outreach programs to educate the public and they participate
regularly in university and community outreach activities. During the summers,
the group hosts undergraduates who participate in research programs at the
University of California, San Diego that specifically serve underrepresented
minorities (African Americans, Chicanos, Latinos, Native Americans, and Pacific
Islanders) majoring in chemistry, physics, or other sciences. In addition, the
newly developed instrument will receive extensive exposure through public
outreach efforts run through the Birch Aquarium at Scripps Institution of
Oceanography, which hosts approximately 400,000 visitors per year.