* 0923474
* MRI: Acquisition of Atomic Force Microscopes for Cross-Disciplinary Materials Research and Education
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* David Wipf, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2012
* USD 463,399.00

0923474&lt;br/&gt;Walters&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding is requested for two custom configured,
versatile Atomic Force Microscope (AFM) instruments such as the Veeco BioScope
II and MultiMode, which can perform all major scanning probe and force
measurement techniques along with combined AFM and biologically-relevant optical
characterization, mechanical property/structural characterization, and
electrochemical analysis in temperature-controlled gas and liquid media. Both
instruments will be housed in the Electron Microscope Center (EMC) at MSU, a
university-wide center that fosters a unique research-intensive learning
environment. This multi-user facility is available to post-doctoral researchers
and graduate and undergraduate students from all of the colleges, departments,
and research centers at MSU. The AFM User Team (comprised of PIs who will
heavily utilize the instrument and SIs and Minor Users for whom access will add
dimensionality to their research) has a critical need for AFM characterizations.
Many outsource imaging which raises concerns of sample integrity and time
delays. Open access AFM will bring new materials characterization capabilities
to the MSU campus, which are necessary for current research activities to expand
and new research activities and collaborations to develop. A dedicated
postdoctoral associate will ensure that the instruments are used to their
fullest capacity and the body of AFM knowledge grows with time. Further, student
researchers will gain the educational depth afforded by directly learning to
characterize samples.