* 0923610
* EAGER: Rapid DNA detection with a fluctuating surface-active peptide
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Raymond Tu, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 08/31/2011
* USD 50,000.00

0923610 Tu

Intellectual Merit:

In this proposal, the PI addresses early stage exploration of the concept that
peptide folding dynamics can be applied to accelerate the kinetics in selective
binding processes. This is important because the ability to couple a particular
illness with a specific biological marker, such as DNA, is increasing faster
than the ability to rapidly detect those markers in a complex environment. A
significant interdisciplinary effort has been invested in looking at the
sequence specific detection of low molecular weight DNA markers, but these
efforts still do not match the ability of native biological molecules to use
dynamics to detect DNA markers in high molecular weight systems. This
exploratory research idea focuses on how one can engineer a new biomimetic
platform that applies accelerated kinetics to develop rapid sensing
technologies. In order to accomplish this, one needs to balance the energy
landscape of folded and unfolded peptide populations, which involves an
inherently complex and risky set of experiments. The approach relies on an
algorithm that combines binary sequence design and naturally occurring DNA
binding sequences to develop novel peptides. These untested biomolecules are
distinctly different from existing biomolecules, which are designed to stabilize
a particular folded state. They will hybridize their previously developed
tunable surface active peptide design with a DNA binding motif and measure the
selectivity, avidity and kinetics of binding as a function of the fluctuating
secondary structure. If these early stage experiments are successful, they will
establish the molecular basis for designing peptides with fast kinetics and
highly selective binding. This new paradigm for molecular design could then open
doors to explore a variety of fundamental questions and technologies. The next
step to transform this idea into a viable technology depends on (1) the ability
to translate the fast kinetics into a sensitive and robust sensor and (2) the
ability to translate the selectivity to a wide range of targets beyond DNA.

Broader Impact:

The scientific outcomes of the proposed work will contribute to the basic
understanding of cooperative folding and binding processes that result in
enhanced kinetics. Moreover, the proposed exploratory work is in its early
stages, but successful experiments demonstrating the research idea will lead to
a generation of biomolecules designed for dynamic behavior rather than static
lock and key binding. These designs can be transformed into a general
biotechnology based on quickly searching complex mixtures. Several elements of
this program could be integrated into outreach efforts at CCNY. These efforts
provide opportunities for students from the High School of Math, Science and
Engineering (HSMSE) in Harlem to graduate students in CUNY to participate in
research and learn about interdisciplinary science and engineering. The far
reaching goals of this integrated research and teaching plan match CCNY's
mission to provide quality education to a highly diverse student body (36%
Hispanic, 30% black, 23% Asian and 11% white).