* 0923070
* MRI:  Development of a 32 Tesla all Superconducting Magnet Using YBa2Cu3O7-X Coated Conductor
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* David Larbalestier, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 09/30/2013
* USD 1,999,942.00

0923070&lt;br/&gt;Markiewicz&lt;br/&gt;Florida State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This award is funded under the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary: A 32 Tesla superconducting
magnet based on YBCO coated conductor will be designed, fabricated and installed
in a user facility at the National High Magnetic field Laboratory. The magnet
will be the first major application of High Temperature Superconductors in a
very high field solenoid magnet. The 32 T magnet will consist of three inner
YBCO coils with a combined field of 17 T in a background field of 15 T produced
by a Low Temperature Superconductor outer magnet. The magnet will have a cold
bore of 34 mm with a field uniformity of 5x10-4 in a 1 cm. spherical volume. The
length of YBCO coated conductor contained in the magnet is 8 km. The design and
fabrication of the 32 T magnet will be preceded by a development activity for
the YBCO coils. The conductor will be characterized for superconducting and
mechanical properties. Aspects of the magnet technology including winding,
joints, insulation, and reinforcement will be examined through modeling and test
coils. Quench protection will be studied in a series of small coils. The results
of the development activities will be incorporated in two prototype coils that
will demonstrate both pancake winding and layer winding, tested at high field
and stress. The 15 T LTS outer magnet will be specified and procured from a
commercial supplier. The combined magnet and cryostat will be assembled and
tested, and then installed in the micro-Kelvin user facility at the
NHMFL.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Layman Summary: Ever since the discovery of High
Temperature Superconductors in 1987, there has been promise of new technologies
that will be made possible by these materials. One of these technologies is very
high field superconducting magnets. The importance of lower field
superconducting magnets has become familiar in the form of medical imaging
magnets. Very high field superconducting magnets are used at the forefront of
advanced materials research and in the study of biological systems including
proteins and viruses. The possibility of using High Temperature Superconductors
in very high field magnets is of particular interest to the National High
Magnetic Field Laboratory, which has the charter to provide facilities and
access to high magnetic fields to researchers nationally. Presently, very high
magnetic fields are achieved with the age old technology of electromagnets using
copper conductor windings. These magnets require large amounts of electric
power, with the result that research time is limited due to cost.
Superconducting magnets operate at a fraction of the electric power even when
operated continuously. Up until now, superconducting magnets have been
restricted to moderate field values because of fundamental performance
limitations of the superconductors being used. But High Temperature
Superconductors are also High Field Superconductors, and in particular the High
Temperature Superconductor Yttrium Barium Copper Oxide (YBCO), also called
simply 1-2-3, has advanced rapidly in commercial development to the point that
it is ready for application in high field magnets. The process of building high
field magnets using YBCO requires further invention, and this will be addressed
in the 32 Tesla magnet project. The 32 Tesla magnet will be an important first
step in the technological revolution in high field magnets that will be made
possible with the use of High Temperature Superconductors.