* 0923006
* MRI:  Acquisition of an Ultrafast Laser System for the Fabrication of Three-Dimensional Photonic Devices
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Ming King Chyu, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 07/31/2011
* USD 278,040.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides funding to acquire
a high-power, high-repetition-rate, wavelength-tunable, femtosecond ultrafast
laser system to study laser material interaction and to fabricate three-
dimensional photonic devices. The ultrafast laser processing defines the
forefront of today?s laser processing technology. Femtosecond laser pulses drive
universal multi-photon photosensitivity process to change refractive index in
many transparent materials. By tightly focusing the laser beam into optical
substrates, the multi-photon process produces below diffraction-limit nanometer-
size refractive index change for the ultra-high precision optical device
fabrication. Laser-induced material damage can be mitigated by exploiting the
bulk heating effect from high-repetition laser pulses. Using the acquired laser
system, the mechanism of ultrafast laser photosensitivity will be thorough
studied. The optimal laser processing window for a wide array of optical
materials will be explored to fabricate high performance three-dimensional
photonic devices that are un-attainable by other fabrication approach.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The success of the proposed research will yield a cross-
platform laser fabrication technique to produce high-quality and low-loss
lightwave circuits in a wide array of optical substrates for both active and
passive applications. It will drastically increase the density, functionality,
and complexity of the optical circuitry. This program also enables unique multi-
disciplinary training opportunities for both graduate and undergraduate
students. Training opportunities will cover all aspects of the laser fabrication
technology including lasers, optical designs, computer control, machine vision,
microstructure analysis, fiber optics, and nonlinear optics. Recruited through
the University of Pittsburgh?s minority mentor EXCEL program, underrepresented
minority and female students to will be encouraged to participate in academic
research and training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;