* 0923127
* MRI: Acquisition of a DualBeam FIB/SEM
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Yingwei Fei, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 07/31/2012
* USD 480,000.00

0923127&lt;br/&gt;Fei&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5)." In this
proposal submitted to the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program, the PIs
request $480K to acquire materials characterization equipment. Requested is a
dual beam FIB/SEM (focused ion beam/scanning electron microscope) system. The
instrument will be outfitted in existing space in proximity to the SEM. The
institution will provide renovation funding. A full-time, dedicated microbeam
specialist and a part-time electronics engineer will oversee maintenance and
operation. The microbeam specialist will be responsible for on-site new user
training. Usage will be allocated by an FIB committee which will also set user
rates and administer maintenance costs through institutional funds, grants and
user fees. The instrumentation will assist in sample characterization, sample
preparation and micro/nano fabrication. It will support multiple projects
allowing investigators to characterize small samples from various sources such
as high-pressure mineral physics experiments, natural diamond and melt
inclusions, meteoric organic matter and pre-solar grains, and CVD single crystal
diamond. Diamond anvil performance will be enhanced through micro/nano-
fabrication efforts targeted at cell assembly design made possible by the
FIB/SEM. The FIB/SEM will be a critical addition to ongoing studies in
cosmochemistry and astrobiology, organic geochemistry and ancient biochemistry,
inorganic geochemistry and petrology, and high pressure geophysics. The
instrumentation will serve a regional and community need. Due to the
institutional support, the instrument will operate effectively and allowing
high-precision analysis by researchers (students, post-docs, PIs) of all skill
levels. There will be a strong interfacing with COMPRES. Training will be made
available to all users and this acquisition will enhance multiple
interdisciplinary research projects and train future SEM and high pressure
physics scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***