* 0923928
* STTR Phase II:  Intraventricular Cooling Catheter
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2009,09/30/2013
* John Elefteriades, CoolSpine LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2013
* USD 599,925.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will build upon the
success demonstrated in the Phase I program and further develop the
Intraventricular Cooling Catheter, whose purpose is to induce localized
therapeutic hypothermia while maintaining systemic normothermia and thus to act
as a neuroprotective modality to mitigate brain injury in traumatic brain
injury, and stroke, and post-cardiac arrest brain injury in humans. In Phase II
our primary objectives are: 1) design and development of commercially viable
prototypes of the system components (Controller and Catheter); 2) determination
of system's range of effectiveness in cooling tissue in various regions of the
brain (cooling map of brain); and 3) determination of system's safety and
efficacy profile. Improvements will be developed to both the catheter and the
controller based on our Phase I experience. Animal trials using a sheep model
will be conducted to determine the system's performance and efficacy in brain
application. Finally, an IDE safety trial will be conducted (in spine
application). We anticipate that the results of this work will provide the
foundation for this intraventricular cooling catheter to be used as an adjunct
modality to other treatments for neuroprotection due to cerebral ischemia in
stroke and traumatic brain injury, as well as in cardiovascular surgery.

The broader impact of this Phase II work addresses the challenge of neurological
deficits relating to cerebral ischemia. Cerebral ischemia reduces oxygen
delivery to brain cells and initiates the process of cellular death. Stroke and
Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI) are the two most prevalent causes of icshemic brain
injury. 780,000 strokes occur annually in the United States with 87% of them
being ischemic. Stroke is the third leading cause of death and the leading cause
of disability. Additionally, stroke strikes blacks at a rate twice that of
whites. TBI results in 235,000 hospitalizations each year and 50,000 deaths. The
challenge of TBI has increased even more in the US military where, due to the
nature of modern warfare, rates of brain injury have increased from 12%-14% to
an estimated 22%. Neurological deficits from cerebral ischemia cry out for novel
therapies. Over $119 billion in direct and indirect costs to society are
incurred annually from Stoke and TBI, $68.9 billion for stroke and 60 billion
for TBI. These diseases affect all sectors of society and the development of a
novel device to induce localized hypothermia while maintaining systemic
normothermia will have a significant impact on clinical practice.

