* 0923561
* MRI: Acquisition of an Isothermal Titration Calorimeter for Research and Teaching
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Paulus Weers, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2012
* USD 334,625.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) program, Brian L.
McClain and his colleagues Eric Marinez, Vasanthy Narayamaswami, Michael Schramm
and Paulus M. Weers will acquire an isothermal titration calorimeter. It will be
used in a variety of research projects including: 1) effects of drug binding on
the structure-function relationships of human serum albumin; 2) alpha-helical
peptidomimetics; 3) receptor assisted small molecule membrane transport; 4)
molecular recognition of anions and organoammoniums; 5) asymmetric Lewis acid
catalyzed organic reactions in aqueous media; 6) hepatic iron metabolism; 7)
structure-function relationships of lactoferrin; 8) apolipoprotein E and
cholesterol metabolism in Alzheimer's and cardiovascular diseases;9) structural
role of apolipoproteins in lipid transport and innate immunity; and 10) collagen
derived biomaterials.

Isothermal titration calorimetry is used to determine thermodynamic properties
of chemical reactions, or of biomolecular interactions such as the binding of
small molecules to other species by measuring temperature changes when
substances are mixed (titrated). These changes provide insight on the underlying
microscopic processes that are occurring, such as the strength of the binding
between the two species or the energy released in a reaction. The instruments
will be used in research and laboratory classes by undergraduate students. The
instrumentation will be located in the Institute for Integrated Research in
Materials, Environments and Society (IIRMES) at California State University,
Long Beach (CSULB). Through the Institute, the instrument will be remotely
accessible, providing usability off-site to geographically dispersed users in
California, particularly other CSU campuses.