* 0923509
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Scanning Electron Microscope with e-Beam Lithographic Capability
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Thomas Myers, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 09/30/2012
* USD 489,707.00

0923509&lt;br/&gt;Theodoropoulou&lt;br/&gt;Texas State U. - San
Marcos&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary: The ability to both pattern and
image at the nanoscale is indispensable for present-day materials science. The
acquisition of a FEI NOVA NanoSEM 230, Ultra High Resolution Scanning Electron
Microscope (SEM) capable of electron beam (e-beam) lithography provides the
capability and reliability necessary for interdisciplinary research in the new
Materials Science and Engineering Ph.D. program at Texas State University. This
instrument eliminates barriers to research productivity presented by the
existing antiquated SEM capable only for larger scale imaging, and enables the
platform for interdisciplinary research linking innovation and discovery between
the physical, engineering, and biological sciences. This Field Emission (FE) SEM
combines high- and low-voltage ultra-high resolution with an imaging resolution
of 1.0 nm and a writing resolution of nominally &lt;10 nm at 30 kV. Importantly,
20-nm patterning can be done routinely. The system features: a high stability
ultra-high brightness FE electron source with high beam current capability; low
pattern distortion and drift; high precision stage and pattern overlay;
environmental SEM technologies; high speed electrostatic beam blanker; and gas
injection systems for direct e-beam writing of nanostructures. The e-beam
writing capability enables fabrication of structures applicable to
multidisciplinary problems such as investigation of nanostructure based photonic
or electronic biological sensors for molecular recognition, nano devices for
more efficient energy conversion, and the spin physics of magnetic
nanostructures. The SEM?s accessibility, ease of use, and consistency make the
e-beam system ideal for integration into our educational and research programs
benefitting undergraduate, graduate and post doctoral students. The core faculty
involved in this project at Texas State, which anticipates achieving Hispanic
Serving Institution status next year, will use the instrument to enhance
outreach programs to assure the maximum opportunity for training and research by
a diverse population of students. &lt;br/&gt;Layman Summary: The ability to both
pattern and image at the nanoscale is indispensable for present-day materials
science. The acquisition of an Ultra High Resolution Scanning Electron
Microscope (SEM) capable of electron beam lithography provides this necessary
capability for interdisciplinary research in the new Materials Science and
Engineering Ph.D. program at Texas State University. This instrument eliminates
barriers to research productivity presented by the existing antiquated SEM
capable only for larger scale imaging, and provides the platform for
interdisciplinary research linking innovation and discovery between the
physical, engineering, and biological sciences enabling advances in nanoscale
materials research for health, energy and security applications. The electron-
beam writing capability enables fabrication of structures at the nanoscale
(10-7m - 10-9 m) applicable to multidisciplinary problems such as investigation
of nanostructure based biological sensors for molecular recognition, nano
devices for more efficient energy conversion, and the spin physics of magnetic
nanostructures. The SEM?s accessibility, ease of use, and consistency make the
electron-beam system ideal for integration into our educational programs
benefitting undergraduate, graduate and post doctoral students. The core faculty
involved in this project at Texas State, which anticipates achieving Hispanic
Serving Institution status next year, will use the instrument to enhance
outreach programs to assure the maximum opportunity for training and research by
a diverse population of students.