* 0923295
* MRI: Acquisition of a Comprehensive Multi-Dimensional Gas Chromatograph with Time-of-Flight Mass Spectrometry Detection (GCxGC-TOF MS)
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Mark Maloney, Spelman College
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2012
* USD 228,505.00

&lt;br/&gt;With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI)
program, the Chemistry Department at Spelman College will acquire a multi-
dimensional gas chromatograph with time-of-flight mass spectrometry detection
(GCxGC-TOF MS) for use in research and education. The instrumentation will be
used in various research projects in organic, physical and analytical chemistry
as well as biology/biochemistry and chemometrics. One project involves the
systematic characterization of a large number of possible gas chromatography
column combinations to establish the fingerprints of each type of column set
under standard operating procedures and various operating temperatures. The
GC/MS equipment will be used to determine the thermodynamics of partitioning of
the analytes in the mixture for each individual column in order to build a
database for use in column selection studies through predictive multi-
dimensional retention modeling. The ability to predict two-dimensional
chromatograms from one-dimensional GC data will enable potential users of the
technology to evaluate the merits of GCxGC with their current instrumentation.
Another project involves the use of GCxGC/MS to assist in the characterization
of a wide variety of organic molecules that are being developed through the use
of novel microwave-assisted organic synthetic protocols that target an
implementation of Green Chemistry. One of the two interdisciplinary projects
involves the development of data mining and pattern recognition algorithms for
use in multi-dimensional chromatography. The other interdisciplinary project
will involve the use of multi-dimensional gas chromatography for the analysis of
small molecular weight biomolecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mass spectrometry (MS)
is an analytical technique used by chemists and biochemists to identify the
chemical composition of a sample and its purity by measuring the mass of the
molecular constituents in the sample. Chromatography is an isolation technique
that precedes the mass spectrometry analysis. It separates a mixture into its
several constituent chemicals which are then analyzed and identified by the mass
spectrometer. Multi-dimensional gas chromatography (GCxGC) employs two
separation columns with different separation characteristics to better analyze
complicated mixtures. This modern instrumentation will improve the education and
training of undergraduate students in research. It will also be used in several
upper-level courses in the chemistry department. New laboratory exercises will
be developed to take advantage of the multi-dimensional chemical data produced
by the instrumentation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;