* 0923250
* Acquisition of a Global Sizing Velocimeter, Aerodynamic Particle Sizer, and Tethersonde Array to Advance Aerosol Technology Engineering and Science on the High Plains
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2011
* Brent Auvermann, West Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2011
* USD 469,671.00

0923250&lt;br/&gt;DeOtte&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;West Texas A&amp;M University
(WTAMU) is a regional university emerging as a research institution and seeks to
strengthen the agricultural air quality program through acquisition of an
aerodynamic particle sizer (APS), global sizing velocimeter (GSV), vibrating
orifice aerosol generator (VOAG), and tethersonde equipped to measure parameters
of the boundary layer in the vicinity of agricultural operations. The goal of
acquiring the requested instrumentation is to apply advanced engineering
techniques and principles to the solution of environmental problems associated
with production agriculture. Objectives include understanding atmospheric
boundary layers to allow better dispersion modeling, accurate measurement of the
efficacy of dust suppression, and integration of modern engineering
instrumentation into high school and undergraduate classrooms, labs, and
research experiences in conjunction with ongoing NSF STEP and S-STEM
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Investigators aligned with two agencies, one
academic and one research oriented, and representing several disciplines
including mechanical engineering, agricultural and biological engineering, and
environmental science, will use the requested equipment to provide data for the
solution of problems associated with several aspects of agriculture and
environmental quality. The GSV and tethersonde will all be applied to provide
the insight into boundary layer development around concentrated animal feeding
operations (CAFOs) necessary for realistic dispersion modeling of pollutants
including aromatic compounds and PM, both of which are increasingly being
scrutinized by the USEPA. The GSV and APS can gather data necessary to
critically evaluate dust suppression at CAFOs so sound engineering principles
may be applied to this important problem.