* 0923493
* MRI:  Development of Research Infrastucture for Neutrino and Astroparticle Phyics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Andreas Piepke, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 08/31/2013
* USD 301,900.00

Neutrino physics and particle astrophysics connect our knowledge of the largest
structures in the Universe with that of the smallest building blocks of matter
and of the forces acting between them. This multidisciplinary research and
diversity spans the fields of cosmology, astrophysics, elementary particle
physics, and materials. Future experiments in neutrino physics will aim to
determine the nature of the neutrino, precisely measure the neutrino masses and
mixing angles, and search for CP violation in the neutrino sector. Future
experiments in particle astrophysics will address questions concerning the
sources and composition of the highest-energy cosmic rays, the distribution and
nature of dark matter, and cosmological evolution including the phenomenon of
dark energy. Not only do experiments in neutrino physics and particle
astrophysics have overlapping scientific goals, but they also employ many common
detection techniques. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will fund the development
of major research instrumentation to support the design and construction of
future experiments in neutrino physics and particle astrophysics. These
experiments are large in size yet demanding in the control of backgrounds and
understanding of detector response. The instrumentation funded by this award is
comprised of a low background, high-efficiency counting capability with high
throughput, enhanced by the technique of neutron activation analysis, for
qualifying materials for ultralow background experiments and instrumentation for
the detailed characterization of radioactive sources fabricated for detector
calibration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the research supported
by the instrumentation includes development of new techniques for characterizing
materials; training of undergraduate and graduate students in the use of
sophisticated instruments to characterize materials and processes for science
and technology; and laboratory infrastructure to support a critical expansion of
their research scope.