* 0923360
* MRI: Acquistion of Equipment Enhancing the Ultrafast Spectroscopy Capabilities of the Center for Photochemical Sciences at BGSU
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Douglas Neckers, Bowling Green State University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2013
* USD 481,976.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award from the Major Research
Instrumentation (MRI) program, the Ohio Laboratory for Kinetic Spectrometry and
the Center for Photochemical Sciences at Bowling Green State University will
acquire ultrafast spectroscopy instrumentation. The instrumentation comprises an
ultrafast amplified laser system, two optical parametric amplifiers covering
wavelengths from the deep ultraviolet to the infrared, as well as new pieces of
apparatus for vibrational spectroscopy to be used with existing laser systems.
The infrastructure will be used to advance a number of research projects in the
chemical, biological and materials sciences: 1) high quantum efficiency
coordination polymers for OLED applications; 2) ultrafast electronic dynamics in
Pt(II) acetylide complexes; 3) proton-coupled electron transfer in chemical and
biological systems; 4) single-molecule chemical imaging of interfacial electron
transfer; 5) organic reaction mechanisms; 6) electronic dynamics in metal -
peptide nanoassemblies; 6) solution organic photochemistry; and 7) photoaffinity
labeling tools for the study of complex biological systems and nucleic acid
damage. In addition, the instrumentation will be made available to a broad range
of external users as part of the impressive photochemical user facility at
Bowling Green State University. Young scientists working at the facility will
have exposure to cutting-edge spectroscopic instrumentation, helping them gain
expertise with an important class of research
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Photochemistry is the study of the interaction of
matter with light, and the subsequent distribution of the absorbed energy into a
material. Photochemical infrastructure, like that supported in this award, helps
scientists better understand how materials interact with light. This has
profound implications in a wide variety of important areas -- from the
conversion of sunlight to electrical energy to the damage of DNA by ultraviolet
light. A better understanding of photochemistry helps society better harness the
beneficial nature of the light-matter interaction, while mitigating its harmful
aspects.&lt;br/&gt;