* 0923950
* Facile Production and Efficient Indexing of Transposon-tagged Lines Using Next-generation Sequencing Technology for Maize
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Hugo Dooner, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 08/31/2014
* USD 1,703,515.00

PI: Hugo K. Dooner (Rutgers University)&lt;br/&gt;CoPIs: Chunguang Du (Montclair
State University) and Randall A. Kerstetter (Rutgers
University)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Transposable element (TE) insertions cause
mutations that help researchers to elucidate gene function. Collections of
insertions that have been sequence-indexed (i.e., in which the host DNA adjacent
to the insertion is known) are valuable resources in organisms with a sequenced
genome and have been identified by the maize community as essential to fully
exploit the maize genome sequence just generated. Recently, the feasibility of
combining high-throughput DNA sequencing with efficient multi-dimensional
pooling strategies to rapidly and simultaneously sequence and index hundreds of
new insertions has been demonstrated. This project will develop and use a
general method for generating, sequencing, and indexing Ac/Ds transposable
element insertions in maize that is rapid, accurate, and cost-effective by
taking advantage of next-generation sequencing technology. Specifically, the
project will: (1) sequence-index a collection of existing lines that contain a
unique transposed Ac element; (2) complete a set of 120 roughly equidistant
transgenic Ds elements that serve as launching platforms and carry easily scored
markers that will allow simple visual selection of element transposition from
any region of the genome and, thus, enable researchers to generate regional gene
knock-out collections, (3) sequence-index 10,000 Ds element insertion sites from
model platforms using a novel method that should be applicable to any collection
of insertions produced in a common genetic background; and (4) develop a web-
searchable database of insertion site sequences cross-referenced to lines that
will be freely available from the Maize Genetics Stock Center
(http://maizecoop.cropsci.uiuc.edu). All relevant information from this project
will be accessible from MaizeGDB
(http://www.maizegdb.org).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses a
critical need in that it will deliver a sequence-indexed reverse genetics
resource, considered essential for researchers to fully exploit the maize genome
sequence. It will integrate next-generation sequencing technology at Rutgers
with bioinformatic sequence analysis at Montclair State University, a
predominantly undergraduate institution in NJ. Students at MSU will assist with
the assembly, annotation, and mapping of short reads as putative Ac-adjacent
sequences and with the design of primers for validation. The project will also
provide research training opportunities for MSU informatics and molecular
biology students, many of whom are from underrepresented groups. Students at
both Rutgers and MSU will also participate in the project as summer interns in
the molecular biology lab and maize genetics nursery.