* 0923803
* DynSyst Special Topics: Coupled Inertial Navigation System
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Antonio Palacios, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 07/31/2013
* USD 250,000.00

The goal of this project is to develop group-theoretical techniques to model,
analyze, and fabricate complex systems, with particular emphasis in a Coupled
Inertial Navigation Sensor (CINS) system made up of coupled vibratory
gyroscopes. Current prototype Micro-Electro-Mechanical Systems gyroscopes are
compact and inexpensive to produce but their performance characteristics, in
particular drift rate, fail to meet the requirements for an inertial guidance
system. The underlying principle of the project is to investigate the conditions
for the existence and stability of synchronization states among the sensing
modes of each of the individual gyroscopes, which preliminary results suggest
that such states can produce better robustness by minimizing phase drift and
susceptibility to jamming and other interferences. The approach to be used will
exploit the symmetry of the system directly to: formulate appropriate models;
analyze the dynamics; outline a systematic procedure for deriving reduced models
that can preserve the large-scale features of a CINS system while being amenable
to analysis; and be able to predict behavior before the system can be
fabricated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objectives outline above will help
advance the design and fabrication of complex engineered systems with gyroscopic
forces, such as navigational systems, hydroelastic and rotating systems, mono-
trains and boats/ships. From a mathematical point of view, the project will help
advance the field of bifurcations of coupled mechanical systems with symmetries.
From the educational point of view, the project will directly impact the
preparation of future computational scientists, engineers, and applied
mathematicians. In particular, recruiting and training of underrepresented
minorities for careers in science and engineering will be pursued through
established channels at the university, which already has a 40% population of
students from traditionally underrepresented groups. Outreach activities include
exhibits at a local museum and formal presentations at national and
international conferences. Additionally, graduate students will participate in
summer internships with collaborators from a local Navy laboratory to work on
translational research tasks to fabricate the CINS device.&lt;br/&gt;