* 0923370
* MRI: Acquisition of a Spectroscopic Ellipsometer for Surface and Materials Analysis at Lehigh University
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Gregory Ferguson, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2012
* USD 103,740.00

With this award from the Major Research and Instrumentation (MRI) program,
Professor Gregory S. Ferguson and Dimitri Vezenov of the Department of Chemistry
at Lehigh University will acquire a spectroscopic ellipsometer. It will be used
in a variety of research projects including studies of: 1) the electrochemically
directed self-assembly of monolayer films, 2) development of biosensors based on
single molecule arrays, 3) photoinduced changes in the optical properties of
chalcogenide glass bulk and thin films, 3) high indium-content InGaN and AlInGaN
semiconductors for energy applications, 4) determination of the thickness of
sol-gel coatings, 5) molecularly designed surfaces, 6) the development of
nanoporous inorganic, polymeric and polymer-biomolecule composite membranes, 7)
glued Langmuir-Blodgett bilayers, 8) glass science, processing and optical
properties of tellurite fibers, and 9) hydrogen in semiconductors.

Ellipsometry is an exceptionally simple technique for surface characterization
in terms of the quantitative measurement that it can provide - in the simplest
case, it is the thickness of a film or interface. It is frequently a technique
of first choice for routine characterization of thin films, soft or biological
interfaces and materials. The acquisition will contribute significantly to
state-of-the-art training of graduate and undergraduate researchers, as well as
postdoctoral fellows, in interdisciplinary studies. It will provide a robust
resource for incorporation into the undergraduate curricula.