* 0923264
* MRI: Acquisition of a Shared X-ray Diffractometer for Research, Education, and Training
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Amir Hoveyda, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2012
* USD 350,400.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) program, Lawrence
T. Scott and colleague Amir Hoveyda from Boston College will acquire a single
crystal X-ray diffractometer to support research in a variety of areas
including: 1) chemical synthesis of uniform, single-chirality carbon nanotubes;
2) design and development of new catalysts for chemical synthesis; 3) biomimetic
chemistry relevant to Photosystem II; 4) protein folding in lipid bilayers; 5)
identification of new classes of inhibitors of fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase; 6)
studies toward the asymmetric synthesis of complex dibenzofuranoids; 7) fused
nucleosides (fN) for the synthesis of fDNA; 8) catalytic diboration reactions
for use in synthesis; 9) catalytic scaffolding ligands; 10) advancing new
chemical methods with X-ray crystallography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technique
of single-crystal X-ray crystallography allows accurate and precise
determination of the full three dimensional structure of a molecule, including
bond distances and angles, and it provides accurate information about the
spatial arrangement of molecules relative to the neighboring molecules. These
studies will have an impact in a number of areas ranging from synthetic organic
and inorganic chemistry to systems of biological interest and materials
research. This instrument will be an integral part of teaching as well as
research.&lt;br/&gt;