* 0923485
* MRI:  Development of a Cavity Ring-Down Sensor for Real-Time Measurement of Atmospheric Mercury Concentrations and Fluxes
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Daniel Obrist, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 08/31/2013
* USD 653,473.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a real-time,
sensitive sensor for measurement of atmospheric mercury (Hg) to resolve
uncertainties in atmospheric Hg measurements imposed by low temporal resolution
of current sensors. Based on a laboratory prototype Hg sensor developed at the
Desert Research Institute (DRI), this project aims to (1) develop a fast-
response cavity ringdown sensor with open- and closed-path cavities to measure
atmospheric Hg; and (2) deploy and field-test the sensor, including the first
application for Hg flux measurement by means of eddy covariance. The goal is a
sensor that is stable, easy to deploy, and safe to operate at ground-based and
high-elevation research stations. Building on an existing prototype, a sensor
will be developed with fundamental design improvements and key technical
features, including improved mirror reflectivity, high-frequency wavelength
tuning for differential on/off absorption line measurement, automatic wavelength
locking, and optimized design, to significantly improve detection limits and
facilitate field deployments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new sensor for
measurement of atmospheric Hg concentrations and fluxes will enable significant
advances in knowledge of the distribution and dynamics of atmospheric Hg, the
primary source of Hg inputs to freshwater aquatic ecosystems. Better
quantification of Hg sources, sinks, transformations, and transport patterns
will be critical for regulatory agencies to protect humans and ecosystems from
this potent toxin. The project will involve high school, undergraduate, and
graduate students and post doctoral scholars. An educational component will be
targeted at underrepresented groups through participation in existing NSF-funded
projects that will (1) provide research experiences for a diverse group of
undergraduate students from several partner institutions, including several
Historically Black Universities and Hispanic-serving institutions; and (2)
enhance participation in workshop programs, mentoring, and promoting
collaboration with women faculty in atmospheric science and meteorology. Further
educational activities will include strengthening current partnerships with
local high schools and showcasing the sensor development in an atmospheric
instrumentation course at the University of Nevada, Reno. Outreach and
dissemination to the scientific community will be accomplished through
publications and presentations. The general public will be reached through news
releases, DRI institutional publications, and Web sites. Technology transfer for
the instrument being developed will be pursued.