* 0923909
* Collaborative Research: Reconstructing Prehistoric Land-Use Patterns in the Lower Rio Verde Valley, Oaxaca, Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,02/28/2015
* Arthur Joyce, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2015
* USD 53,770.00

Sedimentary and biological materials preserved in lakes and wetlands provide an
ecologically rich archive of past changes in vegetation communities resulting
from climate changes or anthropogenic impacts. They may also provide insights
into how past human societies were organized and how they used natural
resources. The focus of the Río Verde Early Agricultural Landscape Project
(Project RVEAL) is to understand prehistoric land use dynamics at landscape
scales. The research will reconstruct the vegetation and agricultural history of
the Lower Río Verde Valley, Oaxaca, Mexico for the last ~4000 years. Sediment
cores have been collected from ten estuarine, lake and archaeological settings
in the valley. The project will undertake detailed multi-proxy paleoecological
investigations at each site. Researchers will analyze the sediment stratigraphy,
macroscopic and microscopic charcoal, pollen, phytoliths and stable carbon
isotope signatures to document vegetation and land use changes resulting from
prehistoric agriculture. The sediment cores will be radiocarbon dated at key
stratigraphic locations in order to develop a chronology. The multi-proxy
analyses will be undertaken at a quasi-decadal sampling interval. The detailed
paleoecological data will complement existing archaeological data and thus
provide a unique opportunity to understand prehistoric land use patterns at a
spatial scale that is directly comparable to social and political changes within
the valley. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Traditionally prehispanic land use history in
Mesoamerica is derived from single site paleoecological analyses of lake
sediments by which broad scale regional understandings of vegetation
distribution and forest clearance for agriculture are reconstructed. Project
RVEAL moves beyond this regional analysis and will focus on reconstruction at
the local landscape scale using the paleoecological record. The research will
enable the construction of a sophisticated multiscalar model of prehispanic land
use and landscape change that integrates understandings of short-term and local
processes with long-term, regional ones. The project will provide an important
contribution to research on the impacts of prolonged human land use in tropical
ecosystems and will use a theoretical framework that may permit implementation
of comparable research activities elsewhere. This project will offer research
opportunities for both American and Mexican undergraduate and graduate students.
The research team is also partnering with personnel at the Museum of the Earth
to develop museum exhibits detailing the research process and findings.