* 0923442
* MRI: Acquisition of the Cyber-ShARE Collaborative Visualization System
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Jose Hurtado, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2012
* USD 699,671.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal #: CNS
09-23442&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Romero, Rodrigo; Gonzalez, Virgilio; Hurtado, Jose M.;
Konter, Jasper; Smith-Konter, Bridget R.&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of
Texas ? El Paso&lt;br/&gt; El Paso, TX 79968-0587&lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI/Acq.:
Acq. of the Cyber-ShARE Collaborative Visualization
System&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This project, acquiring
a collaborative visualization system referred to as the Cyber-ShARE
Collaborative Visualization System (C2ViS) to present high-resolution displays
of scientific datasets for exploratory monitoring, supports interdisciplinary
research and enables development of new visualization techniques for analyzing
and integrating large datasets from the geosciences, environmental sciences,
computational sciences, material sciences, biomedical engineering, and other
domains. The tile-display 32-monitor system will be driven by 32 workstations
interconnected by a high-speed network controlled by a single computer acting as
a head node. With an overall 131 megapixels display resolution, images using the
full resolution of the tiled-system are physically sent to each machine via
open-source software. Supporting a variety of exploratory applications, C2ViS
also supports both local and virtual organizations and serves as a resource for
city and county government entities, as well as regional school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;Applications include the visualization of tomography models
of the subsurface of the Earth, spatial surface datasets from geosciences and
environmental science communities, and 3-D solid models for advanced material
fabrication, tissue engineering, and biomodeling. In addition, the system will
extend Cyber-ShARE?s ability to support interdisciplinary projects, including
those related to knowledge representation, trust management, and visualization
of scientific data and results, CI-based geological model and data fusion for
integration of whole-Earth models, and characterization of ecological and
environmental phenomena through sensor network and data stream
organization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project contributes to
engage young faculty and attract quality researchers to this minority-serving
institution. A high-resolution system allows researchers to view data from
different perspectives and abstraction levels, enhancing analysis, exploration,
and discovery. Furthermore, the system will be used for outreach and education
programs to attract students to STEM fields. Middle high schools brought in for
summer workshops students will be excited and motivated by interacting with
complex graphical models.