* 0923021
* MRI: Acquisition of an Atomic Force Microscope Nanolithography DPN 5000 System
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Luis Rosa, University of Puerto Rico
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 09/30/2012
* USD 243,600.00

Proposal: 0923021&lt;br/&gt;Rosa&lt;br/&gt;University of Puerto
Rico&lt;br/&gt;MRI: Acquisition of an Atomic Force Microscope Nanolithography
DPN 5000 System&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: The University of
Puerto Rico System, through its Institute for Functional Nanomaterials (IFN),
will expand the Jurisdiction's capabilities in research and education, enhance
the innovation potential and collaborative nature of research projects in the
Jurisdiction, and foster the integration of undergraduate and graduate education
in research-intensive environments through the acquisition of an Atomic Force
Microscope Nanolithography System (AFM-NS) that will be the first in its class
in PR and will form part of the shared research facilities of the IFN. AFM-NS is
a direct writing technique were an AFM tip is used to deliver a substance
directly to a nanosize region of a substrate. The AFM-NS has been developed for
the fabrication of nanostructures with features ranging from a few nanometers to
hundreds of nanometers and the deposition of a large variety of substances, such
as small organic molecules, polymers, nanoparticles, large biomolecules and
inorganics, on either metal, semiconducting or insulating substrate surfaces. It
will provide UPR researchers with the ability to fabricate nanodevices in order
to test and exploit the emerging properties of nanoscale materials. The
applications of Atomic Force Microscope Nanolithography span the fields of
Engineering, Chemistry, Physics, Materials Science, and Biology. The Atomic
Force Microscope Nanolithography DPN 5000 System to be acquired is a fully-
integrated hardware and software system. The instrument can perform massive
parallel writing using 1D and 2D tip (55,000 tips) arrays with a line resolution
better than 10 nm. This cutting-edge Atomic Force Microscope Nanolithography
capability will enable the evolution to the next level in the following on-going
interdisciplinary research projects: DNA arrays as sensors, metal silicide
nanostructures functionalized for biosensors, nanolithography of polymeric lines
for graphite conversion, organic ferroelectric tunnel junction bottom up
nanofabrication, EMS base reconfigurable antennas, diblock copolymer for
nanocylinders and nanospheres fabrication, and miniaturized robust UV sensors.
The seven core faculty members involved in this project and twenty additional
experimental researchers of four UPR campuses (Rio Piedras, Mayaguez, Cayey,
Humacao and the School of Medicine) will learn Atomic Force Microscope
Nanolithography, explore applications of this technique to their research, and
request their research students to become trained in the use of the AFM-
NS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Abstract: The University of Puerto Rico
System, through its Institute for Functional Nanomaterials (IFN), will expand
the Jurisdiction?s capabilities in research and education, enhance the
innovation potential and collaborative nature of research projects in the
Jurisdiction, and foster the integration of undergraduate and graduate education
in research-intensive environments through the acquisition of an Atomic Force
Microscope Nanolithography System (AFM-NS). The Atomic Force Microscope
Nanolithography System to be acquired will be the first in its class in PR and
will form part of the shared research facilities of the IFN. The ability to
fabricate devices enabled by the AFM-NS will be used to test and exploit the
emerging properties of nanoscale materials. Applications of the AFM-NS span the
fields of Engineering, Chemistry, Physics, Materials Science, and Biology and
will enable the evolution to the next advanced level in the following on-going
interdisciplinary research projects: DNA arrays, functionalized metal silicide
nanostructures for biosensors, nanolithography of polymeric lines for graphite
conversion, organic ferroelectric tunnel junction bottom up nanofabrication,
miniaturized solar-blind UV sensors, EMS base reconfigurable antennas, and di-
block copolymer for nanostructure fabrication. The acquisition of AFM-NS will:
(a) foster the development of new and existing collaborative research projects
among institutions in PR and with strategic partners in other parts of the
Nation; (b) improve the pertinence and collaborative nature of academic programs
of four UPR campuses (Rio Piedras, Humacao, Mayaguez and Cayey), ranging from
B.S. to M.S. to the Ph.D. in Science and Engineering in the Jurisdiction, (c)
expose and familiarize technicians with the AFM-NS and its applications for the
nano/micro industry, and (d) help to increase and diversify the National pool of
highly-skilled scientific, engineering, and technical workforce.