* 0923430
* Acquisition of an ICP-MS for Interdisciplinary Water Quality and Geochemistry Research
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Julie Bartley, Gustavus Adolphus College
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2012
* USD 246,820.00

0923430&lt;br/&gt;Jeremiason&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; "This award is funded under
the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5)." In this
proposal submitted to the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program, the PIs
request ~$247K to acquire an ICP-MS for water quality and geochemistry research
in Minnesota. The studies will focus on Minnesota's aquatic resources and the
instrument will support students and researchers from several departments
including geology, chemistry and other STEM disciplines. The instrument will
support faculty from different departments with the overarching research focus
on biogeochemical metal cycling in Minnesota watersheds, elemental
transformations impacted by environmental change, mercury contamination and
cycling, anthropogenic metals, and soil biogeochemistry. Specific goals for this
new instrument will involve interdisciplinary student research opportunities for
geology, chemistry, biology and environmental studies students, support two new-
hire faculty (geology and chemistry), enhance external research competitiveness,
bring state-of-the-art equipment into the teaching environment, and provide a
regional resource for ICP-MS analyses. The instrumentation will serve a regional
and community need. Within the college, the departments of geology, chemistry,
biology and environmental science will all directly benefit from this
instrument. The instrument will be incorporated into the Louis Stokes Alliances
for Minority Participation program currently funded at the institution. This
will focus on providing research and learning opportunities to underrepresented
students. Partnerships with state and federal agencies interested in water
quality will ensure regional usage for this instrument. The instrument will be
housed in the Environmental Chemistry Lab - the PI's primary laboratory space.
The PI will retain ultimate responsibility for care and maintenance of the
instrument. The PI has determined that due to potential contamination issues,
proposed analyses will be performed sequentially with an analysis calendar ready
for scheduling. Gustavus college has committed to cover the operating costs
(~$10,000 per year including argon gas) for 5 years after the end of the grant.
After that period, a series of on-going grants and external users (at ~$250 per
day) will support the yearly expenses. The instrument will provide a regional
resource not currently available and will interface students with local, state
and federal regulatory agencies, providing both training and contacts for
potential employment opportunities. Broader impacts were seen as high due to
collaborations and the PIs' broad multi-disciplinary research portfolio and full
student involvement in all aspects of education and
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***