* 0923413
* MRI: Development of Combined Optically-pumped and Optically-detected NMR of Bulk and Nanostructured Semiconductors
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Sophia Hayes, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2013
* USD 375,539.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) program, Sophia
Hayes and her research group from Washington University - St. Louis will develop
an instrument capable of optically-pumped and optically-detected nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR) measurements. The proposed instrument will combine the
techniques of optically-pumped NMR and optically-detected NMR into a one-of-a-
kind instrument. The proposed spectrometer will be used to study bulk and nano-
structured semi-conductor materials. These materials have a number of important
optoelectronic properties, and the studies that will be carried out can directly
probe defect or trap sites, and study the impact of these sites on important
physical properties, such as carrier dynamics. The project will be carried out
by a diverse group of young scientists, including undergraduate and graduate
students. The research also features important collaborations with international
(University of Dortmund, Germany) and industrial research partners (Kopin
Coroporation and MEMC), further broadening the impact of this research.

New kinds of NMR techniques open up new avenues of research. The instrument
developed with this award will allow scientists to study the properties of
important materials, with unprecedented sensitivity. The instrument will be the
first of its kind, and will enable Hayes, her research students and
collaborators to probe the properties of technologically important materials. In
addition, the research students working on this project will receive an
interdisciplinary education, with the added benefits of exposure to
international and industrial collaborations, which will prepare them for
successful careers in science and technology.