* 0923752
* Agroecological Annotation of Gene Function and Computational Analysis of Gene Networks
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2010,05/31/2016
* C. Robertson McClung, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,652,782.00

PI: Cynthia Weinig (University of Wyoming)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CoPIs: Sanjoy
Das (Kansas State University), Julin N. Maloof (University of California -
Davis), C. Robertson McClung (Dartmouth College), Stephen M. Welch (Kansas State
University)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Key Collaborators: Doina Carragea and Gerard
Kluitenberg (Kansas State University), and Paula X. Kover [University of
Manchester (United Kingdom)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will examine plant
responses to vegetation density, which are commonly referred to as "shade-
avoidance" and which greatly affect yield in crop species. Two plant species,
Brassica rapa and Arabidopsis thaliana, are used in this research as models for
developing computational approaches that will enable both reconstruction of gene
networks that regulate density responses and prediction of different traits
(such as flowering time, height, and fruit set) from complex genotypes. Data
collection will include 1) quantifying the developmental, morphological, and
transcriptional responses of experimental genetic material (such as mutants and
segregating progeny) to realistic density treatments and controlled
manipulations of light quality indicative of high- and low-density; and 2)
recording near-plant environmental conditions in the field, including soil and
atmospheric variables, and incident spectra at 15-min intervals. Field studies
will provide an agroecologically relevant picture of gene function. In modeling,
the project will integrate genetic and environmental data to generate a more
complete gene network than is possible from mutant or laboratory studies alone.
Finally, because yield and other phenotypes serve as model outputs, the
computational approaches will enable the prediction of diverse traits from plant
genotypes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will 1) develop evolutionary
genetics modules to educate teachers on evolutionary theory and basic molecular
genetic approaches and 2) provide seed "kits" to be used in age-appropriate,
inquiry-based exercises. Approximately 75 teachers will be hosted annually in
Wyoming, and this educational outreach should ultimately reach between 60-70% of
all biology teachers in the state. As a further outreach component, the
computational technology to be used involves a network of computing volunteers.
Via the project website, this network provides another venue to distribute
educational materials. Finally, long-term, high-sampling-rate time series of
incident irradiance spectra are extremely rare but of interest to communities
ranging from plant scientists to solar energy researchers. The National
Renewable Energy Laboratory will web-deliver the wide-band spectral measurements
made as part of this research. DNA sequence and gene expression information will
be deposited in the NCBI (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) SRA and GEO databases.