* 0923797
* Collaborative Research:   The evolution of gene expression underlying fruiting body development in fungi
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Jeffrey Townsend, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 08/31/2012
* USD 298,724.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Shifts in gene expression drive
differentiation of tissues and the evolution of new morphologies in
multicellular organisms. However, studies linking the evolution of gene
expression and the evolution of development are difficult in complex organisms.
Fungi in the phylum Ascomycota, a group that includes a large number of
important plant and animal pathogens, provide an ideal forum for these studies
as they are easily manipulated, develop fruiting structures with a few well-
characterized tissue types, and feature many available and complete genome
sequences. This project will reveal elements of the underlying transcriptional
program of fruiting body development by profiling the genome-wide gene
expression in a diverse set of closely-related fungi in the Ascomycota class
Sordariomycetes. It will provide data on the evolution of genome-wide gene
expression, revealing evolved differences in the transcriptional basis of
morphological changes. These developmental processes are fundamental to sexual
reproduction, recombination, and to the adaptive dynamics of pathogens and
hosts. The project will determine the transcriptome of two plant pathogenic
Fusarium species and three species of Neurospora during fruit body development
under controlled environmental conditions. This information will then be used to
estimate the ancestral evolutionary transitions that resulted in the shifts in
morphology of these two genera. It is hypothesized that transcriptional elements
identified by this process will display distinct functions in the developmental
process, and functional analyses of these genes in F. graminearum and N. crassa
will be performed. Ultimately, the transcriptional studies and candidate gene
knockouts will reveal the regulatory circuits that control development. Such
regulatory circuits and gene identifications will suggest novel targets for
fungicides. The intellectual merit of the proposed activity will be to provide a
model for how transcriptional shifts drive evolution of morphological variation.
In addition, the proposal will identify the regulatory and structural components
of genes that function in fruit body development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide opportunities for cross-training in
evolutionary biology and functional biology for two graduate students and one
postdoctoral associate, and experience in molecular and developmental biology
for several undergraduate students. In addition, Dr. Trail will expand her
program in microbiology at a local Michigan elementary school. Dr. Townsend will
work with staff and students at a local high school designing two outdoor
classroom modules featuring ecosystems and the role of decomposers, linking to
Connecticut state standards for 6th grade. The modules will also to be
applicable to student tours of the school's natural site. Moreover, plant
pathogenic taxa frequently rely on the sexual stage to withstand environmental
variation, to recombine and create new genotypes, and to successfully evade host
defenses, yet it is a stage that may be sensitive to intervention and often
occurs under predictable conditions. These characteristics make fruit body
development a prime target for efforts to control fungal growth and
reproduction.