* 0923120
* MRI: Acquisition of a Nanoindentation System for Advanced Materials Research and Education
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2010
* John Moosbrugger, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 07/31/2010
* USD 231,625.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will acquire a high
capability nanoindentation system for research and education in advanced
materials at Clarkson University. Nanoindentation is used to probe the
mechanical properties of materials at the nano-size scale (approximately 10-7 to
10-9 meters). The system will include features needed to characterize a broad
range of materials such as nanocrystalline alloys, polymer nanocomposite films
and thin conducting films from metallic nanoparticle dispersion precursors. It
will provide critical information about the behavior of materials for a variety
of scientific and engineering challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
nanoindentation system will create new opportunities to integrate research,
education, training and outreach. The ability to probe mechanical properties at
nano-size scales is needed for films that are too thin to test using traditional
methods and for other materials whose properties are engineered by manipulating
their structure at these small length scales. This will immediately benefit
projects at Clarkson and produce results that will be transferred to industrial
partners through the Center for Advanced Materials Processing. This will benefit
the economy in New York State and elsewhere by enhancing research that
stimulates innovation in commercial products. The instrument will provide a new
tool for industry researchers in northern New York; it will provide invaluable
training opportunities for graduate students and be a resource for laboratory
demonstrations for many undergraduate and graduate courses. Moreover, the system
will enrich the research experience of a large number of undergraduate students,
and strengthen outreach efforts focused on elementary, middle school and high
school education in science, technology, engineering and mathematics.