* 0923023
* MRI: Acquisition of Transmission Electron Microscope at the University of Michigan-Dearborn
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2010
* Pravansu Mohanty, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 09/30/2010
* USD 416,325.00

0923023&lt;br/&gt;Mohanty&lt;br/&gt;U of Michigan Ann
Arbor&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary: The goal of this MRI grant is to
acquire a transmission electron microscope (TEM) to support the ongoing research
and instruction in engineering and science at the University of
Michigan?]Dearborn. The desired TEM will operate at 120kV and will be equipped
with CCD camera and EDS microanalysis system. The ongoing research projects
involve automotive alloys, biomaterials and nanoscale materials, and critically
require this TEM to understand the structure/properties relationship. For
example, the energy storage capacity of nanocrystals is highly dependent on the
defect density and chemical homogeneity, which in turn depends on their
synthesis conditions. The TEM can reveal the structural details and enhance our
understanding to develop innovative materials. The ability to investigate the
details of materials at nanoscale is critical to the success of many ongoing
research projects. Further, the access to such modern equipment will insure that
our students are prepared to take part in this exciting field and broaden their
research experience. Two undergraduate courses that will benefit the most from
this equipment are ENG 350 (Nanoscience and Nanotechnology) and CHEM 490E
(Nanobiotechnology). ENG 350 includes a weekly 3 hr lab component where students
use different analytical equipment and the TEM is a component in the lab
curriculum. This is a very popular course and usually runs in full capacity
(30). This course draws students from many disciplines across the campus. This
equipment is also critical for our upcoming new and first Ph. D. program in
Automotive Systems Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Layman Summary: In recent
years, the University of Michigan-Dearborn has established a core of faculty
members and an array equipment to support basic research on automotive alloys,
biomaterials and nanoscale materials. The properties materials depend on the
internal arrangements and chemical identities of the atoms that comprise the
materials. Transmission electron microscopy is the highest resolution method
that is available to determine this structure property relationship. Currently,
there is no functioning transmission electron microscope (TEM) available on
campus, which imposes significant impedance to the success of funded research.
This new microscope will replace a 20 year old TEM. The microscope to be
acquired during this project will provide us the capability to understand the
structure-properties relationship of many new and exciting advanced materials at
nanoscale and it will also provide an essential educational infrastructure for
our students. There are a host of important materials problems that will be
investigated using this microscope, such as how impurity atoms and defects
affect the behavior of materials. This microscope will be installed and operated
in the engineering analytical laboratory, a multi-user facility in the
university. It will also be accessible for cutting edge materials research by
industrial users. Importantly, this instrument will contribute to existing
university efforts to recruit and retain a diverse student population and expose
students to discovery, science and a variety of learning perspectives.