* 0923158
* MRI: Development of a Gesture Based Virtual Reality System for Research in Virtual Worlds
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2015
* Kazem Kazerounian, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 06/30/2015
* USD 932,000.00

Proposal #: CNS 09-23158&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Ilies, Horea T.; &lt;br/&gt; Anderson,
Amy; Kazerounian, Kazem; Marsh, Kerry L.; Nowak, Kristine&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of Connecticut&lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI/Dev.: Dev. of a Gesture Based
Virtual Reality System for Research in Virtual Worlds&lt;br/&gt;Project
Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This project, developing an integrated virtual environment
system capable of allowing not only 3D visualization of data, but also
interaction with data through natural hand and finger gestured based on a dual
interface, exploits a multi-touch interaction interface and a vision based hand-
gesture interface. Virtual reality environments rely on a collection of
technologies that allow the user to go through a coherent and unified perceptual
experience involving multiple senses, such as vision, touch, and sound, while
interacting with 3-dimensional data. These immersive, highly visual, 3D
environments currently offer a fairly high level of performance for spatially
visualizing data. However, the corresponding machinery providing user
interaction with these systems has not kept up the same pace of development with
the visualization tools. At present some advanced commercial environments offer
some user interaction capabilities achieved through wired wearable hardware
(such as wired gloves and head mounted displays). This promotes, in turn, an
unnatural and cumbersome interaction between the user and the virtual reality
environments, curbing the acceptance of the technologies. The syntax and
semantics of the hand and finger gestures developed interacts with geometric
data, while the implementation relies on the Multi-Touch Surface computing
platform as well as on a newly developed gesture tracking and recognition
system. The environment should lead to a potent open platform for interacting
with virtual geometric data in an intuitive way, without the need for wearable
hardware galvanizing the state of the art at the institution in Nano and Design
Engineering, Psychology, Computer Science, Structural biology, as well as
support research in the Center for Health, Intervention, and Prevention (CHIP).
This project addresses the problem.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;This
instrumentation will be open source and widely available with well documented
set up procedures. The VR system will be networked with other VR-sites,
including VRAC at Iowa State, to maximize the impact and stimulate technology
transfer. Moreover, the instrument contributes to&lt;br/&gt;- Stimulate critical
avenues of interdisciplinary research involving engineering, biology, computer
science, &lt;br/&gt;psychology, and Human Computer Interaction
(HCI),&lt;br/&gt;- Strengthen the potential for educational, student recruiting,
and outreach activities, and&lt;br/&gt;- Perform targeted outreach to K-12
students, teachers, and school districts serving groups that have&lt;br/&gt;
traditionally been underrepresented in the engineering disciplines.
&lt;br/&gt;The project also advances the state of the art in the teaching and
practice of engineering design, as well as other fields in which geometry plays
and important role. Contributing to the development of a new generation of
professionals that use capabilities of virtual reality tools to augment
traditional disciplines for improved engineering design, this work should have a
long-lasting impact on the ability of scientists and engineers.