* 0923299
* MRI: Development of Spectroscopic Imaging Optical Bottles for Analysis of Nanoparticles in Confinement
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Ivan Biaggio, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 09/30/2013
* USD 427,520.00

0923299&lt;br/&gt;Ou-Yang&lt;br/&gt;Lehigh U.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary: As we enter into a world of nanotechnology, it is fundamentally
important that we have the ability to characterize the material properties of
nanoscale particles in their native environments. However, the currently
available instruments are still limited in their abilities to quantify the
properties of nanoscale materials because it is difficult to control and
manipulate these particles due to their small size, Brownian motion, and the
interactions with surfaces and among themselves. This project aims to develop an
instrument that can control and manipulate multiple nanoparticles while their
physical behavior and material properties are characterized. This project builds
on a novel optical bottle method with an instrumental design suitable for in
situ multiple optical diagnostics. The optical bottle formed by a focused laser
beam can manipulate multiple nanoparticles in the size range of 10 to 200 nm,
and confine them in a volume of approximately 1 micron cube. Because the
polarization of the electric field in the optical bottle can be controlled in
all three directions it is possible to manipulate particle orientations in the
bottle. The instrument will be built on a laser scanning confocal optical
microscope where optical manipulation, single and two-photon fluorescence
imaging, spectroscopic analysis such as Raman spectroscopy and photoluminescence
will be integrated into a flexible optical workstation. The instrument will be
constructed by, and used for, a multidisciplinary team from academia and
industry. It will be used to address a range of scientific and technological
issues, including nanoparticle sorting, separation and nanostructure assemblies
of synthetic as well as biological nanoparticles. Through the involvement of
undergraduate, graduate and postgraduate young researchers and a K-12 outreach
program, this project will educate a new generation of US workforce that
understands nanoscale sciences, appreciates the potential of nanotechnology to
the society, and is keenly aware of the impacts of nanotechnologies to the human
health and our natural environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Layman Summary: As we
enter into a world of nanotechnology, it is fundamentally important that we have
the ability to characterize the material properties of nanoscale particles in
their native environments. However, the currently available instruments are
still limited in their abilities to quantify the properties of nanoscale
materials because it is difficult to control and manipulate these particles due
to their small size, constant motion, and the interactions with surfaces and
among themselves. This project aims to develop an instrument that can control
and manipulate multiple nanoparticles while their physical behavior and material
properties are characterized. This project builds on a novel optical bottle
method with an instrumental design suitable for in situ multiple optical
diagnostics. The optical bottle formed by a focused laser beam can manipulate
nanoparticles that are more than a thousand times smaller than the thickness of
a hair, and confine them in a volume a hundred times smaller than the tip of a
sawing needle. The instrument will be built on a state-of-art optical microscope
so the optical manipulation, optical imaging and advanced spectroscopic analysis
of the confined nano objects can be performed in situ. The instrument will be
constructed by, and used for, a multidisciplinary team from academia and
industry. It will be used to address a range of scientific and technological
issues, including nanoparticle sorting, separation and nanostructure assemblies
of synthetic as well as biological nanoparticles. Through the involvement of
undergraduate, graduate and postgraduate young researchers and a K-12 outreach
program, this project will educate a new generation of US workforce that
understands nanoscale sciences, appreciates the potential of nanotechnology to
the society, and is keenly aware of the impacts of nanotechnologies to the human
health and our natural environments.