* 0923880
* Regulation of Early Endosperm Development in Maize
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2016
* Ramin Yadegari, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* thomas okita
* 08/31/2016
* USD 4,931,804.00

________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***&l
t;br/&gt;PI: Ramin Yadegari (University of Arizona) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CoPIs:
Amy Clore (New College of Florida), Joanne Dannehoffer (Central Michigan
University), Gary Drews (University of Utah) and Brian Larkins (University of
Nebraska)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research project is
to understand the gene networks that control endosperm development and function
in maize. The endosperm of the seed is biologically and economically important.
More than 50% of the calories in the human diet originate from cereal endosperm,
which also serves as a raw material for manufacturing numerous industrial
products. Early endosperm development in maize, the period between 0 and 8 days
after pollination, encompasses the time when the endosperm grows from a single
cell into a multicellular structure composed of different cell types. Although
the molecular mechanisms that control this period of development in maize have
not been elucidated, they are likely to affect many important processes,
including embryo nutrition, starch and storage protein accumulation during grain
filling, and seed maturation. In this project a network of maize transcription
factors expressed during early endosperm development will be identified, and
their temporal and spatial expression patterns will be determined. The function
of a subset of these genes will be characterized in maize and Arabidopsis
plants. In addition, the cytological patterns of early endosperm development
will be described in a diverse set of maize inbred lines. These inbreds are
currently being genetically and phenotypically characterized by a large number
of laboratories, and these data will make it possible to evaluate the importance
of the identified genes to a variety of grain quality traits.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader educational impacts of this project will
enhance the infrastructure of research and training at all the participating
institutions through the continued instruction of undergraduate and graduate
students and training of postdoctoral researchers. A significant component of
the proposed research will involve faculty members at institutions with
predominately (Central Michigan University CMU) or exclusively (New College of
Florida NCF) undergraduate populations. Student researchers from CMU and NCF
will have an opportunity to spend a summer each year at the University of
Arizona and the University of Utah for further training and education.
Undergraduate researchers will be recruited from the classroom, local community
colleges, and underrepresented student populations at all institutions. In
addition, an important goal of the project is to increase the representation of
underrepresented minorities in science and to communicate science through
outreach to K-12 teachers and to nonscientists. The scientific and educational
outcomes of this project will be disseminated through the project website
http://cals.arizona.edu/earlyendosperm and Gramene (http://www.gramene.org/).