* 0923173
* MRI: Acquisition of 3-D Micromanufacturing Instruments for Bioengineering Research at Drexel University
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Ryszard Lec, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2012
* USD 344,330.00

0923173 Noh

The goal of this project is to improve the quality and expand the scope of
bioengineering research and training at Drexel University by providing shared
3-D micromanufacturing instrumentation. This proposal seeks the acquisition of
two complementary 3-D micromanufacturing instruments: a micro stereolithography
system and an excimer laser ablation system. Micro stereolithography is an
additive 3-D printing technique that can build complex microstructures via a
layer-by-layer curing process while excimer laser ablation is a subtractive
laser machining technique that can be used for non-planar structures made of
various materials such as plastics, glass, metals, ceramics, and semiconductors.

Intellectual Merits Tissue engineering research necessitates the capability of
building diverse scaffolds with complex 3-D geometries. Biosensors and lab-on-a-
chip systems require multi-layer 3-D architecture to effectively integrate and
package multiple components. Neuroscience and surgical engineering are in need
of multi-functional neural probes and tools that utilize precisely defined 3-D
micro-structures. The conventional microfabrication techniques such as
photolithography and soft lithography are useful but they are limited to 2-D
fabrication and cannot produce complex 3-D structures that are often necessary
in bioengineering research activities. The lack of versatile 3-D
micromanufacturing tools has hampered many bioengineering research projects at
Drexel University. The requested 3-D micromanufacturing instruments will address
this need and greatly improve the quality and expand the scope of bioengineering
research and training activities, particularly in the areas of bioreactors, in
vitro tissue modeling, tissue engineering, biosensors, microfluidics, lab-on-a-
chip, biomechanics, biophysics,neuroscience, and surgical engineering.

Broader Impacts Combined with the existing 2-D microfabrication facility, the
requested 3-D micromanufacturing instrumentation will provide a powerful and
unique microscale manufacturing infrastructure for numerous research activities
at Drexel University and in the Greater Philadelphia area. It is anticipated
that at least 10 faculty members and 20 graduate students and post-doctoral
researchers from 5 departments will become active users of the requested
instruments. This shared instrumentation will contribute to improving our
ability to recruit and retain outstanding faculty and graduate students
(including minority and women) and will increase research funding from both
government agencies and the private sector. The requested instruments will also
be used in existing and new courses and current outreach programs, providing
undergraduate and graduate students, high school teachers and students
opportunities to work with state-of-the-art 3-D micromanufacturing instruments.