* 0923484
* Collaborative Research: MRI: Development of mobileWARP - A Platform for Next-Generation Wireless Networks and Mobile Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Clifford Dacso, The Methodist Hospital Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2013
* USD 200,000.00

Proposal #: CNS 09-23479 PI(s): Sabharwal, Ashutosh; Aazhang, Behnaam;
Cavallaro, Joseph R.; Knightly, Edward W.; Zhong, Lin Institution: Rice
University Collaborative with Proposal #: CNS 09-23484 PI(s): Dacso, Clifford
Institution: Methodist Hospital Rsrch Inst. Title: MRI/Dev.: Mobile WARP:
Platform for Next Generation Wireless Networks & Mobile Applications

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Project Proposed: This collaborative project, developing a mobile, open, and
all-layers programmable platform for wireless communication systems research,
supports the design, development, and dissemination of a community platform
instrument, for collaborative architecting next-generation wireless networks and
mobile applications, including medical applications. Wireless Open-Access
Research Platform (mobileWARP), targets fundamental new research for next
generation mobile network clients. The work involves the following thrusts: -
Programmable and Context-Aware Mobile Platform, - True Cross-Layer Design Flows,
and - Open-Access for Research and Education. Mobile WARP will be completely
reprogrammable at all 7 layers of the networking stack and will support a touch-
based user interface to develop state-of-the-art applications. With battery-
operated portable form factor, it will integrate context measurements from a
variety of sensors (location, motion, power consumption, and health) and enable
fundamentally new ideas in context-aware networking and applications. Two new
design flows will be developed in support of the new hardware, one for the
design of energy-efficient networking components on mobile handsets and the
other for the design of mobile applications. Each design flow will be
architected such that researchers at each layer do not have to learn any
programming languages that they traditionally do not use. Lastly, to realize
community-powered development, every part of mobileWARP will be open source:
hardware designs, sensor subsystems, and all layers of the networking stack.
Semester-long courses, laboratory exercises, operational reference designs, and
hands-on mobileWARP workshops will also be developed. Reprogrammability at all
layers ensures that clean state designs can be verified in a realistic design
and testing environment. The platform opens an opportunity to explore merging
application domains that could revolutionize the use of wireless. An important
category of mobile healthcare for chronic illnesses will serve as a concrete
example. Emphasis will be placed on always-available, ultra-low power designs
for sensor, processing, and wireless subsystems.

Broader Impacts: Embodying a bold convergence concept, and with a potential for
transformative change in wireless networking and mobile applications, the
project directly impacts diverse research communities, cross-cutting multiple
areas and application domains, including mobile healthcare for chronic
illnesses. Furthermore, courses developed, as well as laboratory exercises,
allow students to explore all layers of wireless radio communication.