* 0923419
* MRI:   Aquisition of Genetic Instrumentation for a New Core Facility at the University of South Dakota
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Jacob Kerby, University of South Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 07/31/2013
* USD 321,787.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding from this project has
established a shared-user molecular genetic and genomic facility in the Biology
Department at the University of South Dakota. Our faculty members share a common
set of molecular research approaches in the fields of ecology, evolutionary and
conservation genetics, and developmental biology. Due to the productivity and
common usage of molecular instruments by these faculty members, and others in
the Division of Basic and Biomedical Sciences, the University of South Dakota
has dedicated new space for a completely renovated Molecular Genetic and Genomic
Core Facility. This shared laboratory space in the Biology Department will
maintain state of the art equipment for use in both research and teaching.
Research projects utilizing these instruments are wide-ranging and their
acquisition will benefit the research programs of many faculty, including
students involved in those program, which comprise the majority of graduate
students in our doctoral and masters programs, a large number of undergraduate
researchers, our local community through our participation in K-12 outreach, and
local Native American communities through their direct participation in our
research projects. While each of the faculty has their own research
specialization, there is clear collaboration between projects that will be
further enhanced by a shared space with the requested instrumentation. The
genomics facility will be used to train a considerable (and growing) number of
graduate students and post-doctoral researchers via both formal annual workshops
and in individual research projects. In addition, the equipment will be
demonstrated and used in existing undergraduate and graduate courses. Finally,
several of the projects using our current genetic analyzer involve collaborative
work with local Native American tribes in their communities on tribal lands.
Acquisition of this instrumentation will enhance this work and will allow the
PIs to offer authentic, full-scale research experiences to two high school
students, and will involve tribal biologists and community members from the
Lower Brule Reservation in field work on local organisms and study systems. This
interaction will establish a basis for future relationships to introduce young
Native American students to science.&lt;br/&gt;