* 0923847
* SBIR Phase II:   Social Marketplace for E-learning
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2011
* Christopher Sprague, Inquus Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 07/31/2011
* USD 724,215.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase II project seeks to create the first on-line social studying
platform that allows students to connect, share and learn together. The
application is focused on high school and college students. The proposed
platform, called OpenStudy, combines both theory and practice in a seamless
user-friendly environment that empowers the individual user to learn, create and
share their knowledge. OpenStudy will make education accessible, by connecting
students of varying levels of expertise, age, location, and social graph; and
fun, by providing a social learning experience with peer-to-peer sharing and
validation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the face of globalization and Thomas
Friedman's 'flat earth' economy, competing through education is a fundamental
need whose importance is being recognized at a national level. Students and
educators alike recognize the need for innovative technologies in addressing
this problem. Yet according to leading market analysts, the e-learning supply
chain is rooted in old business practices and unable to meet the needs of the
new buyers. 'The State of Our Nation's Youth' survey reports that high school
students feel the pressure to compete with better grades. Despite the rapid
adoption of learning management systems by institutions and of social networks
by individual students, there is no systematic solution to this problem nor an
application in the education field. Significant technical and business
innovation is required to introduce a solution to this problem. The OpenStudy
platform seeks to accomplish this change by creating a peer-to-peer learning
community to provide a social learning experience for its members. Leveraging
the wisdom of a community, OpenStudy will enable students, faculty and alumni to
engage in a national conversation focused on learning.