* 0923779
* Enzyme Organization and Flux Control of the Phenylpropanoid Pathway
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Oliver Yu, Donald Danforth Plant Science Center
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/2012
* USD 559,923.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-15).

Intellectual Merit: The phenylpropanoid pathway in higher plants produces many
of nature's colorful compounds. Among these compounds, lignins and flavonoids
play essential roles in plant growth and development. Lignins are a major
component of plant secondary cell walls. Flavonoids serve multiple functions
during biotic and abiotic stress responses. Lignins and flavonoids together
account for approximately 30% of plant biomass. Understanding the biosynthesis
of these compounds is an important part of biofuel research. Both lignins and
flavonoids are synthesized from the same starting molecule, the amino acid
phenylalanine. Previous studies showed that the biosyntheses of these two groups
of metabolites are tightly linked. Interruptions of lignin biosynthesis could
increase flavonoid accumulations, block auxin transport, and arrest the growth
of Arabidopsis. It is not understood, however, exactly how plant cells
distribute the common substrate and intermediates between the competing
pathways. This project is focused on the nature of multi-enzyme organizations
and flux regulations. Enzyme interactions in the multi-enzyme complexes could
alter pathway flux, thus becoming an important regulatory factor of metabolic
pathways. Previously, pathway efficiency was successfully increased by
establishing physical contacts of key biosynthetic enzymes. These fusion
proteins have been used to engineer plants and reconstituted pathways in yeast.
Here, the multi-enzyme complex at the junction of lignin and flavonoid pathway
will be studied. The scientific objectives are as follows: 1) To quantify the
flux of phenylpropanoid compounds in each branch of the pathway in transgenic
yeast, and measure the effects of specific enzyme interactions on metabolite
productions. This unique heterologous system will be used to prove protein-
protein interactions with standard in vitro and in vivo assays. 2) To study the
enzyme interactions in wild type Arabidopsis and in various metabolic mutants.
The sub-cellular co-localization of key enzymes in plant tissues that are
treated with elicitors or UV-light in both wild type and mutant background will
be examined. The potential enzyme interactions that define the 4CL-centered
multi-enzyme complex will be characterized.

Broader Impacts: The educational and outreach program is an integral part of
this project. Highly motivated undergraduate students will be enrolled as summer
interns. In addition, the collaboration among faculty members of the Danforth
Center and Maryville University is unique and complimentary. It enables an up-
to-date research experience for the teachers and students of a small liberal
arts college. At the same time, this research will enhance the educational and
outreach component of the Danforth Center. The in vivo yeast expression system
will be developed as a versatile teaching tool for undergraduate biology
laboratory courses. The highly collaborative nature of this research project,
which crosses between biochemistry, microbiology, and cell biology, offers an
environment for high school students, undergraduate students, postdoctoral
associates, and visiting scholars to broaden as scientists.