* 0923256
* MRI: Acquisition of a High-Performance Instrument for Interdisciplinary Computational Science and Engineering
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2014
* Frank Lee, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 09/30/2014
* USD 787,163.00

Proposal #: MRI 09-23256&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): El-Ghazawi, Tarek A.; Briscoe, William
J.; Lang, Roger H.; Lee, Frank X.; Mittal, Rajat&lt;br/&gt;Institution: George
Washington University &lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI/Acq.: High Performance Instrument
for Interdisciplinary Computational Science and Engineering &lt;br/&gt;Project
Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This project, acquiring a Cray XT5 and adequate storage,
upgrading the network of a computer cluster, and integrating these as one High
Performance Computing (HPC) instrument, supports a team of interdisciplinary
researchers from two schools and seven departments via the new Institute for
Massively Parallel Applications and Computing Technologies (IMPACT). New
programming models and processor technologies in understanding high-performance
computing systems productivity, as well as the impact of new technologies on
science will be investigated. Programming models include UPC, Co-Array FORTRAN,
X10, and Parallel Matlab. Application requirements will drive the UPC-10 work
and application specific PGAS compiler optimizations. Investigating new
processor technologies will be pursued jointly with the NSF Industry/University
Cooperative CHREC center. In computational fluid dynamics (CFD), the instrument
will help in the design of micro-aerial vehicles inspired by the dynamics of
insect flight (previous work assumed rigid wings). The HPC instrument will help
carry out detailed modeling to understand insect wing?s deformation. The
instrument will also be used in employing CFD techniques to analyze swimming
strokes for U.S. national teams using a novel immersed boundary method. Current
simulations are carried out at low Reynolds numbers due to lack of HPC
resources. In nuclear physics, the instrument will help unravel the structure of
matter at its deepest level as governed by Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD). The
latter is very difficult to solve without massively parallel computations on a
discrete space-time lattice with millions of degrees of freedom. The instrument
will help expedite the linking of experimental and theoretical nuclear physics
studies in fundamental nuclear reactions and account for the most recent
experimental results in photo and electro-production of mesons and hyperons.
Helping the remote sensing group, it will also contribute to provide more
accurate models of the soil, ground surface and vegetation that can relate the
sensor responses to the bio-physical variables on the
ground.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This acquisition enables producing
a new generation of students and postdoctoral fellows who can face the current
changes in computing technology. The instrument will allow assigning
&lt;br/&gt;realistic computational problems that can integrate research and
teaching promoting learning through discovery. Initiatives include an extensive
outreach program. Open house events are planned and will include community
colleges, high school and middle school students, and K-12 teachers to increase
interest in science and technology. A concrete plan is devised to include women
and minority to receive training, use the instrument, and engage in research
collaboration with the faculty. The plan focuses on HBCU institutions in the
area, and is open to women and minorities. Investigations will result in codes
and data that will be shared with the community using a public license such as
GNU/GPL. The website will provide access to papers, presentations, and freely
distributed relevant software; conferences and workshops will also be organized.
Furthermore, a graduate certificate in interdisciplinary HPC will be issued and
more faculty in the HPC area will be hired.&lt;br/&gt;