* 0923153
* MRI: Acquisition of an LCMS-TOF Mass Spectrometer for Interdisciplinary Research
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Richard Wallace, ARMSTRONG STATE UNIVERSITY
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2012
* USD 277,326.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) program, the
Chemistry Department at Armstrong Atlantic State University will acquire a
liquid chromatograph equipped with a time-of-flight mass spectrometer (LCMS-TOF)
system to support the research activities of the faculty and their undergraduate
student researchers at Armstrong Atlantic State University (AASU) and Savannah
State University (SSU). A variety of research needs will be met by the
acquisition of this instrument including: screening of a bakers' yeast reductase
library, the investigation of systematic mutations of these reductases, the
study of humic and fulvic acids from local wetlands, interactions of copper-
containing proteins and complexes with biological molecules, the detection of
benzoxazinones used for obesity treatment, the analysis of aquatic predatory and
prey alarm cues, and the detection of secondary metabolites from grape, rose and
banana.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mass spectrometry (MS) is used to identify the
chemical composition of a sample and determine its purity by measuring the mass
of the molecular constituents in the sample after they are ionized and detected
by the mass spectrometer. Chromatography is an isolation technique that precedes
the mass spectrometry analysis. It separates a mixture into its several
constituent chemicals which are then analyzed by the mass spectrometer. These
are widely used analytical techniques to identify and quantify the chemical
composition of a sample. It is important for undergraduate students to be
trained in the technique using modern instrumentation. In addition to
applications in their research projects, students will use the instrumentation
in two upper-level chemistry courses and exercises will be designed for labs in
the biology department. Faculty at other area institutions will have access to
the spectrometer.