* 0923654
* International Collaboration in Chemistry:  Is the Single Transition State Model appropriate for the Fundamental Reactions of Organic Chemistry?
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2009,09/30/2013
* Vernon Parker, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 09/30/2013
* USD 665,779.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Organic and Macromolecular
Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division at the National Science Foundation
supports a proposal from Professor Vernon D. Parker of Utah State University.
This proposal, submitted in response to solicitation NSF 08-602: International
Collaboration in Chemistry between US Investigators and their Counterparts
Abroad (ICC), is a collaboration with Professors Xiao-Qing Zhu and Jin-Pei Cheng
of Nankai University in China. The research team will focus on a research
project in physical organic chemistry with profound importance for mechanistic
organic chemistry. The scientific objective of this proposal is to provide an
answer to the question; "Is the single-transition state model appropriate for
the fundamental reactions in organic chemistry?" The basis for the question is
that Professor Parker has presented preliminary evidence that several
fundamental organic reactions including C-H proton transfer reactions, hydride
exchange reactions, carbenium ion-nucleophile combination reactions, neutral-
anion and neutral-neutral combination reactions, SN2 reactions as well as the
classical E2 elimination reactions take place by a 2-step mechanism. The 2-step
mechanism is designated as the "kinetically significant pre-association
mechanism" to distinguish it from pre-association mechanisms which cannot be
kinetically differentiated from the single-step mechanism. The PI's preliminary
non-steady-state kinetic methods including "instantaneous rate constant
analysis" and his hypothesis that the single-transition state model is not
generally appropriate for the fundamental reactions of organic chemistry, have
not gained general acceptance by the physical organic chemistry community. A new
and extremely simple kinetic isotope effect (KIE) mechanism probe has been
developed, which unambiguously differentiates between 1-step and the kinetically
significant pre-association reaction mechanisms. Thus the new method
differentiates between the mechanisms and evaluates KIE for the kinetically
significant pre-association mechanism without the need to evaluate any rate
constants. Detailed studies of six different fundamental reaction types are
proposed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts are enormous and range from
the outstanding training students will receive at both universities to having a
large impact on the field of physical organic chemistry. The overall impact is
that this international project will foster cooperation and good will between
the scientific communities of the United States of America and the People's
Republic of China. This project will contribute to the National Science
Foundation's effort to fund training of a diverse, globally-engaged, U.S.
science workforce.