* 0923384
* MRI: Acquisition of Instrumentation to Support a Multi-disciplinary Acoustic Laboratory for Faculty and Student Research at Union College
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Palmyra Catravas, Union College
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence S. Goldberg
* 08/31/2013
* USD 265,255.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The objective of this project is to set up a multi-disciplinary acoustics
laboratory that enables research in speech and musical acoustics, as well as the
development of new visualization techniques. In the first project the signals
from musical instruments are measured and used to develop graphical techniques
for the visualization of complex data. In the second project acoustic recordings
are made and analyzed to determine how and when children develop individual
acoustic contrasts that define a speech segment sound. The system supports
acoustically sensitive recordings necessary for the research objectives.

Intellectual Merit: The data visualization system is important because it
transforms dispersed data patterns into moving patterns that are significantly
easier for the human eye to detect and process. Potential applications exist in
other systems at the macro, micro, and nanometer levels. The second project will
contribute to a longitudinal database of children's speech. Volume and clarity
are quite variable in child speech, and these variations adversely affect
analysis. The sensitive recordings obtained in this laboratory offset the
adversity. The recordings and their analysis have implications for researchers
in linguistics, psychology, and electrical engineering, and may lead to improved
diagnosis and treatment of communication disorders, among other things.

Broader Impacts: The laboratory increases teaching and research training
opportunities for engineering undergraduates at Union College. The database of
child speech will be made available to other researchers. In addition, the
laboratory is being incorporated into Union's academic and summer programs aimed
at students from disadvantaged and under-represented backgrounds.