* 0923107
* MRI: Acquisition of a Small-Angle X-Ray Scattering/Wide-Angle X-Ray Diffraction (SAXS/WAXD) System for the Characterization of Nanostructured Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Herve Marand, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 09/30/2012
* USD 512,076.00

0923107&lt;br/&gt;Moore&lt;br/&gt;VPI &amp; SU&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary: As an essential compliment to select-area, electron microscopy of local
order within materials, simultaneous small-angle x-ray scattering/wide-angle
x-ray diffraction (SAXS/WAXD) offers a more global perspective in its ability to
probe bulk, nanoscale morphologies over a wide range of length-scales, within a
broader range of sample states from liquids to solids. This proposal involves
the acquisition, installation and implementation of a state-of-the-art, high-
resolution, 3-pinhole collimated, simultaneous SAXS/WAXD instrument with an
added capability of grazing incidence for the structural analysis of ordered
surfaces. The proposed instrument is necessary to fill a critical void in our
nanostructure characterization capabilities at Virginia Tech in support of our
polymer-related activities associated with the Macromolecules and Interfaces
Institute (MII), a variety of NSF sponsored programs in active nanostructures,
DOD and DOE-sponsored programs, and activities stemming from our newly
established ICTAS Nanoscale Characterization and Fabrication Laboratory. Given
the broad versatility of morphological experiments available with this rare
instrument, our multidisciplinary research efforts will involve structural
analysis of nanostructured systems ranging from aqueous, colloidal suspensions
of biopolymer complexes to solid-state membranes for energy applications and
water purification, structurally-controlled semi-crystalline polymers and
blends, tailored nanocomposite materials, and self-assembled surface structures.
The proposed SAXS/WAXD instrument will be a cornerstone system in our multi-user
Nanoscale Characterization and Fabrication Laboratory, and will stimulate
institutional and national/international collaborations (among academia and
industry) as a center for morphological analysis of nanostructured materials.
Along with associated theoretical and practical training, this new capability
will be open to enhance the science and engineering efforts of a diverse
population of students and researchers. &lt;br/&gt;Layman Summary: Small-angle
x-ray scattering is a method used to measure the internal structure and form (in
the dimension of nanometers) of solid materials and complex solutions by
irradiating a complex sample with a fine beam of x-rays and capturing a
projection of the scattered x-rays with a sensitive detector placed at a
significant distance from the sample. Federally-funded and industrially-
sponsored research projects associated with this proposed instrument will
involve structural characterization of a wide variety of new materials that will
impact activities ranging from the development of efficient, energy conversion
devices to bio-functional materials needed to address critical health issues in
our modern society. Each of these novel research activities requires the
structural information obtainable with state-of-the-art SAXS/WAXD methods in
order to gain fundamental insight into morphology-property relationships that
will drive the development of the next generation of nanostructured materials
for a variety of technological applications. The proposed SAXS/WAXD instrument
will be a cornerstone system in our multi-user Nanoscale Characterization and
Fabrication Laboratory, and will stimulate collaborations (among academia and
industry) as a center for morphological analysis of nanostructured materials.
Along with associated theoretical and practical training, this new capability
will be open to enhance the science and engineering efforts of a diverse
population of students and researchers.