* 0923953
* SBIR Phase II:  New Labeling Reagents for Genetic Analysis
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* John Naleway, MARKER GENE TECHNOLOGIES, INC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2012
* USD 799,858.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project aims to develop new,
sensitive, accurate, and reliable detection methods for measuring genomic DNA or
RNA samples isolated from living cells. The intellectual merit of this project
lies in the development of new detection methods that are essential for
improving high-throughput genomic microarray analyses of gene activity. Problems
with current microarray and genomic analysis techniques, including hybridization
perturbation, slow enzymatic labeling methods using expensive labeled
nucleotides and sequence dependence, are solved using a direct labeling
approach. These new systems will provide the detection tools needed to advance
the promising pharmaceutical, research and diagnostic uses of genomic analysis
to determine the pattern of gene expression in disease or upon therapeutic
treatment. Marker Gene Technologies, Inc. has established the feasibility of
these detection methods by preparing new ultrasensitive fluorescent labeling
reagents and developing protocols for directly labeling DNA or RNA samples
isolated from live cells. These reagents are able to efficiently and sensitively
label oligonucleotides for high-throughput microarray analysis. In Phase II
these systems will be validated by further analysis of the fluorescent labeling
methods and characterization of their ability to monitor changes in gene
expression upon application of drugs or other bioactive compounds or in response
to biological changes in cell function or disease, in a cell-specific manner.

The broader impacts of this project include development and commercialization
of new methods for rapid screening of genomic expression patterns in response to
specific drug application in normal cells and tissues as well as in disease,
bacterial or viral infections. These methods are a significant improvement over
existing technologies by using a direct labeling approach that is quicker, more
accurate and more cost-effective. These systems will be marketed to the
pharmaceutical and diagnostics industries for high-throughput pre-clinical
screening of drug efficacy by comparative cellular genomic analysis. In
addition, existing collaborations with industrial and research partners assure
quick commercial development of the technology. The combined techniques will
improve U.S. competitiveness in the burgeoning genomic analysis field as well as
in pharmaceutical therapeutic drug development and lead to further job creation
based on both the products and systems developed.

