* 0923593
* MRI: Development of an Improved Keck II Laser Launch Facility
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Peter Wizinowich, California Association for Research in Astronomy
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Knezek
* 08/31/2014
* USD 1,355,500.00

Telescopes on the ground must observe objects in deep space through the
interference of the earth's atmosphere. As light from a distant object passes
through the atmosphere it gets spread out by turbulence due to wind shear and
changes in temperature and pressure within the atmospheric layers, which
effectively diminishes the resolving power of earth-based telescopes. This
difficulty can be overcome to a large extent by relatively new techniques
employing Laser Guide Stars (LGS) and Adaptive Optics (AO) where a bright laser
illuminates a patch of sky near the target object. The laser's light is absorbed
and then re-emitted by sodium atoms in the upper atmosphere, above much of the
interfering lower atmosphere. The return signal is then used to track the time-
dependent atmospheric distortion of the light. Adaptive Optics uses this
information to rapidly adjust optics in the telescope's instrumentation to
restore the image to (nearly) what would be seen from above the atmosphere.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The W.M. Keck Observatory developed and installed one of
the first successful LGS AO systems at an astronomical observatory just a few
years ago. Keck has led the world-wide astronomical community in AO in terms of
scientific productivity by a significant margin. Keck telescope time is
extremely valuable and any increase in its effectiveness will certainly pay
significant payoffs in science return. Some of the most exciting front-line
astronomical research being done today comes from the Keck AO system. The twin
10-meter telescopes house the largest reflecting telescope mirrors in use today.
Because the native resolution of an optical system scales with the size of its
objective, it is necessary to use adaptive optics to approach diffraction-
limited resolution. Now the Keck LGS system will undergo a significant upgrade,
replacing a laser launch projector currently on the side of the telescope mount
with a newly designed and improved system to be placed on the telescope optical
axis. This upgrade will reduce the perspective elongation seen by the wavefront
sensing system. The new system will have significantly improved resolution,
contrast, and dynamic range and will lead to improved astrometric and
photometric performance by up to a factor of two.