* 0923437
* MRI:   Acquisition of a Field Emission Gun Transmission Electron Microscope for Biological Structure Determination
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Russell Chianelli, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,259,954.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding has been awarded to the
University of Texas at El Paso (UTEP) under the direction of Dr. Ricardo Bernal
for the purchase of a new 200 kilovolt field emission gun electron microscope
equipped with a stage that is capable of maintaining the sample at liquid
nitrogen temperatures. This new instrument will be used to determine the high
resolution three-dimensional structure of macromolecular assemblies such as
nanopolymer particles, viruses, and various protein complexes. Disciplines
including nanotechnology, virology, biochemistry and cell biology all rely on
defining molecular structure to properly understand function. This state of the
art instrument will allow the probing of three dimensional structures to nearly
atomic resolution. Researchers throughout the region will have access to the new
instrument increasing its impact as a regional resource. UTEP is in the process
of establishing a highly competitive cryo-electron microscopy facility as part
of a larger structural biology initiative to expand research capabilities.
Facilities exist at UTEP for in-house X-ray crystallography, NMR as well as
powerful computational resources for structure determination. Furthermore, the
University has started construction of a new Chemistry building that includes a
cryo-EM facility to house the new instrument. Small molecule and macromolecular
X-ray crystallography together with new NMR instrumentation and the new cryo EM
facility will help establish a highly competitive structural biology program at
UTEP and the southwestern region of the U.S. Having this sophisticated
instrument at UTEP will not only stimulate underrepresented minorities to pursue
careers in science but it will provide UTEP students with the training that will
make them highly competitive at an international level. Results from data
obtained with this instrument will be published in high impact peer reviewed
scientific journals and will be presented at scientific conferences for wide
dissemination. &lt;br/&gt;