* 0923296
* SCREMS: Scientific Computing Research Environments for the Mathematical Sciences
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2009,01/31/2013
* Amir Assadi, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 01/31/2013
* USD 119,176.00

This award will provide funds to the Department of Mathematics at University of
Wisconsin Madison in collaboration with mathematics faculty at UW Eau Claire, UW
Whitewater and the Madison Area Technical College (MATC) to implement a network
of high performance computing environment for interdisciplinary research in the
mathematical sciences and its applications to biological and basic medical
sciences. This academic network will collaborate closely with pioneering
American industrial partners (SUN Grid Network.com, nVIDIA and PBC Linear
automation technologies) to provide a novel approach that enables a broader
participation of students and faculty from the State of Wisconsin in advancing
applications of distributed massively parallel GPU-based computation along with
the Madison research groups in the computer sciences, genetics and
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project outcomes include: applications of
topology to accurately determine structure of large proteins, topological
methods in fluid dynamics, mathematical modeling and computations to determine
functions of genes in development of plant root systems. Further, novel
algorithms will enable researchers to overcome current obstacles for
visualization and analysis of very high dimensional massive data sets that are
the hallmarks of the 21st century biotechnology in agronomy, drug discovery, and
systems biology.