* 0923748
* Functional Evolution of the APETALA1/FRUITFULL gene lineage
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Amy Litt, New York Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 09/30/2013
* USD 420,000.00

Amy Litt&lt;br/&gt;Functional evolution of the APETALA1/FRUITFULL gene family
&lt;br/&gt;IOS-0923748&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to determine whether
the function of APETALA1/FRUITFULL genes, key regulators of flower formation,
changed during the course of flowering plant evolution, and if these changes had
any effect on flower development. In the model plant species Arabidopsis, there
are two important genes in this family, AP1 and FUL. Both are required for
flowers to form properly, but in addition AP1 is required for proper sepal and
petal development, whereas FUL is needed for the seed pod to form correctly. AP1
and FUL resulted from a duplication that occurred when the core eudicots, the
most successful group of flowering plants, evolved. Thus the genomes of core
eudicots such as Arabidopsis, daisies and roses have one gene similar to AP1 and
one gene similar to FUL. However, groups that evolved earlier than the core
eudicots, such as magnolias, grasses, or buttercups, only have genes that are
similar to FUL. The central question is: did the origin of the core eudicot
AP1-like genes change the way in which flowers are formed? The researchers are
addressing this question with a two-pronged approach. In Arabidopsis, they are
manipulating AP1 and FUL gene sequences and activity to determine which is
responsible for the differences in function. In columbine and poppy, which are
not core eudicots, they are using a virus-mediated technique to silence the
activity of the FUL-like genes to determine their function. The results of this
project will determine whether flowers in all species develop according to the
same genetic plan, or whether that plan has changed during flowering plant
evolution. This information is critical for future studies that might manipulate
flower development for agricultural or horticultural purposes. A goal of this
project is to inform non-scientists about the genetic processes that underlie
flower development. Therefore in conjunction with this research a demonstration
garden will be created at The New York Botanical Garden displaying naturally
occurring mutants of species such as snapdragon, poppy, and columbine, with
signage explaining the genetic control of flower formation. In addition this
project will support a post-doctoral researcher and a graduate student from
underrepresented groups, and will provide research opportunities for
undergraduate and high school students.