* 0923827
* Precise Engineering of Plant Genomes using Zinc Finger Nucleases
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Kan Wang, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 08/31/2014
* USD 3,355,326.00

PI: Daniel F. Voytas (University of Minnesota)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CoPIs: Drena
L. Dobbs (Iowa State University), J. Keith Joung (Massachusetts General
Hospital), Jennifer Kuzma (University of Minnesota) and Kan Wang (Iowa State
University)&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Plants have remarkable biosynthetic capacities
that can be harnessed to produce compounds of value for food, fuel, medicine and
industry. Fully realizing the biosynthetic potential of plants, however,
requires sophisticated tools to manipulate plant genomes. Specifically, it is
desirable to make precise alterations to the plant genetic code, including DNA
insertions, deletions and substitutions. Such precise modifications can be made
through a process known as gene targeting or homologous recombination.
Fundamentally, gene targeting is a DNA swapping reaction: a DNA fragment
carrying a desired sequence is introduced into a plant cell, and it replaces the
native copy of the gene. To enhance the efficiency of gene targeting, a
chromosome break is created at the site of modification (the target). An enzyme
called a zinc finger nuclease (ZFN) is used to generate the chromosome break.
ZFNs have two components: a DNA recognition domain (a zinc finger array) and a
nuclease that cleaves the chromosome. Zinc finger arrays can be designed to
recognize diverse DNA sequences, thereby making it possible to modify any
chromosomal target. Current research is directed at developing zinc finger
nuclease-assisted gene targeting for widespread use in plants, including
establishing key parameters for high frequency gene modification and robust
methods for the design of zinc finger arrays. The project focuses on
implementing gene targeting in rice, arguably the world's most important food
crop. The outcome of the research will be a highly facile gene targeting system
that can be employed in a variety of plant species. Because gene targeting
introduces changes in plant genomes in a highly specific and controlled manner,
crops generated through gene targeting may be met with greater public acceptance
than traditional genetically modified crops. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An efficient
method for making precise modifications to plant genomes (gene targeting) is
critical for detailed functional analysis of genes and genetic pathways. Gene
targeting will also enable the development of new crop varieties, including
those that better withstand pests, have enhanced food value, and produce
compounds of industrial importance. Gene targeting differs fundamentally from
transgenesis in that the resulting plant material may only have a single or few
nucleotide changes that distinguish it from the parent. This precision suggests
that gene targeting may mitigate some concerns about the use of genetically
modified crops, which has limited the application of genetic engineering to
plant agriculture. The project specifically explores the potential societal
impacts of gene targeting. In addition, the project will train undergraduate and
graduate students for work in plant molecular biology, computational biology and
public policy. This diversity of research topics provides a rich
interdisciplinary training environment and a unique opportunity for all project
participants to learn about the impact of science on society. Access to software
and data generated from this project can be obtained at www.zincfingers.org. DNA
reagents are available at www.addgene.org.