* 0923655
* US Egypt Cooperative Research: Baboons, stable isotopes, and the mystery of Punt
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2011
* Paul Koch, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 09/30/2011
* USD 73,426.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative research project is
being undertaken by Dr. Nathaniel J. Dominy, University of California Santa
Cruz, and Dr. Salima Ikram, American University of Cairo, Egypt, to analyze
isotope ratios of mummified baboons and to compare them with modern baboon
populations in an attempt to identify the location of the lost city of
Punt.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Punt was a celebrated destination in Ancient Egypt.
It was an exporter of valued commodities such as ebony, myrrh, electrum, and
exotic pets (leopards and baboons). The historical importance of the Egypt-Punt
relationship is twofold. First, it is one of the earliest examples of peaceful
trade between neighboring political states. Second, it is one of the longest
commercial alliances in human history, spanning more than 1200 years. Yet the
location of Punt is a mystery. Scholarly debate over the past century has
resulted in five hypothetical regions: (1) Eritrea-Ethiopia; (2) the Sinai
Peninsula; (3) Somalia; (4) western Uganda, and (5) Yemen. The collaboration
will test among these competing geographic hypotheses by measuring ratios of
carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen stable isotopes in the hair and bone tissues of
mummified baboons, which were likely imported from Punt. The distinctive
combination of these values is expected to match those of a modern baboon
population inhabiting one of the five hypothetical locations above. This cross-
disciplinary project represents a unique bridge between Geology (Geochemistry)
and three sub-disciplines in Anthropology (Archaeology, Egyptology, and
Primatology). The results are expected to complement and inform ongoing debates
concerned with Egyptian history and foreign trade.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact of this project lies in its geographic scope and the integration
of new and emergent technologies to address a central question in human history.
Empirically, the PIs expect to identify the location of Punt. Theoretically, the
research will advance our understanding of how human commerce and foreign policy
evolved. Practically, the PI intends to enhance the education and laboratory
training of 2 graduate students. The project will also permit greater
intellectual exchange across academic disciplines and international borders.