* 0923640
* Epigenetic Modifications of the Centromeric Chromatin in Rice
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2014
* Jiming Jiang, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 09/30/2014
* USD 821,957.00

The centromere is the domain of a chromosome that governs the segregation and
transmission of the chromosome from generation to generation. It has been well
demonstrated in several model species that the establishment and maintenance of
the centromere in its location on a chromosome is determined by epigenetic
modifications of centromeric DNA and/or centromeric proteins. Epigenetic
modifications change the behavior of DNA without actually changing the DNA
sequence itself. Although vitally important for centromere function, little is
known about which epigenetic modifications are critical and whether any are
specific to the complex of DNA, RNA and protein that makes up centromeric
chromatin. Using rice as a model and approaches that include chromatin
immunoprecipitation and DNA sequencing, this project will reveal the location of
epigenetic marks, such as cytosine DNA methylation and histone modifications,
associated with centromeric chromatin. The information generated from this
project will also provide information about the potential levels of
transcription associated with centromeric DNA compared with DNA located outside
the centromere region. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The personnel of
this project will be involved in teaching an annual Plant Cytogenetics Training
Workshop for the plant genome research community. This workshop provides hands-
on training in several molecular cytogenetic techniques. This project will also
provide summer research training for minority undergraduate students along with
area high school students. The results of this project will have an impact on
future technology development that can be used to improve agricultural
practices.&lt;br/&gt;