* 0923024
* MRI-RUI:   Acquisition of a Spinning confocal Microscope to Advance Interdepartmental Research and Training at Missouri State University-Springfield
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Lifeng Dong, Missouri State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2012
* USD 248,350.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A grant has been awarded to Missouri
State University (MSU) to acquire a laser spinning confocal fluorescence
microscope equipped with a Yokogawa spinning confocal scanner and four laser
lines for research and teaching at the university and in the region. This
instrument will not only allow researchers to achieve significantly improved
quality in microscopic imaging but will also afford them the opportunity to
perform advanced techniques such as fluorescence recovery after photobleaching
(FRAP), fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET), optical sectioning of
specimens, and dual-channel real-time imaging. All participants including the PI
and Co-PIs represent an interdepartmental group of faculty who, despite diverse
research interests, possess commonalities in their employed approaches and
instrumentation. Foreseeable outcomes from the research activities include
advancement of interdisciplinary research, training, and collaboration. This new
system will offer researchers the exciting opportunity to pursue several up to
date research avenues including: 1) uncovering the roles of dynamin-like
proteins in endocytosis, 2) characterizing anti-inflammatory signaling networks
downstream of interleukin-10, 3) revealing the role of ATAF1 in plant resistance
to powdery mildew pathogens, 4) understanding the role of actin cytoskeleton
reorganization during the defense responses by grapevine to powdery mildew
pathogens, 5) monitoring the delivery of carbon nanotubes in cells, 6)
monitoring fluorescent biosensors based on conducting polymer nanowires, 7)
studying neuron-glial cell communication, 8) investigating fecal coliform growth
in biofilms derived from freshwater streams, and 9) studying P2 nucleotide
receptor function at the molecular level. Employment of the confocal microscopy
in multiple classroom settings at the university and in the region will broaden
the impact of the instrument. Training with the instrument will be incorporated
into the curriculums for five of our academic departments, both in traditional
classes and student independent research. Acquisition of the spinning confocal
system will impact many facets of the MSU community and beyond. An immediate
outcome will be the expanded investigative capacity of the major users and
students. As a result, faculty in several departments will be better positioned
to (i) contribute to the scientific community by way of conference presentations
and peer-reviewed publications and (ii) compete for external research funding. A
heightened research profile at MSU will aid in the recruitment and retention of
high-quality faculty and students. Furthermore, the establishment of the
proposed system will broaden interdisciplinary collaboration with local
universities. Collectively, greater success in these areas will increase student
research opportunities and heighten the quality of undergraduate and graduate
education in the region. The availability of this instrument will also
contribute greatly towards the outreach programs in the local community to
educate families and motivate young people to pursue careers in science and
engineering. Outcomes of the research projects will be communicated through
presentations by students and faculty at regional or national meetings, in peer
reviewed journal publications, and on the internet.