* 0923622
* Exploring the Interaction between Calcium Channels and their Presynaptic Slots
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Yu-Qing Cao, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Asson-Batres
* 08/31/2013
* USD 433,199.00

The research objective of this project is to explore the molecular interactions
between neuronal voltage-gated Ca2+ channels (VGCCs) and their presynaptic
slots. The outcome of this study will serve as a gateway towards understanding
the fundamental issues about neurotransmission at central nervous system (CNS)
synapses.

Neurons in the CNS connect with each other at synapses. Presynaptic neurons
communicate with their postsynaptic targets via synaptic transmission: the fast
and well-controlled release of neurotransmitter from synaptic vesicles. Synaptic
transmission at most CNS synapses is mediated by joint actions of multiple
VGCCs. In her previous work Dr. Cao has demonstrated that VGCCs occupying
presynaptic slots to mediate neurotransmission between hippocampal neurons.
Nevertheless, the presynaptic VGCC slots remain only functionally-defined, i.e.
as "virtual" slots. Here Dr. Cao proposes to explore the molecular basis of
channel-slot interaction as well as the cellular localization of these slots.
This project will use a multidisciplinary approach, combining techniques in
electrophysiology, molecular biology, protein biochemistry as well as cellular
imaging. The investigators expect to address the following aims: (1) to define
the VGCC domains that interact with presynaptic slots; (2) to explore the
molecular identity as well as subcellular localization of presynaptic VGCC
slots. The information derived from this project will yield important insights
into the fundamental mechanisms through which presynaptic VGCCs regulate CNS
neurotransmission. Furthermore, the outcome of this study will increase
understanding of the hippocampal-dependent cognitive processes such as learning
and memory. The research delineated in this proposal will provide opportunities
for students at many levels and from diverse backgrounds to conduct independent
research, preparing them for advanced scientific careers. The long-term goal is
to set up Dr. Cao's laboratory as a platform for training students and
postdoctoral fellows committing to both research and teaching in their future
career.