* 0923080
* MRI: Acquisition of a High Resolution Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometer for the Mid-South Region
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Wei-Yin Chen, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2013
* USD 494,094.00

0923080&lt;br/&gt;Cizdziel&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a proposal to obtain a state-of-the-art
high resolution inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometer (HR-ICP-MS), which
will be located at the University of Mississippi (UM), Department of Chemistry
and Biochemistry. The instrument utilizes a doublefocusing (electric-magnetic)
mass analyzer and is the technology of choice for trace and ultratrace elemental
analysis because it offers the highest sensitivity and lowest detection limits
of any ICP-MS. Moreover, it has the unique ability to resolve most isobaric
interferences through high mass resolution. Because there are not such
instruments in the area, it will be operated as a regional multi-user open
access facility to be called the Mid-South Center for Trace Element Research
(MSCTER). In addition to the UM faculty who have an immediate use for the
instrument, a number of researchers at different institutions within a three
hour drive will take advantage of the facility to advance their research. The
proposed facility will not only facilitate interdisciplinary projects at UM but
will encourage collaborations among researchers across the Mid-South. The PI has
extensive experience with ICP-MS and together with the Co-PIs will oversee the
facility, which will be modeled after other successful trace element analytical
facilities, with costs being recharged at rates depending on user experience and
technical staff involvement.