* 0923628
* Collaborative Research:   Molecular Genetic Studies of Bdelloid Rotifers
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Matthew Meselson, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 12/31/2012
* USD 499,445.00

The goal of this project is to discover and characterize the genetic and
ecological factors that have allowed a group of invertebrate animals, bdelloid
rotifers, to evolve successfully for tens of millions of years without sexual
reproduction although other metazoan species that cease reproducing sexually
almost invariably suffer early extinction. Specifically, the project will (1)
Determine the length and age distribution of DNA segments transferred within
bdelloid populations. Although bdelloids almost certainly do not engage in
sexual reproduction, the recent demonstration of homologous DNA transfer in
natural bdelloid populations appears to represent a novel form of mixis, the
genetic and evolutionary implications of which are as yet unknown. (2) Determine
whether the unusual desiccation/rehydration cycle of bdelloids can mediate
horizontal transfer of genes to bdelloid genomes by screening bdelloids after
desiccation and rehydration in the presence of DNA carrying a selectable marker.
The occurrence of gene integration under such conditions would constitute a form
of genetic transfer previously unknown to occur naturally in metazoans and, if
homologous, is likely to account for both the recently demonstrated allele
sharing in bdelloid populations and the ectopic incorporation of foreign genes.
(3) More fully characterize the massive horizontal transfer and ectopic
incorporation of foreign (including bacterial, fungal and plant) genes that has
occurred in bdelloids by examining transcribed genes of several rotifer species
in order to determine the nature, sources, and possible functions of genes
horizontally transferred from distantly related taxa.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Why sexual reproduction exists, why it
should take two parents rather than one to produce offspring, are questions of
fundamental biological importance that are also of general public interest and
afford an excellent opportunity for public education in biology. Results from
this project under earlier NSF support have received wide coverage in the US and
international media, and have been incorporated into college biology curricula,
biology textbooks, and popular books on biology and evolution. The project will
train two postdoctoral scientists, a Ph.D. student, and four undergraduates. The
more than 30 Mb of bdelloid cDNA sequence generated by the project will be
deposited in GenBank and will be available on a website with a graphical
interface for examining read quality, coverage of assemblies, ORF
identification, and annotation; for searching bdelloid sequences using BLAST or
bdelloid annotation using keywords; and for downloading data, the results of
BLAST searches, etc.