* 0923672
* Diversity Initiative for Tenure in Economics
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2009,06/30/2013
* William Darity, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2013
* USD 150,683.00

The Diversity Initiative for Tenure in Economics (DITE) is a research mentoring
workshop that seeks to facilitate successful transition from junior faculty
status to tenured associate professor for economists from underrepresented
racial and ethnic groups (especially blacks. Latinos, and native Americans). The
gross underrepresentation of economists from these groups in the ranks of
university faculty, particularly in economics departments, creates an imperative
for special efforts to insure that junior faculty from these groups develop the
research and teaching profile that will lead to promotion to tenure. The
American Economic Association (AEA) supports the professional development of
minority economists via three major avenues, the AEA Summer Program and Minority
Scholarship Program, the AEA Pipeline Project, and the supervision of each by
the Committee on the Status of Minority Groups in the Economics Profession
(CSMGEP). DITE is the only program designed specifically to increase the
representation of black, Latino and native American economists in tenured
faculty positions at colleges and universities throughout the United States via
mentoring &lt;br/&gt;of junior faculty focused on research and teaching.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During each year of the grant, this award enables DITE to
match up to twelve junior scholars with six senior faculty mentors and convene
an annual one and one-half day workshop where the junior fellows will receive
critical guidance on their research activities as well as professional
development advice in each of the three summers of the program. NSF support also
will enable each DITE cohort of scholars and mentors to meet again during the
course of the Allied Social Science Association (ASSA) conference in the
following January and to re-convene at Duke in spring for a workshop where
fellows will make formal presentations of their current research activity.
Finally, where possible, DITE provides support for fellows to make one visit to
one of their mentors at the campus of the mentor. In each year the twelve
fellows and six mentors are subdivided into three working teams, identified
primarily on the basis of common research activities, similarity of
institutional type, and appropriateness of the network of scholars that the
mentor can provide the junior faculty member. The three teams meet for an
intensive session devoted to preparing the research projects for successful
submission for publication in well-regarded professional journals. Each break-
out session will allow fellows to present their research and receive feedback
from the group mentors and participants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Implications: The effectiveness of DITE is measured by renewal rates,
publication success, conference attendance as presenter and discussants,
teaching evaluations, citation counts, and receipt of grant funding of its
fellows. DITE fellows careers are followed longitudinally for at least five
years beyond their year in the program. The goal of DITE is to play a role in
producing greater inclusiveness in the demography of economics faculties in the
United States by significantly increasing the odds of professional success for
junior faculty from underrepresented groups&lt;br/&gt;