* 0923473
* MRI: Acquisition of a 400 MHz NMR Spectrometer to Support Undergraduate Research and Research Training at Lawrence University and the Fox Valley Region of Wisconsin
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* David Hall, LAWRENCE UNIVERSITY OF WISCONSIN
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2013
* USD 435,764.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) program, Stefan
Debbert and colleagues David Hall, and Ron Peck from Lawrence University and
Martin Rudd from the University of Wisconsin - Fox Valley will acquire a 400 MHz
NMR spectrometer to support research that includes designing novel molecular
scaffolds, developing organometallic-polyamine conjugates, and designing new
metal-organic framework materials and dipyrrin-metal complexes. In addition,
biochemistry and biology faculty will use the instrument to conduct structure-
activity studies of viral peptides and of biosynthetic regulation in
Halobacterium salinarium. Researchers at U. Wisconsin - Fox Valley will use the
spectrometer to carry out studies of selenium - and tellurium - containing
anions. Students at both campuses will have access to the instrumentation in
their coursework as well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR)
spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools available to chemists for the
elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is used to identify unknown
substances, to characterize specific arrangements of atoms within molecules, and
to study the dynamics of interactions between molecules in solution. Access to
state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential to chemists who are carrying out
frontier research. The results from these NMR studies will have an impact in
synthetic organic/inorganic chemistry and biochemistry. This instrument will be
an integral part of teaching as well as research.