* 0923446
* MRI: Acquisition of a Hitachi S-3400N-II SEM and an INCA E250 EDX System for the microanalysis of sediments and biological material
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2010
* Michael Graham, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2010
* USD 204,485.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The PIs are requesting funding to acquire a modern
low-vacuum scanning electron microscope equipped with an energy dispersive x-ray
spectrometer. The proposed instrumentation would be used for the microanalysis
of biological specimens, sediments, rocks, hard skeletal parts, and other
materials. Research efforts supported by the proposed instrumentation would
include: examining the relationships between geology and microbial activity in
sub-seafloor extreme environments; examining dynamics of particle transport and
carbon cycling; examining age, growth, and life histories of fishes, corals, and
other marine organisms; analyzing microbial diversity; and examining
hydrothermal vent ecosystems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The proposed instrumentation will improve the research
capability at the institution, which consists of a consortium of seven
California State University campuses (San Jose, East Bay, Monterey Bay, Fresno,
Stanislaus, Sacramento, and San Francisco). The PIs also state that the proposed
instrumentation will enhance student mentoring activities (undergraduate and
high school) at these affiliated institutions, which include minority-serving
institutions. Additionally, the PIs state that the proposed instrumentation will
be incorporated into student independent research
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;