* 0923812
* MSB:  Collaborative:  Symbiont Separation and Investigation of the Novel Heterotrophic Osedax Symbiosis Using Comparative Genomics
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Charles Brown, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Liliana Jaso-Friedmann
* 08/31/2013
* USD 50,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The diversity and pervasiveness of
bacterial partnerships with animals is only now being fully appreciated. In many
marine environments these symbioses play critical roles in sustaining high
productivity. This project concerns symbioses between a group of gutless worms
within the genus Osedax and their microbial symbionts. These keystone species
are found at deep-sea whale falls worldwide at depths ranging from 25 to 3000
meters. Evidence suggests that the most likely nutritional source for both
partners is collagen present within the whale bone, however, very little is
known about the specific functional capabilities of each partner in this regard.
Although all Osedax species have similarities, they differ in the identity and
biomass of their symbiotic populations. These differences can contribute to
observed ecological differences among Osedax species. The acquisition of genomic
information from the symbiotic bacteria will facilitate our understanding of the
metabolic machinery used in these unique symbioses. Analysis of single symbiont
genomes, however, is often problematic due to difficulties in separating the
bacteria from the host tissue and cells. To address this problem, the
investigators will use a recently developed technique for purifying specific
bacterial cells called immuno-magnetic separation (Magneto-FISH). Subsequent
genomic comparisons between symbionts in three Osedax species will offer the
opportunity to not only learn important details regarding the specific
metabolism and biochemistry of the bacterial symbionts, but to also identify the
factors that result from, and contribute to, intimate interactions between
bacteria and higher organisms. Symbiosis research is inherently multi-
disciplinary and this RUI project will directly introduce undergraduates to the
disciplines of microbiology, molecular ecology, genomics, and symbiosis.