* 0923406
* Does Force or Agreement Lead to Peace?: A Collection and Analysis of Militarized Interstate Dispute (MID) Settlement, 1816 to 2001
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Douglas Gibler, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2012
* USD 205,291.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research analyzes the
effectiveness of substantive political settlements in ending international
conflict. The recent literature on peace agreements often concludes that treaty
terms matter little in determining the durability of peace following interstate
conflict. The authors argue that this conclusion results from the use of
datasets and tests that are ill-suited for examining the role of issue
settlement following conflict. Previous research has examined whether
negotiation took place, not whether a substantive agreement was actually
research. Previous studies have also focused on the peace agreements that follow
wars and deadly conflicts, possibly ignoring the many successful agreements that
have avoided conflict escalation to war.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal
investigators plan to collect and analyze data on all negotiated settlement
outcomes in the Correlates of War Militarized Interstate Dispute (MID) dataset.
These data include all threats, displays or uses of force between two or more
countries from 1816 to 2001. The PIs will examine the issues at dispute in each
conflict and will then match these issues to the agreement ending the conflict.
Analysis of this data will take many forms, including qualitative case studies
of the various settlements and statistical analyses of the effects of issue
settlement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the immediate impact on the
peace agreement literature, the analyses completed with this dataset have
important implications for the scholarly literatures on studies of rivalry,
territorial conflict, the bargaining literature, and research programs based on
more general theories of cooperation and treaty formation. Each of these
literatures has used the dichotomous imposed/negotiated settlement variable in
analyses of MID data. Richer information on settlement types would allow more
comprehensive tests of these theories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The implied policy
prescriptions of the current peace agreement literature will also be addressed.
The current literature suggests that the balance of capabilities controls the
likelihood of peace, and agreements must therefore reflect that balance in order
to be durable. Policymakers practicing negotiations based on the current
literature are using knowledge gained from a severely selected sample of cases,
which is particularly unfortunate if political settlements or enforcement
mechanisms can indeed prevent disputes from escalating to war. By broadening the
scope of peace agreement research, both temporally and for conflicts short of
war, the researchers hope to provide a much better understanding of the
necessary conditions for a durable peace.&lt;br/&gt;