* 0923056
* Workshop:  Advancing Geoscience Through Continental Drilling, June 4-5, 2009 in Denver, Colorado
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2009,03/31/2010
* Anthony Walton, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 03/31/2010
* USD 48,935.00

This award will provide funds for a scientific workshop to identify critical
topics where drilling to obtain samples, make subsurface measurements, or
emplace instruments will make important advances in the geosciences in the near
future, and to outline longer term plans for the development of future
initiatives in land-based scientific drilling. The workshop will use insight
from members of the international geoscience community to develop contemporary
themes, such as CO2 sequestration and climatic controls on rates of evolution;
and other themes that may emerge from the workshop or elsewhere.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The result of the workshop will be a brief but
comprehensive working document that will publicize projects currently in
progress and in planning stages, identify efforts that are only in conceptual
stages that may come to fruition in the next 5 years, encourage collaboration
between the continental drilling community and other geoscience communities and
entities, and articulate the resources necessary for the implementation of
scheduled, planned, and envisioned projects. The working document will be made
available to the geoscience community, to science planners and administrators,
and to agencies that either fund science or appropriate funds for science
primarily as a web document (.pdf). The meeting will be used to provide the
basis for planning a larger-scale international meeting in 2010 that will be
designed to produce a long-range (decadal scale) science plan for continental
drilling.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;