* 0923003
* MRI: Development of Software Defined Communications Testbed for Radio and Optical Wireless Networking
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Timothy Kurzweg, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 09/30/2013
* USD 888,500.00

Proposal #: CNS 09-23003 &lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Dandekar, Kapil R.
&lt;br/&gt;Fontecchio, Adam K.; Johnson, Jeremy R.; Kim, Youngmoo E.; Kurzweg,
Timothy P.&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Drexel University &lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI/Dev.:
Software Defined Communications Testbed for Radio and Optical Wireless
Networking&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project
Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This project, developing a multi-purpose Software Defined
Communications (SDC) testbed to be used for rapid design and prototyping of the
next generation wireless communication networks making use of radio, optical, or
ultrasonic modalities, responds to the impending need for new high-bandwidth,
inexpensive, flexible, and upgradable wireless communication technologies to
meet the growing demands of future applications. Among others, the SDC testbed
aims to enable many projects including high-speed secure data transmission,
thru-metal relay and control networks, localization and tracking, real-time
wireless video transmission, and enhanced home entertainment systems. The
integrated plan challenges the existing radio frequency centric view of software
defined radio by addressing the requirements of high-bandwidth, robustness, and
easy configurability for future telecom applications. Supporting multiple signal
propagation media within a single framework, the project aims to&lt;br/&gt;-
Develop a modular hardware and software platform which can be used to prototype
technology and algorithms for macro- and micro-scale communications, local area
networking, and localization applications.&lt;br/&gt;- Provide software
reconfigurability at all layers of the protocol stack (in contrast to
conventional SDR which only provides physical layer flexibility) so that cross
layer UWB and optical communications techniques can be developed and field-
tested.&lt;br/&gt;- Disseminate transceiver hardware block diagrams and FPGA/DSP
software modules to allow the SDR community to prototype high performance radio,
optical, and ultrasonic communications systems.&lt;br/&gt;- Build propagation
channel data repositories for high data rate UWB, optical, and ultrasonic
wireless systems which can be used by industry and academia to design and
evaluate new algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;- Demonstrate, experimentally for the first
time, the augmentation of UltraWideBand (UWB) multicarrier, UWB impulse radio,
diffuse free space optical, line-of-sight optical communications with spectrum-
efficient MIMO space-time coding techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: This project offers educational opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate students, as well as for K-12 students and teachers. It catalyzes
advanced telecommunications development, but also trains and excites future
engineers and general public. The project creates an Entrepreneur Development
program in ECE; it will be used as a model for undergraduate senior design
students in the context of starting a small business; facilitates independent
study and cooperative work, and conducts outreach programs with local students
and teachers.