* 0923977
* Development of a High-Density Cylindrical Ion Trap Array Mass Spectrometer using Micro-Fabrication Techniques
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Teresa Greely, SRI International
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2013
* USD 477,261.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award from the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation and Facilities: Instrument Development (CRIF:ID)
program, Friso van Amerom and Timothy Short of Stanford Research Institute, St.
Petersburg, FL and colleagues Shekhar Bhansali, Teresa M. Greely and Jing Wang
of the University of South Florida will develop high-density cylindrical ion-
trap array mass spectrometers using micro-fabrication techniques. The devices
will have lower system power and vacuum requirements, compared to more
traditional mass spectrometer designs. The mass spectrometers will be used to
analyze environmental water samples. Graduate students at University of South
Florida will participate in the development of the instrument as well as working
with teenage girls in a summer-time Oceanography Camp for
Girls.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New kinds of mass spectrometry techniques open up
brand new avenues of research. The instrument developed with this award will
allow scientists to study complex chemical samples, in-situ, with field-
deployable instruments. Increasingly, mass spectrometry has enabled rapid
advances in a number of areas with significant societal impact -- including
homeland defense and environmental monitoring. Technology like that developed in
the present award will aid in future advances in these and other areas.