* 0923369
* MRI: Development of Molecular Beam Expitaxy Apparatus for Growth of Two Dimensional Electron Gas Systems with Mobility of 100,000,000 cm2/Vs
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Loren Pfeiffer, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 06/30/2014
* USD 1,800,000.00

0923369&lt;br/&gt;Pfeiffer&lt;br/&gt;Princeton
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the
project is to construct a new molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) machine specifically
designed to produce semiconductor hetero-structures of unprecedented purity and
quality. The structures will be designed to yield two-dimensional electron
system (2DES) samples having free carrier mobilities in excess of 100,000,000
cm2/Vs at cryogenic temperatures. At the low level of chemical and structural
impurities envisioned, the free 2D electrons will interact primarily with each
other through the many-body Coulomb interaction. The availability of such
samples will enable an unprecedented level of inquiry into a broad range of
fundamental questions in many-body phenomena in condensed matter physics. In the
past, as the quality of 2D hetero-structures has improved, new physics has been
discovered, that has led to two Nobel Prizes. These high quality 2DES are also
expected to be important for the next generation of technology. They are
crucial, for example, in examining topological approaches in quantum
computing.&lt;br/&gt;Carrier mobility is a direct indication of semiconductor
crystalline quality. Recent experiments have revealed the current record 2D
electron mobility of 36,000,000 cm2/Vs is likely limited by residual chemical
impurities located within the GaAs conducting channel. These impurities can
arise from multiple sources: vacuum out-gassing and breakdown of the furnace
parts containing the molten elemental sources in the MBE machine, chemical
impurities in the elemental sources themselves, and leaks or out-gassing of the
MBE chamber and the substrate heating equipment. In the new machine, improved
vacuum pumping and the introduction of a novel vacuum cryopump will
substantially reduce the levels of critical impurities. Based on recent results
and calculations, we predict the new machine will be able to grow samples with
carrier mobilities in excess of 100,000,000
cm2/Vs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Layman?s Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the
proposed project is a new crystal growth machine specifically designed to
produce semiconductor crystals of record quality and purity. In present day
crystals the free conduction electrons scatter off fixed residual chemical
impurities, or off the neighboring conduction electrons. With this new MBE
(Molecular Beam Epitaxy) machine we expect to produce crystals with strongly
reduced impurity levels, so that the dominant scattering that the free electrons
suffer will almost exclusively be from other free electrons. The electrons will
be able to easily move about without running into fixed impurities, thus leading
to the record ?mobility? in the project title. Such samples will enable an
unprecedented level of inquiry into a broad range of fundamental questions in
condensed matter physics. In the past, as crystal purity levels have improved,
new results were discovered which led to Physics Nobel Prizes in 1985, and 1998.
Such near-perfect crystals are also important for long range technological
applications ? such as new approaches to computing after the current shrinking
of microchips according to ?Moore?s Law? becomes no longer feasible. The MBE
machine to be constructed will have record quality of vacuum inside ? fewer
impurity molecules will be inside to contaminate the growing semiconductor
crystal than in any other crystal growth machine in the world. The work will
take place at the Princeton Institute for the Science and Technology of
Materials and the Department of Electrical Engineering at Princeton University.
About 150 students and researchers across the US will directly benefit from this
project.