* 0923246
* MRI: Acquisition of a State-of-the-Art X-Ray Photoelectron Spectrometer for Research, Training and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Robert Bartynski, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 09/30/2012
* USD 547,279.00

0923246&lt;br/&gt;Bartynski&lt;br/&gt;Rutgers U. New
Brunswick&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary: X-ray photoelectron
spectroscopy (XPS) is widely used as an analytical technique to determine the
nature of the near-surface region of a material. Shifts in the core level
binding energies of atoms at or near the surface of a material can reveal
changes in oxidation state, surface potential or band bending, chemical or
physical inhomogeneity, or dynamic response (i.e., screening) that are distinct
from those of the bulk of the material. However, a growing number of modern
applications employ materials in complicated structures that are laterally
inhomogeneous and thus it is critical to perform XPS in a spatially resolved
manner, along with high photon flux, and high energy resolution. Examples, that
are currently active research areas at Rutgers include the study of: (i)
transition metal ions and their diffusion in ZnO for room temperature
spintronics, (ii) surface modification of organic single crystal surfaces, (iii)
surface functionalization and characterization of novel nanocrystals used to
enhance biomolecule imaging, (iv) surface characterization of plasma-treated and
chemically-modified polymer films for cellular and related bioactivity studies,
and (v) interface properties of nanoscale self-assembled solid state systems.
The Rutgers Laboratory for Surface Modification (LSM) is a multidisciplinary
research center that hosts a comprehensive set of facilities used to examine
surfaces, interfaces, thin films, and nanoscale materials, and has strong
collaborations with state-of-the-art research and development laboratories
around the world. A gap in our suite of tools is lack of a modern high
resolution XPS system that can adequately address the key issues in the study of
modern materials systems. The state-of-the-art instrumentation requested in this
proposal would replace a 20-year-old machine and will significantly strengthen
our capabilities by enabling high energy resolution studies, in parallel with
high resolution lateral imaging and depth profiling. These features are central
to the diverse research and education activities both within Rutgers as well as
the regional community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Summary: Materials
interact with their surroundings through their surfaces. Very often, the
chemical or physical environment of surface atoms is significantly different
from those of the bulk A powerful way to probe surface properties is to expose a
material to X-rays of a specific wavelength and study the electrons that are
emitted from surface. As only electrons that originate from the first one or two
nanometers of the surface are able to escape the material, this technique is
very surface sensitive. Moreover, these electrons escape with well-defined
energies that not only depend upon the atomic species, but also exhibit small
variations depending on the environment of the atom. The study of these
electrons, known as X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), enables one to
determine the chemical and physical state of these near-surface atoms. In modern
materials systems, such as nanoscale crystals used to enhance imaging of
biological systems, or potentially revolutionary semiconductors made entirely of
organic molecules, the atomic environment in one region of the surface can
differ from that of another region. Therefore, it is critical to perform XPS
studies in a spatially resolved manner. The Rutgers Laboratory for Surface
Modification (LSM) is a multidisciplinary research center that hosts a
comprehensive set of facilities used to examine surfaces, interfaces, thin
films, and nanoscale materials, and has strong collaborations with state-of-the-
art research and development laboratories around the world. A gap in our suite
of tools is lack of a modern high resolution XPS system that can adequately
address the key issues in the study of modern materials systems. The state-of-
the-art instrumentation requested in this proposal would replace a 20-year-old
machine and will significantly strengthen our capabilities by enabling high
energy resolution studies, in parallel with high resolution lateral imaging and
depth profiling. These features are central to the diverse research and
education activities both within Rutgers as well as the regional community.