* 0923281
* MRI: Acquisition of a Multi-Collector Inductively-Coupled Mass Spectrometer
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Alberto Saal, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2012
* USD 677,890.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The multi-collector inductively coupled plasma mass
spectrometer (MC-ICPMS) will be used to address cutting-edge questions related
to solid earth, ocean, planetary, environmental, biological, medical and
archeological sciences. The instrument is capable of analyzing precise isotope
ratios not only on dissolved sample solutions, but also (when attached to a
laser ablation system) allows in-situ analyses of almost any solid material with
a spatial resolution of 10 microns (X-Y direction) and submicron depth-profiling
resolution (using new excimer lasers). Such advanced capabilities in mass
spectrometry are producing profound insights into a wide range of natural
processes and the time scales over which they occur. The Brown MC-ICPMS will be
the first instrument of its kind in the state of Rhode Island. The MC-ICPMS will
serve a large science community and will function as a catalyst to foster inter-
departmental and inter-institutional collaborations (Marine Biological
Laboratories, University of Rhode Island, Roger Williams University and Bryant
University) in research, education, and public outreach.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interdisciplinary environment at Brown University
ensures that this new instrument will be applied to a broad array of scientific
problems. Research efforts in isotope geochemistry are intimately linked with
the education and training of the next generation of scientists. The MC-ICPMS
instrument will provide our graduate and undergraduate students and those from
other institutions access to state-of-the-art facilities and at the same time
foster diversity among the ranks of future scientists. The Department of
Geological Sciences and Brown University through the NSF GK-12, EPSCOR and
Leadership Alliance Summer Research Early Identification Programs, are involved
in a number of science education outreach programs that target under-served and
under-represented groups in the community.&lt;br/&gt;