* 0923183
* MRI: Acquisition of a Scanning Electron Microscope for Imaging and Elemental Analysis in Research at Duquesne University
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Ellen Gawalt, Duquesne University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2012
* USD 310,890.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) program, the
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at Duquesne University will acquire a
Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) equipped with energy dispersive spectroscopy
(EDS) to support imaging, elemental analysis and elemental mapping. This
instrumentation will enable significant advances in projects focused on
materials science, nanotechnology, biology, energy and the environment. Examples
of projects include: i.) The elemental composition and composition gradients in
inorganic semiconductors at the nanoscale will be studied. This will be combined
with data detailing bulk phase analysis to understand the resulting physical
properties of the semiconductor and the fine-tuning thereof; ii.) The analysis
of alloy oxide surfaces will be studied where elemental maps of the oxide
surface via EDS will be combined with atomic force microscopy imaging
information to understand why or when the reactivity of an organic moiety varies
with surface content; iii.) Nanoscale elemental analysis (EDS) and morphology
determination (SEM) will be used to optimize the efficiency of carbon-
modified(CM)-n-TiO2 thin films for photoelectrochemical splitting of water to
hydrogen by visible light. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scanning electron microscopy is
a widely used technique for providing an image of a sample surface. The image is
obtained from scanning the surface with a beam of electrons. Energy dispersive
spectroscopy is combined with a SEM to provide elemental analysis i.e. chemical
characterization of the sample. The SEM/EDS acquisition will be fully integrated
into graduate and undergraduate research projects, as well as three regularly
offered courses in chemistry, biology and forensic science, providing students
with cutting-edge microscopy experience. Many of Duquesne's summer research
students will have access to the instrumentation via a NSF-sponsored REU
program, as will high school students through an outreach project to Sto-Rox
High School. Faculty from Indiana University of PA, Slippery Rock University and
St. Vincent College will also use the instrument.