* 0923215
* MRI: Acquisition of a Hybrid Diamond/III-N Synthesis Cluster Tool
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Harris Kagan, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 09/30/2012
* USD 421,323.00

0923215&lt;br/&gt;Johnston-Halperin&lt;br/&gt;Ohio State U. Res.
Fdn.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary: Wide bandgap semiconductors, and in
particular III-Ns and diamond, are emerging as a powerful force for innovation
across a wide spectrum of science and technology. This breadth of potential is
captured by the extraordinary diversity of the interdisciplinary team assembled
for this proposal, with research interests ranging over 15 orders of magnitude
in energy (from ~1 meV to ~ 1,000 TeV), 13 orders of magnitude in time (~ 100 fs
to ~ 1 ms), and 11 orders of magnitude in length (from ~ 1 nm to ~ 10 cm). This
diversity provides a unique and powerful opportunity, by optimizing a relatively
modest set of material parameters: electron mobility, spin relaxation time,
electron-hole recombination time and structural quality, it is possible to have
a transformative impact across a truly broad front of leading edge research.
This optimization will require the rapid development of these emerging
materials, necessitating a tight coupling between high quality materials
synthesis and precise materials characterization informed by a fundamental
understanding of the science underlying these diverse applications. The
collaborative network presented here, including the PIs and both on-site and
off-site collaborators, posses the necessary expertise as well as the necessary
infrastructure in materials characterization to exploit this unique opportunity;
the only piece lacking is the appropriate infrastructure for materials
synthesis. As a result, the acquisition of the hybrid diamond/III-N synthesis
cluster tool proposed here will have an immediate impact on a wide spectrum of
active research programs as well as providing interdisciplinary collaborations
with the necessary infrastructure to successfully compete in this rapidly
developing area of materials science. The proposed tool will consist of two
growth chambers, one optimized for microwave-plasma chemical vapor deposition
(MPCVD) of diamond films, and the other optimized for ammonia-based molecular
beam epitaxy (MBE) of III-N epilayers. The chambers are linked by an air-free
glove box and an ultra-high vacuum (UHV) transfer line, allowing for in situ
sample transfer and high quality heterostructure growth. Finally, the diversity
of this collaboration will lead directly to the training of graduate and
undergraduate students who are optimally positioned to take advantage of
increasingly interdisciplinary opportunities in both the academic and industrial
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Layman Summary: The objective of this project is
to establish a materials fabrication facility to investigate the properties of
new nanoscale materials based on diamond and III-N semiconductors. Wide bandgap
semiconductors, and in particular III-Ns and diamond, are emerging as a powerful
force for innovation across a wide spectrum of science and technology. Research
in this area will benefit industries including magnetoelectronics/spintronics,
high-speed electronics, solid state lighting, photovoltaics, and energy-
efficient transportation. This breadth of potential is captured by the
extraordinary diversity of the interdisciplinary team assembled for this
proposal, with affiliations including Materials Science and Engineering,
Electrical and Computer Engineering, Condensed Matter Physics and High Energy
Physics and research interests ranging over 15 orders of magnitude in energy, 13
orders of magnitude in time and 11 orders of magnitude in length. For example,
this variation is equivalent to temperatures from 10Â° C above absolute zero to 1
million times hotter than the sun, the difference in time between 1 millionth of
a second and the age of the earth and sizes ranging from several atoms to the
size of a cell phone. As a consequence, the acquisition of the hybrid
diamond/III-N synthesis cluster tool proposed here will have an immediate impact
on a wide spectrum of active research programs, laying the groundwork for
fundamental discoveries and new technology and providing training for graduate
and undergraduate students in emerging interdisciplinary applications of
fundamental materials science research.