* 0923694
* Condition-dependent signal reception: limitations and functions of carotenoids in avian color vision
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Kevin McGraw, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 07/31/2013
* USD 324,000.00

Animals use a diversity of signals for communication (e.g. songs, colors), many
of which are honest indicators of their worth as a mate or rival. However, the
ways that animals perceive the world and receive transmitted signals may also be
linked to their quality (e.g. health, condition), and such control of signal
reception could impact the evolutionary pace and directions of animal
communication systems. This research will involve investigations of the degree
to which the color-visual sensory system of a songbird species (the house finch,
Carpodacus mexicanus) is impacted by environmental factors, including diet,
disease, and light exposure, and affects critical behavioral tasks like food
selection and mate selection, both of which involves color preferences.
Condition-dependence of color vision will be explored by tracking accumulation
of the types and amounts of carotenoid pigments (e.g. the orange colorants of
carrots) dedicated to the retina, where they are thought to filter light,
protect the eye from photodamage, and tune color visual sensitivity. This
approach provides a key molecular link between color vision and color
production, which in house finches and many other animals occurs in the form of
red, orange, and yellow carotenoid pigments whose supplies in feathers are also
limited and condition-dependent. The biochemical, nutritional, and behavioral
approaches taken in this research will enrich understandings of (a) the suite of
benefits conferred by antioxidant nutrients in animals, (b) resource allocations
and trade-offs in the context of animal communication, and (c) the
coevolutionary mechanisms governing sexual traits and preferences in animals,
tracked in a common chemical currency. The urban nature of the field research
also affords the opportunity to involve local schoolteachers and children in
data collection and science training, so that they may test first-hand the
impacts of human encroachment on the communication system and viability of a
desert-adapted organism.