* 0923831
* MRI: Acquisition of Light Stable Isotope Mass Spectrometers for Research and Teaching in Geochemistry, Paleobiology, and Cosmochemistry
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Albert Colman, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2010
* USD 463,218.00

0923831&lt;br/&gt;Colman&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; "This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5)." This
proposal seeks funding for acquisition of two light stable isotope mass
spectrometers. These instruments will be incorporated into the newly renovated
stable isotope geochemistry lab at the University of Chicago. The "newest" IRMS
currently in the facility is a 20 year old Delta E which cannot be fitted for
continuous flow operation. The proposal seeks a Thermo Delta V Plus IRMS
configured for continuous flow with various introduction interfaces (EA, TCEA,
GasBench II). This will allow determination of bulk H, C, N, O and S isotopes.
Additionally, a MAT 253 IRMS for carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide, and sulfur
isotopologue studies is requested. The IRMS will be used to understand the
marine phosphorous cycle and biogeochemistry. The inorganic phosphorous oxygen
isotope composition differs among riverine, estuarine and marine systems.
Isotopic measurements will be used to track P cycling in freshwaters and coastal
systems. Pi cycling by bacteria and archaea will be inferred from disequilibrium
measurements. Isotopic disequilibria will be measured in oceanic profiles to
better understand OM turnover. These measurements require the TCEA with reverse-
flow configuration. Sulfur isopotologues will be used to understand non-mass-
dependent photochemical and paleo- (atmospheric) sulfur cycling. Experiments
will be conducted with sulfur dioxide under a range of uv irradiation in
oxygen/ozone-free atmospheres. Complementary oxygen isotopes measurements will
be made in order to tighten constraints on oxygen partial pressures in the
Archean atmosphere. Strain across the Tibetan plateau will be analyzed in terms
of crustal subduction, crustal thickening, mantle lithosphere removal, and
elevation. Light stable isotope paleoaltimetry will be the analytical method ?
using the strong fractionation effects seen in oxygen and hydrogen in orographic
precipitation. Clumped isotope thermometry will be used to refine
paleotemperature estimates to within ±2 °C. IRMS analysis will be used to
elucidate sponge metabolism and its impact on nutrient cycling in nutrient-poor
reef systems. Diagnostic gene transcripts have recently been identified in
sponge symbionts implicating nitrogen fixation in associated bacteria. CO
metabolism was likely significant in early Earth?s history. The PI and
collaborators will study carbon isotopic fractionation during anaerobic
carboxydotrophic microbial growth. A modified injection loop system will be
developed allowing smaller sample size(s) and ultimately increased precision.
The PI intends to perform calculations relating minor carbon and oxygen
isotopologues to infer CO temperature formation. The instruments will be
incorporated into the existing UC isotope laboratory and will support multiple
departments. The acquisition will represent the only isotopologue measurement
capability in the Midwest (and offer inter-calibration possibilities). Stable
isotopes will be used in four new or revised courses at the undergraduate and
graduate level. The laboratory will also support a mentorship program to train
high school teachers from disadvantaged areas of South Chicago. Isotope
measurements will be incorporated into four new or revised courses. There are
over 70 graduate students and ~70 post-docs who would also benefit. The PI will
be responsible for the overall operation and maintenance of both acquired IRMS
systems. A full-time technician will be hired to manage day-to-day laboratory
use and cost recovery. Remuneration will be used to cover remaining salary and
consumables. Space is available to house the new IRMS systems including proper
power, temperature, chilling and humidity requirements. Fluorination and vacuum
lines are available. Sample prioritization will be transparent and published for
outside users. This grant will thus lead to a new hire position at the
University of Chicago in addition to equipment
purchase.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***