* 0923249
* MRI: Acquisition: Establishment of the Midwest Isotope and Trace Element Research Analytical Center (MITERAC)
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2009,12/31/2011
* Clive Neal, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 12/31/2011
* USD 811,454.00

MITERAC shall expand the research endeavors of 18 researchers from 6
universities in Indiana and Michigan. This will be accomplished via the
acquisition of the following new instruments with funding from the MRI Program,
which will be combined with the existing high resolution Element 2 ICP-MS (with
213 nm laser ablation unit and liquid chromatographic system): multiple
collector-inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometer (MC-ICP-MS), 193 nm laser
ablation and microdrilling systems, and dedicated Hg analyzers. The MC-ICP-MS
instrumentation shall provide researchers the capacity to obtain highly precise
and accurate isotope data from various types of environmental and geological
samples. The 193 nm laser system and microdrill shall be used to acquire high
quality, isotope data at high spatial resolution; i.e. 10s to 100s of micron
scale from geological and archaeological samples. The Hg analyzers shall be used
to quantify mercury levels in environmental samples as part of on-going research
investigations in pollution remediation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MITERAC shall be a
facility specializing in isotope geochemistry and trace element research; one
that is fully accessible to undergraduates and graduate students, and faculty.
The establishment of MITERAC will provide both graduate and undergraduate
students from 6 universities with experience in handling and interpretation of
isotope data, and critical hands-on training and expertise at Notre Dame in
latest ICP-MS technology and highly innovative instrumentation; training that is
critical to their scientific development. The facility will address research
covering a broad range of research disciplines, including petrology, planetary
geology, anthropology, the environment, engineering (pollutant remediation),
nuclear forensics, geomicrobiology, and hydrology; the latter research areas
having a direct impact on societal issues. Our proposed facility shall attract
scientists/engineers and accompanying students from around the world to conduct
their highly innovative research, which ultimately enhances the educational
experiences of all involved.&lt;br/&gt;