* 0923152
* MRI Acquisition of Equipment for the Establishment of a Reconfigurable Computing Center at the University of Puerto Rico
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Edusmildo Orozco, University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2012
* USD 185,490.00

Proposal #: CNS 09-23152&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Arce-Nazario, Rafael; Orozco,
Edusmildo&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Puerto Rico ? Rio
Piedras&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI/Acq.: Acq.of Equipment for the
Establishment of a Reconfigurable Computing Center at UPR-RP
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, acquiring a shared computational resource
instrument with multiple high-end general purpose processors and Field
Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGA) co-processors that form flagship platforms for
Reconfigurable Computing (RC), supports interdisciplinary collaboration with
research groups in Finite Field Applications, Computational Discrete
Mathematics, Electronics Design Automation, and Developmental Biology. Focusing
on research tools for assisting automatic partitioning of applications to
multicore architectures and configurable platforms, the project services eight
application fields, including hardware/software (HW/SW) co-design tools, power
optimization tools for embedded systems, Latin square orthogonality- and
hypercube cut number-related problems, reconfigurable radar waveforms, and
bioinformatics. The DMAGIC (DST Mapping using Algorithmic and Graph Interaction
and Computation) methodology generates a high-level efficient partition for a
given pair of problem descriptions in Discrete Signal Transform (DST) and
architectural descriptions. Hence, algorithms will be designed mapping the
different research areas into the platform. Education and research training are
given a high priority.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The instrument
expedites scientific results, impacts the education and training of all users,
and contributes to workforce training. Collaborations open new opportunities for
undergraduate research, contributing not only to retain students, but also to
direct them to graduate studies. This university, residing in an EPSCoR
jurisdiction, services a large number of underrepresented minority
students.&lt;br/&gt;