* 0923743
* Regulation of Talin Function in Amoeboid Cells
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Margaret Titus, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 07/31/2013
* USD 486,418.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit. One of the many
inhabitants in the leafy debris of the forest floors is social amoeba. These are
ancient organisms that diverged and evolved independently from mammals quite
early in evolution. Social amoeba are quite remarkable--they can exist as
individual cells that subsist on the bacteria growing in their environment, or
they can come together to form a multicellular organism when food becomes
scarce. Amoeba survival and movement depends on their ability to stick to
surfaces, either their prey bacteria or the soil on the ground or even each
other. The goal of this project is to understand exactly how simple amoebae are
able to adhere to surfaces. The focus of the work is on talin, a highly
conserved protein found in both mammals and amoeba. Talin is a linker protein
that connects adhesion receptors, proteins residing in the cell's plasma
membrane that recognize specific surfaces (i.e. bacteria, other amoeba), to the
cell's internal skeleton, called the cytoskeleton. Linking receptors to the
cytoskeleton allows the cell to pull against the surface and either engulf its
prey bacteria or move along the forest floor. The project will ask detailed
questions about the mechanism of talin action, i.e. identifying regions of the
talin molecule necessary for its function and searching for other adhesion
proteins that bind to talin. It will also ask how the role of talin has evolved
in social amoeba by comparing the structure and function of talins from
different species of amoebae, from the most ancient to the most recent. The
information gained from this project will reveal basic principles about how
cells interact with their environment, an activity that is critical for their
growth and survival. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. The project will
provide hands-on training opportunities in laboratory research for inexperienced
students (high school students, college freshmen and sophomores). The overall
goal is to introduce students to experimental science as well as stimulate and
foster their independent, critical thinking skills. The project includes a
series of mini-projects designed specifically for students with a wide range of
skill levels. A one-on-one Socratic method will be employed: students will be
individually taught various methods by the PI and then encouraged to work
through and answer specific questions about talin, and formulate their own new
questions as they proceed. The research will also introduce students to the
power of bioinformatics approaches in biology and concepts in the evolution of
proteins and organisms. Finally, the project will serve as a vehicle for
stimulating international cooperation and scientific exchange with research
laboratories in Latin America. Lectures and laboratory modules will be developed
for presentation in a series of International Training Courses in Cell Biology
&amp; Biochemistry held annually in Brazil, Uruguay and Argentina, and these
interactions will serve as a catalyst for developing scientific collaborations.