* 0923180
* Collaborative Research: Scale and context-dependence of relative humidity to adult Manduca sexta behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2014
* Goggy Davidowitz, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 12/31/2014
* USD 339,438.00

Studies of sensory cues and signals mediating plant-animal interactions have
tended to focus only on one scale (community or individual) and one context
(attraction). Relatively little is known as to how sensory cues modify behavior
across scales and in different contexts. In this study, the tobacco hornworm
hawkmoth (Manduca sexta) will be used to address the behavioral roles of
relative humidity in foraging choices at different scales (local, habitat and
landscape) and contexts (sex, age, nutritional status) and how these interact
(additively, synergistically) to modify transitions in nectivorous behaviors of
orientation, habitat selection and foraging and their implications for moth
fitness. Cross-disciplinary training will be given to atmospheric science
undergraduates from Cornell who will not only model relative humidity profiles
at the study site, but will come to Arizona to learn, first hand, how climactic
variables influence biological processes. This study will also support an
outreach program that uses insects to teach biological principals to 2nd grade
students in specially designed workshops and classroom visits, reaching over
5000 elementary school students most of whom are minority and of poverty
economic status. These students will gain hands-on experience as to the
importance of water and humidity in desert environments, how and why insects
behave, and that bugs are inherently fascinating. Over 70 Undergraduate
Preceptors will be trained in outreach teaching and how to convey an enthusiasm
for science to the general public. An outreach program at Cornell
('Insectapalooza') is focused on the extraordinary biology of insects, and will
guarantee a strong impact of this project on the public in two diverse cities.
The undergraduate students and postdoctoral fellows will receive cross-
disciplinary training in ecophysiology, behavior, pollination biology,
nutritional ecology and community structure, as well as one-on-one mentoring in
experimental design, manuscript writing and the oral presentation of scientific
research.