* 0923408
* MRI: Acquisition of an Ultrafast Spectroscopy System for Biological and Engineering Research
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Jerome Schultz, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2014
* USD 399,131.00

0923408&lt;br/&gt;Vullev&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal requests the
purchase of a broad-excitation/detection ranges, in the fs time-domain, using a
Ti - Sapphaire-based system for absorption (reflectance/ up-conversion
fluorescence) system. The instrument will cover the excitation range of 240-2600
nm, detection in the range of 360-1700 nm and a time window of 150 fs to 10 ns.
The assembled instrument will be utilized primarily to study charge-transfer
processes in a variety of systems from charge separation and recombination in
solar energy conversion schemes to biologically relevant redox systems. The
assembled instrument is a turnkey type machine, simple to operate and easy to
maintain. It is considered a key instrument in contemporary frontier science.
The instrument will serve a large number of PI's (over 15 are listed) mostly,
but not solely in the Dept. of Bioengineering. The large number of interested
parties will encourage inter-disciplinary interactions. This acquisition will
significantly expand the capabilities and resources that are currently available
at UC-Riverside to research projects that are in progress. This will expand the
potential for expanding collaboration among the investigators from UC-R and
those from other institutions and companies in the region. It will also expand
the opportunities that will be available to undergraduate and graduate as well
as high school students, and in particular minority students from local
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;