* 0923853
* STTR Phase II:  Development of a Lead Optimization Chip for Drug Discovery
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Douglas Clark, Solidus Biosciences, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 07/31/2011
* USD 500,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase II project will address
further development and commercialization of a multi-enzyme lead optimization
chip (Multizyme Chip) for high-throughput generation of lead compound analogs
coupled with cell-based screening for the rapid identification of biologically
active derivatives. Such a capability directly impacts a key bottleneck in drug
discovery; namely, the efficient optimization of lead compounds to develop drugs
with optimal pharmacological properties. Solidus Biosciences, Inc. proposes to
combine six biocatalysis with pharmacological screening to provide rapid
identification of biologically active compounds against cell-specific targets,
which is a new paradigm for lead optimization. Moreover, the Multizyme Chip
platform will be well-suited for lead optimization in related industries,
including agrochemicals, cosmetics, and cosmeceuticals. The Solidus technology
will thus improve the competitiveness and efficiency of the pharmaceutical,
cosmetics, and chemical industries, and will serve as a rich source of new and
improved commercial products.

The broader impacts of this research are the advances that Solidus Biosciences
will achieve toward generating better and safer drugs, reducing the cost to
develop these drugs, and increasing the overall efficiency of the pharmaceutical
industry. Solidus will generate Multizyme Chips for purchase by pharmaceutical
and biotechnology companies to facilitate their lead optimization programs,
particularly those involving natural product-derived and complex synthetic small
molecule leads. Cryopreservation techniques developed in Phase II will enable
the sale of chips and chip-handling devices produced during Phase I, and will
allow seamless penetration of the Solidus technology platform into the company's
target markets.

