* 0923822
* SBIR Phase II:   Improved Manufacturing Methodology for Aluminum Ash Metal Matrix Composite Materials
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2009,12/31/2012
* Brock Marrs, NuForm Materials, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2012
* USD 761,251.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This Small Business Innovation Research(SBIR)Phase II project seeks to overcome
the principal impediments of the inconsistent quality of metal matrix composite
(MMC) materials from fly ash and aluminum. This project utilizes highly
processed ash derived ceramics (ADC) as a reinforcing phase in aluminum MMCs
manufactured with powder metallurgy (P/M) methods. The processed ADC has a
narrow size distribution and is free of carbon, magnetite, and cenospheres. In
powder metal technology the ADC alters the strength, stiffness, and hardness of
the aluminum. When blended with aluminum powders and compacted into parts,
aluminum MMC materials can be fabricated with stiffness properties like ductile
iron. Sintering parameters can be manipulated to control the aluminum-ADC
reaction and the silicon metal and spinel that it generates, thus creating wear
resistance and hardness. The MMC then behaves like a hypereutectic alloy. The
primary objective of this project is to formulate one or more high performance
ADC-aluminum MMCs that are ready for commercial deployment. Achieving this level
of performance will allow ADC?aluminum MMCs to compete directly with
hypereutectic alloys and ductile iron in the production of parts for the
transportation industry.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be the ability to
derive high quality, ash derived ceramics (ADC) that are recovered from coal
combustion ash for use in new light weight high strength composite materials.
These materials are needed in the transportation industry where weight, cost,
and performance are critical. ADC-aluminum metal matrix composites can be used
to manufacture parts for the transportation industry such as brake rotors, and
drive train components that are currently made from ductile iron or
hypereutectic alloys, materials that are heavier and/or difficult to machine.
This material change will decrease the overall weight of the vehicle, thereby
improving its fuel efficiency and performance while improving the margins for
parts manufacturers. This technology will create a new commodity that will lead
to the creation of new jobs and help support the needs of the automotive and
transportation industries.

