* 0923511
* MRI: Acquisition of Tesla Hardware for Speech Recognition
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Adam Janin, International Computer Science Institute
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2012
* USD 108,833.00

Proposal #: CNS 09-23511 &lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Janin, Adam &lt;br/&gt;Institution:
International Computer Science Institute&lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI/Acq.: Acquisition
of Tesla Hardware for Speech Recognition &lt;br/&gt;Project
Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This project, acquiring an nVidia Tesla architecture system,
facilitates development parallel code algorithms for automatic speech
recognition (ASR). The Tesla Hardware for Speech Recognition consists of a
cluster of 10 nVidia Tesla rack-mounted units with associated infrastructure.
New parallel codes must be developed to improve the accuracy of speech
recognition, since computer systems now obey ?Core?s Law? (where the number of
cores on a chip doubles once every two years). The system provides a large-scale
multi-core general purpose computing environment that enables the development of
scalable parallel code algorithms. The instrument provides a testbed in which to
investigate future scalable algorithms that are expected to facilitate continued
leadership in the commercial and industrial markets in terms of advanced and
novel algorithms. Thus, envisioning the state of computing in 5 to 10 years when
multi-core architectures prevail, the project aims to first&lt;br/&gt;- Secure
appropriate computing resources for research in speech recognition and
then&lt;br/&gt;- Eclipse the current 2- and 4-core basic desktop
systems.&lt;br/&gt;The institute performs extensive training for machine
learning and speech recognition in realistic settings with challenging acoustic
properties and natural, human to human communication. Applications run from
hands-free access to disabled users and natural speech-driven interfaces for the
non-computer literate to automatic meeting assistants and browsers, in which
meetings are recorded in real-time and tools are provided that allow access to
content both during and after the meeting. The following two relevant methods
improve accuracy:&lt;br/&gt;- Multi-stream methods that involve combinations at
many levels within the system, including multiple features, multiple machine
learning estimators, and multiple word-streams combinations and&lt;br/&gt;-
Increasing the size of the training set.&lt;br/&gt;Careful integration of data
can improve the accuracy even when the training data does not exactly match the
conditions of actual application. Both methods require increasing computational
power hard to fulfill with current conventional
hardware.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The acquisition contributes to
continue attracting young researchers and aiding in their training. The improved
computational capability facilitates the demonstration of speech research to
local high school students. The BFOIT Foundation for Opportunities in
Information Technology aims to attract more women and underrepresented
minorities in computer science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;