* 0923054
* MRI-Consortium: Development of a Multimode Microscope for Imaging Structure and Dynamics of Soft Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Rudolf Oldenbourg, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 09/30/2013
* USD 157,303.00

0923054&lt;br/&gt;Oldenbourg&lt;br/&gt;Marine Biological
Laboratory&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This award is funded under the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary: This project aims to develop a
multimode optical microscope which will simultaneously reveal the structure and
dynamics of soft and biological materials from various perspectives and across
multiple length scales. The proposed instrument will be centered around an
inverted optical microscope and will have the following four mutually compatible
modalities: (1) holographic optical tweezer based on an infrared laser, (2) epi-
fluorescecence microscope capable of localizing single molecules with
millisecond temporal resolution and nanometer spatial resolution, (3)
quantitative polarization microscopy which will reveal either 2D birefringence
maps at the highest spatial resolution attainable with visible light or 3D
birefringence maps at a reduced spatial resolution and (4) dual view imaging.
The new multimode microscope will be used to examine a broad range of soft and
biological materials including self-assembled non-amphiphilic membranes whose
formation is driven by chiral interactions, spontaneously oscillating eukaryotic
flagella, dynamics and structure of semi-flexible polymers absorbed onto a hard
wall and synthesis and expression of biopolymer collagen in vivo. The proposed
instrument will be developed in a close collaboration between Brandeis
University and the Marine Biological Laboratory in Woods Hole, MA. The operation
of the proposed instrument will be supported by the Material Research Science
and Engineering Center at Brandeis. Special effort will be taken to develop a
novel experimental course focused on optics and microscopy, which will enable
undergraduate and graduate students to effectively use the multimode
microscope.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Layman Summary: Optical microscopy uses visible
light to directly image the structure and dynamics of various soft materials
such as paints, foams, gels and liquid crystals. Over the past few decades
various specialized modalities of optical microscopy have been developed, with
each modality revealing certain aspects of the material under examination. For
example, brightfield microscopy reveals the structure and dynamics of entire
micron sized assemblages, fluorescence microscopy yields the dynamics of
individual components within such an assemblage, polarization microscopy
indicates the orientation of molecules within any given structure and laser
tweezers enable studies of how these assemblages respond to external force. So
far most soft materials have been examined with either single or dual mode
microscopes. This project aims to develop a novel multimode microscope which
will enable simultaneous examination of materials with all four different
modalities: brightfield microscopy, fluorescence microscopy, quantitative
polarization microscopy and holographic laser tweezers. Special care will be
taken to ensure that the performance of each module is not compromised by the
presence of other modalities. Development of the multimode microscope will
enable experiments that will correlate behavior of materials across multiple
length scales and will thus provide essential insight into how collective
properties of a material such as its equilibrium shape and elasticity arises
from interactions of individual components. The proposed instrument will be
developed in a close collaboration between Brandeis University and the Marine
Biological Laboratory in Woods Hole, MA. The operation of the proposed
instrument will be supported by the Material Research Science and Engineering
Center at Brandeis. Special effort will be taken to develop a novel experimental
course focused on optics and microscopy, which will enable undergraduate and
graduate students to effectively use the multimode microscope.