* 0923312
* Functional Genomics of Tomato Fruit Quality: Bridging the Gap between QTLs and Genes
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2010,07/31/2016
* James Giovannoni, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 07/31/2016
* USD 3,008,403.00

PI: Harry J. Klee (University of Florida -
Gainsville)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CoPIs: Zhangjun Fei and James J. Giovannoni
(Boyce Thompson Institute/USDA-ARS) and Denise Tieman (University of Florida -
Gainsville)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborator: Alisdair Fernie (Max Planck
Institute of Molecular Plant Physiology, Potsdam-Golm,
Germany)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fruits are major components of the human diet,
contributing a large portion of vitamins, minerals, antioxidants, and fiber.
While flavor and nutrient composition have clear and profound human benefit,
they are difficult traits to modify due to their complex metabolic and
regulatory pathways. Synthesis of nutritional and flavor compounds is the result
of coordinated activity of multiple biochemical pathways, requiring integration
of developmental, physiological and environmental cues. Effective manipulation
of these traits requires knowledge of the pathways and the regulatory systems
that control them. This project exploits the exceptional diversity within the
Solanaceae to identify networks regulating synthesis of flavor and nutrition
compounds. For many metabolic pathways, all of the genes encoding biosynthetic
activities are known. Yet virtually nothing is known about how those genes are
regulated to control metabolic output. The focus of this project is on three
specific metabolic pathways responsible for synthesis of major flavor and
nutrition chemicals: synthesis of folic acid, carotenoids and a family of
phenylalanine-derived flavor and fragrance volatiles. In each case multiple, as
yet unidentified genetic loci regulating metabolite flux through these pathways
have been identified from wild tomato relatives. This project will specifically
identify the genes responsible for that regulation and their mechanisms of
action. In order to most effectively accomplish these goals, several valuable
community resources will be developed. Gene expression profiling of fruit from
lines containing defined segments of the wild tomato relative, Solanum
pennellii, will be performed, providing quantitative information for gene
expression and gene mapping. Also, BAC end sequencing of a S. pennellii library
will be performed, facilitating rapid isolation of orthologous sequences by the
entire research community. All sequence data will be available through GenBank
and all metabolite, gene expression, and SNP data will be accessible through the
Tomato Functional Genomics Database (TFGD, www.ted.bti.cornell.edu). All clone
and germplasm resources can be ordered online at
http://ted.bti.cornell.edu/cgibin/TFGD/order/home.cgi.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research project integrates genomics, metabolomics, informatics, genetics and
biochemistry to achieve a deep understanding of how to manipulate important,
multigenic quality traits in plants. This systems approach to a problem provides
an excellent training environment for undergraduate and graduate students as
well as postdoctoral scientists. The project integrates with ongoing highly
successful minority training programs at both institutions. The achievable goals
of better and healthier foods are highly appealing to students, industry and the
public at large.