* 0923383
* Galactic Center Workshop 2009: A Window Into the Nuclear Environment of Galaxies; October 2009; Shanghai, China
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Cornelia Lang, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Lodders
* 08/31/2011
* USD 50,000.00

This award will support travel and local expenses for United States students and
early career scientists to attend the international workshop "Galactic Center
Workshop 2009: A Window into the Nuclear Environment of Galaxies", to be held on
October 19-23, 2009 in Shanghai, China. The purpose of the workshop is to
highlight the recent research results on the center of the Milky Way and the
nuclear regions of nearby galaxies. This conference is the latest in a series of
scientific workshops held every 3-4 years on this topical area. Recent
highlights include the high-resolution and sensitive new surveys of the Galactic
Center interstellar medium at wavelengths from X-ray through radio, new
constraints on the size and structure of the super massive black hole source,
Sgr A*, and the most recent results from coordinated monitoring campaigns of
this source. The workshop will also emphasize the relationship between the
physical processes occurring in our own Galactic Center and those happening in
the nuclei of the nearest galaxies. The format of the meetings will include
substantial time for discussion in addition to the scheduled talks. These
discussions, moderated by leading researchers in the field, will focus on the
implications of the current results presented in the sessions and future
directions for inquiry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop serves to promote
Galactic Center astronomy in wider academic circles and on an international
effort. The funding from this award will support the travel costs of as many as
20 junior researchers - graduate students, postdoctoral scholars, and junior
faculty members - to attend this international scientific workshop. Travel
support will give young and active members of the scientific community the
opportunity to attend what will certainly be a very interesting and informative
workshop at an early stage in their scientific careers. In addition, the
participants will be exposed to the breadth of astronomical activities occurring
in China. A diverse group of speakers and participants will be recruited for
this workshop in order to represent the diversity of research currently being
carried out on this topic.