* 0923714
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Technological Change in Southwestern Asia: Metallurgical Production Styles and Social Values during the Chalcolithic and Bronze Ages
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2009,04/30/2011
* Pamela Vandiver, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2011
* USD 10,950.00

In the Laboratory for Cultural Materials at the University of Arizona, under the
direction of Pamela Vandiver, Lesley Frame will examine evidence for some of the
earliest copper production in the world (early 5th millennium BCE) to understand
technological choices made by prehistoric craftspeople. Three sites on the
Iranian Plateau (Tal-i Iblis in the South, and Seh Gabi and Godin Tepe in the
North) have yielded archaeological evidence for smelting copper. The Plateau
region is unique in the persistent use of crucibles (shallow bowl-like vessels)
for over two millennia for converting copper ore to metal for despite the
presence of more efficient technologies (e.g. the furnace) in the surrounding
lowlands and nearby coastal regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to study the
reasons for the persistent use of crucibles, and the earliest metallurgy on the
Iranian Plateau in general, one must first develop a dynamic view of
metallurgical technology on the plateau. This dynamic view must consider metal
production in different locations (with access to different raw materials
including ore, fuel, and clay), and it must consider different scales of
production (in workshop and residential settings), and changes in social values,
trade networks, demand for metal goods, and access to other craftspeople, and
therefore other technological processes. This project examines early metal
production on the Iranian Plateau by focusing on (1) both published data and new
results generated by this project from large-scale production areas, (2) data
from trade and urban centers that exhibit evidence of small-scale, "cottage-
level" metal production and working as well as a wide range of metal artifacts,
and (3) the technological choices and technological changes exhibited at these
sites that occur with other, non-metal, materials on the
Plateau.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will contribute significantly to our
understandings of the early development of metal technology in the Iranian
highlands. In addition, the detailed study of the important highland Iranian
sites included in this project, which have been largely neglected since their
initial excavation over 30 years ago, will shed new light on the practices of
and interactions between Chalcolithic and Bronze Age communities. Furthermore,
the methodology and use of social technology theories makes this project
anthropologically robust as well as analytically
detailed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Further, the number of scholars studying the
archaeometallurgy of Iran is small, but diverse. The broader impacts of this
project include contributions to an ongoing dialogue within this international
group of German, British, Iranian, Canadian, and American researchers regarding
the state of the field and the interpretation of our collective data. The
project will also contribute to undergraduate education at the University of
Arizona. The experimental archaeological casting is being incorporated as a
demonstration and interactive experiment for upper-level undergraduates in
Materials Science and Engineering. These classes are designed to help students
understand the relationships between processing and properties of materials, and
how technology has changed over the past 30,000 years.