* 0923562
* MRI: Acquisition of instrumentation to study stable isotopes of the carbon, nitrogen, and water biogeochemical cycles.
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Cailin Orr, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2012
* USD 508,518.00

Washington State University (WSU) has received funds from the Major Research
Instrumentation Program to support the acquisition of a tunable diode laser
optical analyzer (TGA100A), a leaf gas exchange system (LI6400), a ten detector
isotope-ratio mass spectrometer, and an isotopic water analyzer (L1102-i). The
instrumentation will be incorporated into WSU's Laboratory for Biotechnology and
Bioanalysis 2 (LBB2) Stable Isotope Core facility. Through the Center for
Environmental Research, Education and Outreach (CEREO) this instrumentation will
facilitate research and training in the area of global climate change and
ecosystem-atmosphere exchange of carbon, nitrogen and water across the
University. The TGA100A and LI6400 will be used to measure the exchange of trace
gases between the atmosphere and the biosphere at ecosystem and leaf levels. The
focus of the mass spectrometer will be to identify sources of nitrogen
pollutants and fertilizers in agricultural and natural environments. The L1102-i
will be used to study water movement through plants and soil profiles, and to
understand how these processes are affected by changing climate. Additionally,
the instrumentation will be incorporated into several graduate and undergraduate
courses and will be an integral part of a nitrogen methods workshop developed
through a NSF funded Integrative Graduate Education and Research Traineeship
(IGERT) grant. An internship through the Stable Isotopes Core facilities will
also be available to train underrepresented undergraduate and graduate students
from regional Universities on the technical aspects of this instrumentation and
to engage high school students in independent research projects.