* 0923826
* Mechanism and Genetic Impacts of Transposon-Induced Duplications in Maize
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* David Weber, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,001,067.00

Research Objectives: Partial chromosome duplications (segmental duplications)
are important contributors to the structure, function and diversity of plant and
animal genomes. However, very little is known concerning how duplications are
generated, and their immediate effects on gene expression and genetic
recombination. This project examines the potential role of transposable
elements, or jumping genes, in generating segmental duplications. The aim of
this project is to isolate and characterize a series of partial chromosome
duplications in corn generated by Ac/Ds transposable elements. The structures of
duplications will be examined by microscopic visualization of chromosomes. The
duplication endpoints will be isolated and studied to determine precisely how
DNA replication and genetic recombination are involved in forming duplications.
Finally, the effects of partial chromosome duplications on genetic recombination
and gene expression will be analyzed in detail, because these two processes are
critical for effective plant breeding. This project utilizes complementary
molecular, genetic and microscopic approaches to study this important class of
genetic variants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project will
provide significant new insight into the role of transposable elements in
generating duplications, and the impact these duplications have on genetic
recombination and gene expression. This information may lead to significant
advances in breeding of crop plants, thereby improving agricultural efficiency
and environmental sustainability. In addition, this project will result in
significant training opportunities for current and future scientists in a
variety of approaches and methods in molecular genetics, classical genetics,
cytogenetics and transposon biology. Three graduate students are integral to the
research project and will be trained in a variety of classical, cytological, and
molecular genetic approaches. The project will also provide laboratory work
experience and on the job training for approximately six undergraduate students
per year. In addition, an annual cytogenetics short course will train 12-18 high
school students and teachers yearly. Together these training activities will
significantly enhance the science infrastructure in the USA.