* 0923829
* Mechanistic Studies of the Adenosylmethionine Radical Enzyme Biotin Synthase
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Joseph Jarrett, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2013
* USD 450,000.00

Biotin is a small molecular cofactor used in several important enzymes that
carry out reactions that involve the transfer of carboxylate groups; for
example, the addition of a carboxylate group to acetyl CoA by the biotin-
containing enzyme acetyl CoA carboxylase is the first step in fatty acid
biosynthesis in humans as well as most other organisms. Biotin is not made in
humans (it is an essential vitamin), but is made in bacteria, yeast, and plants
by a conserved pathway that concludes with the substitution of a sulfur atom in
place of two hydrogen atoms, a reaction that is catalyzed by the enzyme biotin
synthase. This biochemical reaction is unique and unprecedented: it requires
S-adenosyl-L-methionine (AdoMet or SAM) to remove the hydrogen atoms from the
precursor dethiobiotin and it appears to use an iron-sulfur cluster cofactor as
the source of sulfur for constructing biotin. The involvement of SAM in removing
hydrogen atoms suggests that biotin synthase belongs to an emerging family of
enzymes that utilize SAM as a substrate or cofactor to facilitate the controlled
generation of substrate or protein radicals. In the present research, the
formation and decay of this intermediate will be examined using several
techniques. First, mass spectrometry and heavy atom labeling will be used to
determine the chemical nature of the intermediate, probe the kinetics of
formation and decay of the intermediate, and optimize conditions for maximizing
the amount of enzyme in this state. Second, vibrational spectroscopy and
electron paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy with isotopically-labeled
substrates will be employed to probe whether 9-mercaptodethiobiotin is
covalently attached to the iron-sulfur cluster during the catalytic reaction. A
detailed description of the factors that control SAM radical generation,
substrate activation, and carbon-sulfur bond formation will contribute to our
understanding of mechanistic and structural features common to all radical
enzymes.&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS. The research projects described provide an
excellent forum for teaching the basic techniques involved in characterizing
enzyme reaction intermediates to undergraduate and graduate students and
postdoctoral researchers. The University of Hawaii serves a diverse student
population that includes a significant percentage of students from the Hawaiian
and Pacific Islands, and a number of undergraduates will be trained in protein
and enzyme characterization through participation in a "Directed Research"
course. More specifically, this research project will support the scientific
work of 2-3 graduate students and 3-4 undergraduate students over three years.
In addition, our improved knowledge of the mechanism of biotin synthase will
contribute to the development of organisms engineered to overproduce biotin.
Biotin is an expensive but essential vitamin that is incorporated into both
human nutritional supplements and, more significantly, into animal feedstock.
The current research could contribute to a low-cost biological method for the
production of biotin (as well as other vitamins) which would benefit society by
contributing to less expensive and more efficient food production. This award
was co-funded by the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the
Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division.