* 0923440
* MRI: Acquisition of a Multipole Wiggler for the LSU Synchrotron for Protein Crystallography, Tomography, X-ray Absorption, Radiology, and Microfabrication
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2014
* Leslie Butler, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 09/30/2014
* USD 1,261,000.00

0923440&lt;br/&gt;Newcomer&lt;br/&gt;LA State U &amp; A&amp;M
College&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary: Replacing the current single-
pole wavelength shifter with a multipole wiggler will increase the X-ray flux by
about 10 fold and extend the range of useful intensities to higher energies. The
wiggler will serve 4 beamlines on the CAMD synchrotron and will greatly benefit
researchers in the following fields.&lt;br/&gt; Protein Crystallography: The
higher brightness will allow studies involving smaller crys-tals and/or higher
resolution data sets, both requiring intensity levels currently unavailable. Re-
duced data collection times will increase the productivity of the beamline.
&lt;br/&gt; Tomography: The increased transverse beam coherence of the MPW,
estimated at 0.2 µm, will enable new full-field phase contrast imaging, a
powerful method of enhancing image contrast in samples. Also, the increased flux
will enable practical high resolution tomography, about 3 µm, for large field-
of-view samples. &lt;br/&gt; Medical Radiology: Current research is aimed at a
potentially new radiation therapy called K-edge capture therapy in which the
dose is localized by means of a drug that targets can-cer cells. Dual energy
K-edge imaging and phase contrast imaging have significant potential in
diagnostic imaging, including breast cancer screening. The increased intensity
and energy of X-rays will allow studies to be extended to Gd and other high-Z
contrast agents.&lt;br/&gt; X-ray Spectroscopy: The 10 to 14-fold greater X-ray
flux in the range of 4 to 24 keV will improve signal-to-noise ratio in XANES and
EXAFS and will permit experiments that include in-situ catalyst studies,
environmental studies of dilute metal pollutants and of metal sites in in-tact
proteins. The K or L edges of almost all transition metals will be
accessible.&lt;br/&gt; Microfabrication: Higher energy photons from the MPW will
improve the fabrication of high aspect ratio microstructures, a unique advantage
of X-ray lithography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lay Summary: The photons produced by
the proposed multipole wiggler are called ?hard X-rays?. They have wavelengths
comparable to the distance between atoms and can pass through matter without
causing significant damage. This unique combination of properties makes hard
X-rays ideal for determining the structure of crystallized molecules, including
very large mole-cules such as proteins, and for investigating the internal
structures of solids. X-ray based struc-ture determination is an essential part
of modern drug discovery. &lt;br/&gt;Other applications for hard X-rays exploit
the fact that each element absorbs X-rays at certain wavelengths characteristic
of that element. By selecting an appropriate wavelength, re-searchers can
investigate the chemical state of individual atoms in a molecule. This is an
impor-tant tool in studies of environmental contamination. The same property may
be used to enhance the effectiveness of radiation therapy by localizing the
radiation dose to regions labeled with tu-mor-specific drugs.&lt;br/&gt; All of
these applications require an intense source of X-rays that can produce
radiation of the desired wavelengths. Synchrotron rings can be strong sources of
X-rays when the electron beam inside the ring is passed through a magnetic
field. We are proposing to install a set of 11 very strong superconducting
magnets on the existing synchrotron at Louisiana State University. This device,
known as a Mulitpole Wiggler, will increase the intensity of the X-rays
available to experimenters by more than 10 fold and the high-intensity output
will extend over a wide range of wavelengths. All of the applications mentioned
above will benefit greatly from the new mul-tipole wiggler.