* 0923757
* Interactions in Yeast Pre-mRNA Splicing
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* David Peabody, University of New Mexico Health Sciences Center
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 08/31/2013
* USD 723,443.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;
DExD/H-box proteins are found in every living organism. They generally use the
energy from hydrolyzing ATP to unwind double-stranded RNA or DNA to single
strands in vitro. They also share several properties including a common
structure of their helicase core domains. However, for the vast majority of RNA-
dependent DExD/H-box proteins, their mechanisms of action and physiological RNA
target substrates are unknown. This project focuses on Prp5, one of 8 DExD/H-box
proteins required for pre-mRNA splicing within the spliceosome in the yeast
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Prp5's ATP-dependent activities are important for
monitoring the accuracy of splicing and essential for forming the
prespliceosome, an intermediate in the assembly pathway leading to the active
spliceosome that catalyzes splicing. In this project, a combination of genetic
and biochemical assays will be used to test three hypotheses regarding Prp5's
interactions with RNA. These three hypotheses address two critical issues
fundamental to all RNA-dependent DExD/H-box proteins; how RNA binding regulates
ATPase activity and identifying the target of an RNA helicase. The first
hypothesis is that a region immediately adjacent to the helicase core regulates
Prp5's ATPase activity by linking RNA binding to ATP hydrolysis. In vitro ATPase
and RNA binding assays will be used to characterize kinetic parameters of RNA
stimulation in proteins with mutations in this region. The second hypothesis is
that RNA stimulation of Prp5 modulates splicing accuracy. Mutant proteins
defective in RNA stimulation of ATPase activity will be assessed for their
effects on splicing accuracy in vivo. The third hypothesis is that Prp5's
helicase core binds U2 RNA (another spliceosomal factor), pre-mRNA or both
within the spliceosome. Directed hydroxyl radical mapping and in vitro splicing
assays will be used together to identify the RNA that binds the core and is
therefore Prp5's target substrate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impact:&lt;br/&gt; This research project will have several outcomes important to
advancing science as well as education and training. The results will increase
our understanding of many DExD/H-box proteins and the biological processes in
which they participate. Another project outcome will be development of a new
research tool (directed hydroxyl radical mapping) to further the study of these
proteins. Three training, educational and outreach activities will involve
students from middle school to graduate level. Graduate and undergraduate
students will conduct parts of the project. High school students will visit the
lab and shadow lab members to observe research in action, and to discuss
training and educational opportunities. Finally, a STEM (Science, Technology,
Engineering and Mathematics) team comprised of university faculty and students
as well as middle school teachers and science professionals will be formed to
introduce new learning sessions to middle school students. These sessions will
develop scientific concepts and critical thinking skills as well as illustrate
career choices and provide role models. The long-term outcome of the
educational, training and outreach activities is to increase the number and
diversity of individuals pursuing STEM careers.