* 0923919
* SBIR Phase II:  Adaptive Methods for Sensorless Estimation of Induction Motor Efficiency
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2009,10/31/2012
* Amir Atiya, Veros Systems, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 10/31/2012
* USD 719,468.00

This Small Business Innovation research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop and
field-test a system for obtaining accurate on-line, in-service estimates of
energy efficiency of industrial electric motors. The effort will further exploit
the basic technology at the core of the condition monitoring & assessment (CM&A)
product being developed by Veros Systems. Inc., and will become a key feature of
that product. This monitoring technology is sensorless, in that only electrical
measurements, i.e. voltages and currents available at the motor control centers,
are utilized. No information from mechanical sensors, such as speed, torque,
vibration or temperature, is necessary. Consequently, this reliable and
effective CM&A technology is cost-effective and cost-scalable. The proposed
approach to efficiency estimation is based on employing the raw electrical
measurements that are collected for use by the existing CM&A product framework,
and augmenting them with adaptive filters for accurate estimation. The Phase II
research plan calls for the refinement of the online, in-service efficiency
estimation algorithms defined in the previous Phase I effort.

The broader impacts of the project include awareness of the importance of energy
efficiency in industrial motors, which account for about 25% of all electricity
sold in the U.S. Widespread adoption of this energy conversion efficiency
estimation technology could reduce the total energy consumption by industrial
motors up to an estimated 18%. These energy conversion efficiency costs,
together with the costs of maintaining electric motors and the costs of lost
production associated with motor downtime are among the most significant
controllable costs of industrial establishments. Even a modest adoption of more
effective CM&A and efficiency estimation technologies would eliminate some
fraction of this waste and have a significant impact on the U.S. economy, while
enabling clients to reduce their energy costs, increase profitability, reduce
fuel imports and lower greenhouse emissions.

