* 0923238
* MRI: Acquisition of an Optical Motion Capture System for Human-Centered Computing Research
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Qi Cheng, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 12/31/2012
* USD 300,000.00

Proposal #: CNS 09-23238&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Sheng, Weihua; Cheng, Qi; Li, Xiaolin;
Rahnavard, Nazanin&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Oklahoma State University &lt;br/&gt;
Stillwater, OK 74078-1011&lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI/Acq.: Acq.of an Optical Motion
Capture System for Human-Centered Computing Research&lt;br/&gt;Project
Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This project, acquiring an optical motion capture system,
supports research for infrastructure-free human context awareness and context-
based human intention recognition. The system relies on wearable sensing and
computing devices to achieve human context awareness. The research aims to
answer central questions in understanding the interplay between human and
computing, mainly &lt;br/&gt;- Understanding human context (e.g., behavior,
location) through embedded computing, and&lt;br/&gt;- Exploring the knowledge of
human context to improve embedded computing applications.&lt;br/&gt;The first
research project investigates the development of infrastructure ?free human
context awareness in GPS-restricted environments. The second studies the use of
the knowledge of human context to better understand human intentions and
addresses the study in a human-robot interaction (HRI) setup. Both projects
require a motion capture system that can provide location ground truth, allow
performance comparison, and facilitate system calibration. The work aims to
&lt;br/&gt;- Develop a theoretical framework to achieve a stand-alone human
context awareness that requires zero infrastructure setup. (Some activities,
such as 'virtual landmarks' are expected to contribute in indoor human
localization.)&lt;br/&gt;- Develop explicit human intention recognition based in
the context of both location and activity that pushes forward research in human-
robot interaction &lt;br/&gt;- Lead to a better understanding of interactive,
coupled relationship between human and computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The work impacts wearable computing, human-computer interaction (HCI),
and ubiquitous computing research. Modifications of the developed hardware and
software might serve to track the locations and monitor the status (activity and
health) of first responders, improving the efficiency of personnel safety in
their operations. The system improves the research capabilities in Oklahoma, an
EPSCoR state. Planned education and training activities contribute in preparing
students in embedded computing, wireless communication, signal processing, and
human behaviors. Outreach activities stimulate prospective students. Efforts
will be made to involve Native American and female students.