* 0923247
* MRI: Acquisition of Thermal Analysis and Calorimetry Equipment for Multiple Applications Emphasizing Research on Sustainable Fuels
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Rolf Jentoft, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2011
* USD 440,751.00

0923247&lt;br/&gt;Jentoft&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is for the acquisition of state-of-
the-art thermal analysis and calorimetry instrumentation, namely a thermobalance
and a heat flow calorimeter. The thermobalance is combined with evolved gas
analysis (EGA) by coupled mass and Fourier transform infrared spectrometers (TG-
MS-FTIR). This instrument is designed for the characterization of materials
dynamics during heating in a controlled atmosphere. The heat flow calorimeter of
the Calvet type is for the quantitative measurement of heats of gas-solid and
liquid-solid adsorption. The calorimeter system includes a gas volumetric dosing
unit, and reaction cells for static, flow, and high pressure conditions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal is the application of thermal analysis
and calorimetry to a sequence of complex scientific problems in the area of
conversion of biomass into fuels. The research will start with the
characterization of the biomass feedstock and the thermal analysis of the
pyrolysis of biomass into pyrolysis (or bio-) oil. The complexity of the
material and its decomposition reactions require the thermogravimetric apparatus
to be combined with two different methods for gas phase analysis (MS and IR).
Another approach is the hydrolysis of polysaccharides with solid acid catalysts.
The catalytic conversion of the obtained mixture from the pyrolysis (or
hydrolysis) will require the development of new catalysts with very well tuned
acid-base properties. Measurement of the heats of adsorption of reactant
molecules, and of the adsorption kinetics, will help identify suitable catalyst
materials and will provide important thermodynamic and kinetic parameters for
modeling the target reaction. The applicants will also assess the hydrophilicity
(or hydrophobicity) of the catalyst materials, which is important when working
in a single, or multiple liquid phases (as is likely in the conversion of polar
to non-polar compounds). A novel contribution to the catalysis field will be to
map the adsorption isotherm and the differential heats of small molecules into
high pressure ranges that are actually relevant for the catalytic process.