* 0923308
* MRI: Acquisition of an LC-MS/MS Mass Spectrometer by Cleveland State University
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* David Anderson, Cleveland State University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2012
* USD 514,962.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) program, the
Chemistry Department at Cleveland State University will acquire a triple
quadrupole/linear ion trap liquid chromatograph mass spectrometer system (LC
MS/MS). This instrument will promote research in a wide range of scientific and
engineering fields, including: analytical chemistry, organic chemistry, clinical
chemistry, pharmacology, forensic chemistry, environmental sciences,
biochemistry, molecular biology, green and renewable energy, nano-science,
engineering, and others. The projects include studies on: I) Elucidating
molecular mechanisms of drug resistance; II) Biomaterial development for drug
delivery; III) Ante- and post-mortem forensic analysis of drugs; IV) Nano-
particle fuel cells; V) Efficient bio-fuel production; VI) Metabolomic studies
of lipids in the liver: biological and analytical aspects; VII) A novel
separation technology interfaced to mass spectrometry; VIII) Proteomic studies
to elucidate plant arsenic detoxification mechanisms; and IX) Undergraduate
research experiences to enhance learning: Use in the Research Experiences to
Enhance Learning (REEL) Program in Analytical and Pharmaceutical
Chemistry&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mass spectrometry (MS) is used to identify the
chemical composition of a sample and determine its purity by measuring the mass
of the molecular constituents in the sample after they are ionized and detected
by the mass spectrometer. A tandem mass spectrometer system is two mass filters
in series to better identify the constituents under study. Chromatography is an
isolation technique that precedes the mass spectrometry analysis. It separates a
mixture into its several constituent chemicals which are then analyzed and
identified by the mass spectrometer. These are some of the most widely used
analytical techniques used to identify and quantify the chemical composition of
a sample. The LC-MS/MS would improve the education and training of undergraduate
and graduate students. This acquisition involves faculty and students from the
Department of Chemistry, the Department of Biological, Geological and
Environmental Sciences, the Department of Electrical &amp; Computer Engineering,
and the Department of Chemical and Biomedical Engineering at Cleveland State
University (CSU), as well as researchers from Cuyahoga County Coroner's Office,
Northeastern Ohio Universities College of Medicine, University of Akron , Case
Western Reserve University, and students from Cuyahoga Community College (CCC).
This instrument will promote the growth and interdisciplinary research between
these departments, and institutions, that will act as a catalyst for the
development of new ideas in research and education within CSU, Cleveland area
institutions and the Northeast Ohio community