* 0923064
* MRI: Acquisition of a Focused Ion Beam Instrument for Research and Education
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Lane Baker, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2013
* USD 1,656,606.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) program, the
Department of Chemistry at Indiana University will acquire a Focused Ion Beam
(FIB) instrument for the development and characterization of structures with
properties that are tailored and controlled at the molecular level. The research
applications are strongly interdisciplinary spanning topics from chemical
synthesis to physical property measurements to biological self-assembly. More
specifically, the FIB will impact the following research activities: (1) near-
field aperture arrays for nanophotonic force actuators; (2) nanostructures for
light intensity mapping and sensing; (3) nanofluidic channels for liquid phase
separations; (4) nanopore-based chemical sensors; (5) structural analysis of
nanofibers and organogels; (6) counting and correlating gold nanoparticles to
investigate surface enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) enhancement; (7)
characterization of architecturally controlled materials; (8) quantum phase
transitions in low-dimensional nanostructures; (9) structure and dynamics of
nano-confined liquid-phase systems; (10) surface contacts for supramolecular
materials in nano-electronics; and (11) sectioning samples for cryo-TEM
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A FIB instrument is used for fabricating
structures with dimensions below 100 nm and for the preparation of thin section
samples for high-resolution transmission electron microscopy. The instrument
consists of a field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM) column and a
liquid gallium focused ion beam (FIB) column, which operate together in a "dual
beam" mode. Gallium ions are produced, accelerated, and focused in the ion
column, strike the sample, ablating material at the focus of the ion beam. The
process, in effect, creates a mill with high (sub 100 nm) resolution that can be
monitored in "real time" with the FESEM. The instrument is also a fully
functional scanning electron microscope when operated without the focused ion
beam. The system will be integrated into several graduate courses as well as a
tutorial on micro and nanofabrication techniques. The faculty users are well
integrated with existing university wide programs that target increased
participation from underrepresented groups. Undergraduates will also have access
to this instrumentation through ongoing lab courses and independent research
projects. The concepts of nanofabrication will be broadly disseminated via web
based demos.