* 0923856
* SBIR Phase II:  Manufacturing of Package Test Socket Contactors through Innovations in Electrochemical Printing
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2009,01/31/2012
* Jeffrey Nelson, Ionographics, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Grace Jinliu Wang
* 01/31/2012
* USD 608,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project addresses the low
volume manufacturing of test probe cards through Electrochemical Printing.
Integrated Circuit Board Testing Connectors(ICBTCs) include contactors that are
metal structures designed to contact integrated circuit boards (ICBs) at the
wafer level during production with wafer probe cards (WPCs) or after packaging
with package testing sockets (PTSs). WPC contactors are manufactured with
semiconductor processes (SPs) in high volume whereas PTS contactors are built in
lower volume with conventional microfabrication (CM) or low cost plating through
dryfilm masks on flexible substrates. There is increasing pressure to reduce the
ICB package size and PTS contactor dimensions while also reducing testing costs.
This project addresses these needs by developing a moderate cost, high
resolution electrochemical printing technology.

The broader impacts of this research include providing repair solutions for high
value products that are currently thrown away and reducing plating bath
inventory in an electrodeposition tool by at least 10X. The long term
opportunity is for EcP is to revolutionize desktop microfabrication because it
is a low cost, single step process that has promise of producing complex 3D
fully functional polymer, semi-conductor, and metal parts.