* 0923386
* MRI: Acquisition of the ISTeC High Performance Computing Infrastructure for Science and Engineering Research Projects
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Howard Siegel, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2013
* USD 627,326.00

Proposal #: CNS 09-23386&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Siegel, Howard Jay &lt;br/&gt; Burns,
Patrick J.&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Colorado State University &lt;br/&gt;Title:
MRI/Acq.: ISTeC High Performance Computing Infrastructure for Science and Eng
Research&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project
Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This project, acquiring High Performance Computing (HPC)
instrumentation, aims to support much larger and more complex problems in
science and engineering (especially for data intensive applications), add
greater physical fidelity to existing models, facilitate application of HPC to
new areas of research and discovery, and support training to attract new
researchers. Filling the current void in cyberinfrastructure (CI) resources, the
project is expected to change the culture of discovery at the institution,
elevating HPC to the level of central infrastructure. Advanced networking will
facilitate the interaction of Tier-3 system with other systems, and enhance
researchers? abilities to utilize Tiers 1 and 2 systems worldwide. The principal
focus of the system will be data- (and often compute-) intensive applications in
NSF funded research areas, such as design of extreme ultraviolet lasers, weather
forecasting, computational physics, climate change, atmospheric modeling,
bioinformatics, network traffic analysis, robotics, computational
electromagnetics, remote sensing, robust resource allocation, and magnetic
materials. Tier -3 system will expand the domain and range of computations,
allowing problems of greater fidelity including multi-physics algorithms and
much finer spatial and temporal resolutions. The work is carried out with CSU-
Pueblo, a Hispanic-serving institution, as full partner.&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;The existing Tier-3 will share cycles of different
architectures for educational purposes: workshops, seminars, expertise via
affinity groups, instructors, courses, and students. The institution, a large
producer of STEM graduates, will integrate HPC into the STEM curricula and K-12
teacher training programs with emphasis on inclusion of women and minorities.
Member companies of the ISTeC Industrial Advisory Council have expressed
interest in participating in the activities. Existing courses support the
activity through teams consisting of application experts from diverse
disciplines (breadth), and mathematicians (algorithms) and computists (mapping
applications and algorithms to parallel architectures) (depth).