* 0923251
* MRI: Acquisition of a Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* David Pine, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 09/30/2012
* USD 458,966.00

0923251&lt;br/&gt;Ward&lt;br/&gt;New York University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This
award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public
Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract. The requested Zeiss ULTRA
55 field emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM) will provide structural
and compositional characterization for a core group of users from the
Departments of Chemistry, Physics, and Biomaterials &amp; Biomimetics, as well
as a broader user group from these and other NYU departments, and the
Polytechnic Institute of NYU. The instrument will be located on the main NYU
Washington Square campus, and it will be affiliated with the NYU Materials
Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC). This acquisition will address a
critical need, as NYU currently does not own an FE-SEM, which is essential for
its growing effort in soft materials, molecular materials, biomolecular
assemblies, biomaterials, and magnetics. Most of these materials are non-
conducting and, as such, are susceptible to charging during imaging with
conventional electron microscopes, which degrades image quality. The Zeiss ULTRA
55 FE-SEM has a unique charge compensation feature that minimizes sample
charging while maintaining excellent resolution and image quality, streamlining
analysis, minimizing the number of sample preparation steps, and providing
images that are more reliable depictions of sample structure. A wide range of
internal and external users will have ?hands on? access to the equipment after
training by an SEM specialist, who will be responsible for oversight and
operation of the instrument, and remote users will be able to control the on-
site computer for real-time access to all software-enabled functions and data
visualization and retrieval. In addition to the training of users in a technique
that is central to materials research, the FE-SEM will be incorporated into
materials-oriented courses at NYU and it will be accessible to REU and MRSEC-
supported visiting summer research faculty and students, many from minority-
serving institutions and four-year colleges. The project team also will organize
annual electron microscopy master classes for a broader user community ?
students, faculty, and industry scientists in the tri-state area ? which will
expand the user base and serve as a recruiting tool for students from nearby
four-year colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Abstract. The Zeiss ULTRA
55 FE-SEM is a scanning electron microscope with unique capabilities for
obtaining high-resolution images of a wide range of materials. Whereas scanning
electron microscopes can produce high-quality images of electrically conducting
materials, non-conducting materials build up electrical charge during the
imaging process, which reduces image quality. The ULTRA 55 FE-SEM offers an
innovative solution to this problem that dissipates the charge, thereby
producing exceptional images of non-conducting materials as well as conducting
materials, which eases sample handling and provides images that are more
reliable depictions of sample structural and morphology. The instrument will
substantially impact NYU research by enabling precise structural
characterization of a diverse range of materials, including dental composites
and polymer scaffolds for tissue engineering, complex colloid architectures,
DNA-based nanomechanical devices, and biominerals ? all which are especially
sensitive to charge accumulation during imaging with conventional SEMs ? as well
as magnetic nanostructures that will advance information storage. The FE-SEM
will provide training of NYU student and postdocs in a technique that is central
to materials research, and it will be incorporated into existing and new courses
at NYU. Through an existing REU program, MRSEC-supported faculty-student team
fellowships, and a partnership with the NYU Faculty Resource Network, the
instrument will be used by visiting summer research faculty and students, many
from minority-serving institutions and four-year colleges, including a new
collaboration with faculty from Xavier University of Louisiana, an HBCU. The FE-
SEM also will be incorporated into the required research component of the
Master?s of Science in Chemistry for High School Educators, and the project team
will organize annual electron microscopy master classes for a broader user
community ? students, faculty, and industry scientists in the tri-state area ?
which will expand the user base and serve as a recruiting tool for students from
nearby four-year colleges.