* 0923860
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:  Conservation and Customary Law in Coastal Southwest Madagascar
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* J Brosius, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 08/31/2011
* USD 15,000.00

Graduate student Elaina Lill (University of Georgia), supervised by Dr. J. Peter
Brosius and Dr. Bram Tucker, will conduct multi-sited ethnographic research to
investigate efforts and effects of trying to utilize what is thought to be
traditional customary law in natural resource management. The researcher will
focus on the case of Malagasy traditional customary law known as dina, and how
it has been employed in the Velondriake project, a community-based natural
resource management initiative developed for the Vezo people in Madagascar.
Preliminary research suggests that Vezo fishers did not historically practice
dina, or any explicit resource management tradition. But for the past five
years, a foreign non-governmental organization (NGO) has promoted dina ideology
and practices in the co-managed Velondriake project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
researcher will use the results of participant observation, focal follows, a
biannual household questionnaire, cultural domain techniques, interviews, and
document research to: 1) explore how the national government, international NGO
conservation agents, and Vezo people themselves understand and construct
cultural models of dina; 2) compare Vezo cultural models of dina to their actual
coastal foraging behavior; 3) investigate how markets and conservation projects
affect Vezo welfare and perception of the environment; and finally, 4)
investigate how markets influence participation in the Velondriake project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is important because it will contribute to
improving collaborative efforts to develop meaningful participatory approaches
to resource management in the developing world. It will also improve scholarly
understanding of the "invention" of tradition, its relationship to institutional
development,and its effects on social, economic, and environmental change.
Funding this research also supports the education of a graduate student.