* 0923000
* MRI: Development of a State-of-the-Art Laser Micro-machining and Surface Engineering System
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Yip-Wah Chung, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 08/31/2013
* USD 420,000.00

The objective of this instrument development proposal is to build an integrated
state-of-the-art laser micro-machining and surface engineering system (LSES).
This instrument integrates a pico-second laser with the technology of numerical-
controlled precision machining and high-speed and high-sensitivity
instrumentation. The system will enable (i) rapid physical and chemical
texturing of micron-sized features onto arbitrary three-dimensional object
surfaces with sub-nanometer precision, (ii) direct visual and spectroscopic
observation of the workpiece surface and the laser plume, (iii) temperature and
strain measurements of the workpiece at high temporal and spatial resolution,
and (iv) post-texturing surface measurement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful
development of the proposed LSES will open new opportunities for fundamental
studies in understanding how surface (physical and chemical) texture of
different length scales may affect friction, wear, lubrication and energy
dissipation under different contact conditions. More importantly, surface
texture has a major role in reducing energy consumption. Various initiatives are
proposed to make this instrument available to other researchers, to encourage
participation of woman and under-represented minority students, and to enhance
education, training and technology transfer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;