* 0923018
* MRI: Acquisition of 100TF Graphics Processor Laboratory for Multiscale/Multiphysics Modeling
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Robert Dalrymple, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Siegmund
* 07/31/2013
* USD 381,518.00

Complex systems that involve a wide range of length and time scales and
different physical processes are at the forefront of science and engineering.
New computational hardware and algorithms are needed to address these
challenging problems. The goal of this award is to acquire a compute cluster
built with graphics processor units that have the potential to dramatically
accelerate calculations. The cluster will allow NSF funded research teams to
develop new multiscale/multiphysics algorithms and implement them for graphics
processors. Applications to solids will include modeling and optimization of the
mechanical properties of materials with heterogeneous structures, connecting
atomistic dynamics to the macroscopic response of disordered metals and
polymers, and fracture under conditions from slow laboratory loads to planetary
impact. The facility will also enable studies of fluids that address temporal
and spatial complexity in turbulent flows, water waves and air-sea interactions,
and multiphase flow of fluids and particles in porous media.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Every member of society is affected by decisions or
predictions based on computational simulations of critical processes, such as
infrastructural integrity, energy production, and environmental processes. This
facility will provide a platform for the development and application of new
modeling paradigms and techniques for such complex problems. The facility will
serve as the primary "laboratory" for the NSF-Integrative Graduate Education and
Research Traineeship program on "Modeling Complex Systems - the Scientific Basis
of Coupling Multi-Physics Models at Different Scales." It will play an essential
role in the training of the students and postdoctoral scholars associated with
this program, producing a cadre of computational scientists who can lead the
application of new methods for modeling complex systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;