* 0923502
* MRI:   Acquisition of a Roche 454 FLX pyrosequencing instrument: development of a nexus for cross-platform next-generation sequencing and bioinformatics
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Martin Dickman, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2012
* USD 612,019.00

During the past 10 years, there has been a major revolution in the
biological/life sciences as a result of the remarkable development and
subsequent generation of a vast quantity of data from genome sequencing efforts.
Genome sequencing is a process that determines the identity and order of an
organism's DNA; thus providing a blueprint for the genetic code underlying all
of the processes of life. This has been highlighted by the recently completed
draft sequence of the human genome, a notable technical achievement made
possible by the development of powerful computational hardware and software. The
availability of complete genome sequences is providing the foundation for
understanding how organisms (from microbes to humans) function, develop, evolve
and interact with pathogens and assorted environmental cues. This has led to a
transformational change in the field of biology stemming from the development of
next-generation ultra high-throughput, ultra low-cost DNA sequencing technology
( e.g. Roche 454), which serves as the basis for this proposal. What used to
take several months, can now be done in several hours. The Roche 454 FLX will be
used by more than 60 faculty members and their research staff, including post-
doctoral fellows, graduate and undergraduate students at Texas A&M University.
Applications and research programs include: dissection of sorghum drought
tolerance, functional and metagenomic analysis of biological communities for
cattle and rumen bacteria, disease resistance and an analysis of microflora in
ocean drilling programs, among others. Dissemination of data and project
outcomes will be available on the Institute for Plant Genomics and Biotechnology
website (http://ipgb.tamu.edu), research publications, relevant scientific
meetings and during our scheduled campus-wide annual meeting.