* 0923409
* MRI: Development of high-performance computing facility for gravitational-wave data analysis
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Xavier Siemens, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,188,018.00

The Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory (LIGO) is an NSF-funded
project to detect gravitational waves. This award supports the design,
development, construction, commissioning and operation of an enhanced
computational facility to search the LIGO data stream for weak signals from
astrophysical sources and instrumental anomalies. The enhanced facilities will
(i) quadruple the computational capacity of the LIGO Tier-2 center at University
of Wisconsin-Milwaukee (UWM) using cost-effective, high performance/price
choices, (ii) more than double the storage capacity of the LIGO Tier-2 center at
UWM, and (iii) provide a 10 Gigabit Ethernet connection from the LIGO Tier-2
center at UWM to the campus backbone to remove communication bottlenecks from
the LIGO Data Grid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The LIGO Tier-2 center at UWM is
available to all members of the LIGO Scientific Collaboration, including
undergraduate and graduate students. Research activities will address issues in
cyber-infrastructure and gravitational physics. The enhanced computational
facilities will permit deeper and more intensive searches for a wider variety of
signals, and may enable the first-ever direct detection of gravitational waves.
The instrument development under this award will have considerable impact on the
education and training of undergraduates, graduate students and post-doctoral
scientists at UWM and other institutions around the nation. Undergraduate
students will be involved in both the instrument development and the associated
research program providing exceptional hands-on training in large-scale
distributed computing. Access to these computational facilities is also provided
via the Open Science Grid for non-LIGO scientists thus adding to the national
cyber-infrastructure for scientific research.