* 0923298
* MRI: Acquisition of a Scanning Probe Microscopy System for Nanoscale Probing, Manipulation and Fabrication
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Zhaolin Lu, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2011
* USD 200,297.00

MRI: Acquisition of a Scanning Probe Microscopy System&lt;br/&gt;for Nanoscale
Probing, Manipulation and Fabrication&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This award is funded
under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5)"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A Nanonics
scanning probe microscopy (NSPM) system will be acquired for investigating and
manipulating nanoscale systems. The system is extremely flexible, allowing the
simultaneous use of several probes anywhere on a sample, including optical,
electrical, AFM, dip-pen/nanopipette, tweezers and
heaters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits - Nanoscale devices, materials
and systems are yielding exciting discoveries and solving the most challenging
problems. To develop and understand these devices an instrument that can probe
and modify the nanoscale characteristics of these devices is required. This is
especially the case as nanosystems and devices become more and more complex -
integrating, optical, electronic, and chemical responses and functionalities. At
RIT the NSPM will directly benefit several of these research areas, including
nanophotonics, plasmonics, biological MEMS, lithography, batteries,
photovoltaics and nanomaterials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts - The
acquisition of the NSPM instrument will enable a multitude of experiments and
discoveries that will have a significant impact on several fields, such as,
computing, telecommunications, biosciences, lithography and power. The tool will
be incorporated into already existing courses in the Microsystems Engineering
and Microelectronics program and a course will be developed specifically for the
tool where students fabricate nanodevices and test them. In addition, the
instrument and the research enabled by it will have an impact on the local
community through already established K-12 outreach programs, to the local
Optical Society of America and IEEE chapters and to members of New York States
photonics industry.