* 0923079
* MRI: Acquisition of a Semiconductor Device Analyzer and a Probe Station for Multidisciplinary Research and Education
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Kent Price, Morehead State University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2011
* USD 175,456.00

The objective of this project is to acquire a semiconductor device analyzer and
a probe station to improve the research capability on high-speed transistors,
micro-electro-mechanical-systems switches, solar cells and high-dielectric
constant metal oxides at Morehead State University. The device analyzer supports
current-voltage measurements and quasi-state and multi-frequency capacitance-
voltage measurements. The probe station is used to build an electrical link
between the device analyzer and a device under testing. The instruments will be
integrated to the existing related courses. The instrumentation will increase
the ability and scope of research and research training, and improve the quality
and efficiency of teaching and learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of this project is fourfold. The research on high-speed transistors will
be conducted to identify the role of dielectric passivation at device
degradation and the effect of barrier metal on ohmic contacts. The research on
micro-electro-mechanical-systems switches includes investigation of the
possibility of using small mechanical springs to mitigate contact stiction and
mechanical damages. Research on solar cells is conducted to gain understanding
of the influence of fundamental physical factors on cell performance. The
research on high-dielectric constant materials will gain insight into new gate
oxide/substrate interfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will have
significant broader impacts. The instrumentation will 1) enable the faculty
involved to conduct their active research projects and initiate new research
programs; 2) offer long-term educational benefits to future students; 3) boost
recruitment and retention of underprepared and underrepresented students into
engineering, and 4) better serve community colleges and K-12 schools.