* 0923111
* Scientific Computing Research Environments for the Mathematical Sciences (SCREMS) at IIT
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2011
* Fred Hickernell, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 07/31/2011
* USD 97,900.00

The Department of Applied Mathematics at the Illinois Institute of Technology
will purchase a high performance computer cluster of 128 processors with
supporting software, which will be dedicated to the support of ongoing research
projects and educational efforts in large-scale parallel computing. The
equipment will be used for seven research projects in applied mathematics, which
require intensive computer simulations. Mathematically, all projects are related
to modeling, numerical analysis and simulation of deterministic and stochastic
(partial) differential equations, covering a wide range of applications that
include materials science, geoscience, finance, biology, environmental fluid
mechanics, plasma physics and software engineering.

The proposed program will provide excellent training opportunities for graduate
students in parallel computing and offer them easy access and hands-on
experience to a high performance computing cluster. Four courses in
computational mathematics will be enhanced by incorporating parallel
computation, which will benefit both graduate and undergraduate students from
different disciplines, including Applied Mathematics, Biomedical Engineering,
Mechanical Engineering, Aerospace Engineering, Electrical Engineering, Civil
Engineering and Computer Science. The PIs in the proposal have outstanding track
records of recruiting and scientifically nurturing women and underrepresented
minority students and the grant will enable them to train these students in
state-of-the-art scientific computing. On the technological and social aspects,
the proposed cluster will provide support for seven research projects that have
applications to a broader set of related problems including global climate
change, option pricing, membrane-based drug delivery, environmental research and
monitoring, and large-scale computing software.

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)