* 0923032
* MRI: Acquisition of a Properties Measurement System for Education and Research in Energy Related Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2011
* N. Ravindra, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sean Jones
* 09/30/2011
* USD 282,015.00

0923032&lt;br/&gt;Tyson&lt;br/&gt;NJIT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This award is
funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary: There is a critical and growing
need to develop new and novel materials for energy storage and energy conversion
and recovery. As a part of an effort to strengthen the base of knowledge in the
United States in this area, the Materials Science and Engineering Program at the
New Jersey Institute of Technology (NJIT), is developing a new Masters degree in
?Materials for Energy Efficiency?. This degree will emphasize both course work
and extensive hands-on materials preparation and characterization in
thermoelectric materials, fuel cells and emerging battery technologies, photo-
electrochemical hydrogen generation materials, hydrogen storage materials and
other energy related systems. As a central part of this effort we are seeking to
acquire a physical properties measurement system to enable the determination of
thermal transport (Seebeck coefficient and thermal conductivity), heat capacity,
and electron transport (AC/DC Resistivity and Hall Effect) properties of
materials. Optical access by light pipes and fiber optic cables will enable the
study of photovoltaic systems and photo-electrochemical hydrogen generation
materials. Measurements over the temperature range of 2 K to 400 K will be
possible. The availability of high magnetic fields will enable the isolation of
the spin contribution to thermal properties. An integrated helium recovery
system will enable very low operating cost and facilitate its continuous use and
accessibility by students and researchers. NJIT will provide all support
facilities needed to operate this instrument. Stationing the instrument in the
NJIT York Materials Characterization Facility makes it accessible to students
and researchers at NJIT. The instrument will also be utilized in a transition
metal oxide preparation and characterization workshop for Newark area high
school students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Layman Summary: There is a critical need
to develop new and novel materials for energy storage and energy conversion and
recovery. In order to tap the energy generated by the sun, highly efficient
energy conversion materials need to be developed. To enable low weight energy
storage, better battery systems are needed. To recover waste heat from
electronics and internal combustion systems, new more efficient thermoelectric
materials must be developed. These issues point to the essential role for
education and research in the area of materials for energy efficiency. The
Materials Science and Engineering Program at the New Jersey Institute of
Technology (NJIT), is developing a new Masters degree in ?Materials for Energy
Efficiency? to fulfill this need. As a central part of this effort, we are
seeking to acquire a comprehensive properties measurement system for research
and education in this area. Specifically, we propose to acquire an instrument to
characterize and to optimize the properties of materials used in fuel cells and
emerging battery technologies, light induced hydrogen generation from water
using solar energy, hydrogen storage, thermoelectrics and other energy related
systems. The instrument will also be utilized in a transition metal oxide
preparation and characterization workshop for Newark area high school students.
This will serve to develop scientific literacy and to directly influence
students from underrepresented groups to pursue careers in science.