* 0923913
* GEPR:   Flower and Fruit Development in Diploid Strawberry
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2016
* Zhongchi Liu, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Anne W. Sylvester
* 08/31/2016
* USD 1,636,454.00

Strawberry fruit production has significant economic value for US farmers.
Knowledge that can lead to an increase in strawberry fruit size and number,
improvement in fruit color, shape, and taste, and to added nutritional and
pharmaceutical value will enhance our nation's economic competitiveness.
Information gained from studying fruit development in existing reference plants,
such as Arabidopsis, rice or maize, is difficult to apply to strawberry because
strawberry flowers and fruits have unique structures and complex chemical
communications between the seed-bearing ovary called the achene and the fleshy
stem, the fruit. This project will describe molecular, hormonal, and
morphological events, in specific cell types and individual tissue types, during
floral organ and fruit development. The project will use the most modern
technology and a diploid strawberry species, Fragaria vesca that is easily
worked with in the laboratory. With the resources and information thus
generated, genes with roles in achene ripening and genes that regulate
signaling/communications between achene and fruits will be identified and
characterized, taking advantage of the recently completed genome sequencing of
F. vesca. The project will provide fundamental molecular and physiological
insights into the signaling and communication events between achenes and the
fruit. Such insights will enable future agricultural manipulation to control
seed maturation, fruit growth, and fruit ripening, which underlie strawberry's
reproductive success and adaptation to the changing
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. The resources generated by
the project include next generation sequencing data for 36 stage and tissue
specific samples representing reproductive development, annotations of a large
number of strawberry genes, discovery of novel strawberry genes, identification
of cell-, tissue-, and stage-specific messenger RNAs, and useful tools for
monitoring hormone levels and dynamics. Because Strawberry belongs to the
Rosaceae family, which contains many economically important tree and woody
perennial fruits (peach, apple, and raspberry) and nuts, as well as ornamental
and wood crops, the project will help establish the diploid strawberry as a
model for studying other herbaceous perennials as well as other Rosaceae
species. In addition to community resources, the project will contribute to the
understanding of fundamental questions about reproductive development, hormonal
cross-talk, organ-to-organ signaling, and tissue-to-tissue signaling. The
project will also provide interdisciplinary training opportunities that are
integral to the research plan to undergraduate students from a local HBCU and
two state universities. A bioinformatics summer workshop will be offered to high
school teachers from inner city Baltimore to encourage quantitative thinking in
high school students. Two postdoctoral fellows will follow a career development
plan that encourages independent thinking, communications, and student
mentoring. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;