* 0923825
* Mate choice and evolutionary genetics in Xiphophorus hybrid zones
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Gil Rosenthal, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 06/30/2013
* USD 510,000.00

Choosing a mate is one of the most far-reaching decisions an animal can make. A
female's mate choice can influence not only which male traits get passed on to
the next generation, but also the formation of new species or the fusion of two
species through hybridization. Mating preferences are complex, with females
paying attention to numerous different male characteristics, and females often
prefer male trait combinations never found in nature. How do complicated female
mating preferences drive male trait evolution? This project takes advantage of
remarkable natural hybrid zones between two species of swordtail fish in the
Sierra Madre Oriental of central Mexico. Males of the two species are strikingly
different in physical appearance, and females of the two species show strong
differences in their preferences for male characters. Mating preferences for
multiple male traits will be evaluated by presenting females with computer-
animated clips of males. Genetic mapping will be used to identify which sets of
genes are associated with male traits and female preferences. This genetic
information will then be used to test how traits and preferences are associated
in the wild. This project will directly connect the psychology of mate-choice
decisions with the evolutionary consequences of these decisions. The project
will sustain collaboration with Mexican researchers, mentoring of minority
undergraduates, and conservation, sustainable development, and outreach efforts
in rural Mexico.