* 0923231
* MRI: Development of a Spin-Polarized Scanning Tunneling Microscope for Nanomagnetism Studies
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Maxim Tsoi, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2013
* USD 483,000.00

0923231&lt;br/&gt;de Lozanne&lt;br/&gt;U. Texas
Austin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This award is funded under the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary: The development of a low temperature scanning tunneling microscope with
spin-polarized and spectroscopic capabilities is proposed (SP-STM). While a
handful of similar instruments are operating in Europe and Japan, so far there
are only two in the US. The proposed instrument will have three features that
are designed to increase its productivity compared to existing facilities: the
tip will be characterized with in-situ field ion microscopy, in-situ scanning
electron microscopy, and with a secondary in-situ room temperature STM. The new
instrument will have a superconducting magnet to provide sufficient field to
manipulate the magnetic moment of the tip and the sample. This instrument will
benefit the research programs of 12 faculty on our campus and will strengthen
existing collaborations amongst this group and with researchers world-wide. The
initial experiments will include studies of multiferroic and manganite
materials. This is timely since a new MBE facility for oxide growth has just
arrived. We will also study the behavior of triangular arrays of self-assembled
magnetic nanoplatelets, which is a promising realization of the elusive
frustrated Ising model. Spin-torque effects will be studied and used to
manipulate the magnetization of individual nanoplatelets. All these studies will
be complemented by existing capabilities in low temperature magnetic force
microscopy and Hall Probe microscopy. The PI?s are already committed to the
training of a diverse community of scientists, both individually as well as
collectively through their participation in programs such as REU, IGERT, and
outreach to High Schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Layman
Summary: "The nation that controls magnetism will control the universe,"
predicted Dick Tracy, the comic book hero debuted in 1931. The creator of this
character would probably not believe to what extent this has become a reality:
most of our financial, medical, and government records are now stored on
magnetic media with ever increasing information density. While information
storage technology has already benefitted from basic discoveries made in the
past decade or two, the most recent developments are even more impressive, such
as the detection of the magnetic spin of a single electron. The scanning
tunneling microscope, known for its ability to image atoms on surfaces, is blind
to the magnetic properties of the sample. Fortunately this microscope can be
fitted with spin-polarized ?glasses? that allow us to look at the magnetic
landscape at the atomic scale. Unfortunately this is not easy, and European labs
have taken the lead in this important technique. Only two labs in the US have
developed spin-sensitive tunneling microscopes. The PI and his group have
developed similar microscopes for 27 years and propose to use their expertise to
build a new generation of spin-sensitive microscopes that can make this powerful
technique more widely available in the US. The team that will work on this is
unusually diverse, because half of the doctoral students are female and more
than half of the team is Hispanic. During the summer the team also has a few
high school students, with strong emphasis on the participation of young women.