* 0923063
* MRI:   Acquisition of instrumentation to strengthen ecological research and education at the University of Southern Mississippi
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Kevin Kuehn, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Vicki Martin
* 07/31/2011
* USD 284,368.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A grant has been awarded by NSF to the
University of Southern Mississippi for the purchase of instrumentation to expand
faculty resources for ecological research and to improve student education and
training. This instrumentation includes a CHNS Nutrient Analyzer, Nutrient
Autoanalyzer, Automated Soil CO2 Flux Systems, and Portable Photosynthesis / CO2
Gas Exchange Systems. In addition, this award provides funds to purchase
equipment infrastructure (aquatic mesocosms and incubators) to support the use
and integration of this instrumentation into current research and educational
training activities. The University of Southern Mississippi has a core group of
faculty interested in the role and impact of carbon and nutrients on organismal
biology and ecology. These faculty range from physiological to community and
ecosystem ecologists, who focus on a variety of taxonomic groups including
plants, algae, protozoa, fungi, bacteria, invertebrates, and vertebrates. This
instrumentation will establish new and critical analytical capabilities for
faculty to measure carbon and nutrient dynamics within terrestrial and aquatic
ecosystems. Thus, this instrumentation will foster and strengthen collaborative
interactions among faculty and students interested in quantifying carbon and
nutrient processes and impacts within ecosystems. This instrumentation also will
support the research, coursework, and training of both undergraduate and
graduate students in the ecological sciences. Student education and training
will be significantly enhanced, as undergraduate and graduate students expand
their analytical skill level with modern instrumentation. This opportunity will
help students integrate theoretical learning with hands-on practical skills,
thus increasing their competitiveness in a demanding job market likely to see
growth in environmental sectors.