* 0923689
* ETBC Collaborative Research: Feedbacks between nutrient enrichment and intertidal sediments: erosion, stabilization, and landscape evolution
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Linda Deegan, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 08/31/2013
* USD 469,074.00

For more than three decades, the impact of anthropogenic nutrient loading in
coastal ecosystems has been a major concern of scientists, coastal managers, and
the public. Nutrient enrichment leads to a variety of negative ecosystem
consequences including increased intensity, duration, and frequency of
phytoplankton blooms, hypoxic and anoxic events, increased macroalgae blooms,
losses of fish and shellfish habitat, decreased benthic diversity, and loss of
eelgrass beds. Remarkably, little work has been done in intertidal areas, and
very few studies have addressed the effects of nutrient enrichment on the
coastal landscape or how changes in biogeochemical cycles can modify the
coastline by promoting erosion, accretion, and shoreline evolution. This
research determines the impact of anthropogenic nutrient loading on tidal flats
and salt marshes at the Plum Island LTER site, Massachusetts. State-of-the-art
field and laboratory techniques work will be used. Quantitative measurements of
a wide variety of field parameters will be incorporated into coupled numerical
models that will be used as a tool for examining impacts to the landscape and
ecosystem over longer-time scales and at different locations. Results of the
work will be generalizable and widely applicable to shallow coastal landscapes
anywhere in the world. Broader impacts of the work include providing important
projections of coastal erosion and wetland assessments to land managers,
integration of research and education, training of significant numbers of
undergraduates and a postdoc, and support of an early career researcher.