* 0923722
* Mechanistic links between phytochrome signaling and chloroplast differentiation
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Meng Chen, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Slocum
* 07/31/2011
* USD 150,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Meng Chen, Ph.D.&lt;br/&gt;Proposal
Number: IOS-0923722&lt;br/&gt;Title: Mechanistic links between phytochrome
signaling and chloroplast differentiation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chloroplast
differentiation, or how plants turn green after germination, is critical to the
establishment of photosynthetic plastids that enable plant to undergo
photosynthesis. Thus, it is an essential process during light-dependent plant
development. Although it is well known that chloroplast differentiation is
controlled mainly by the red and far-red photoreceptor phytochromes, little is
known about the molecular mechanisms by which phytochromes initiate this
process. Recently, the investigators identified a novel and essential component
for phytochrome signaling, HEMERA (HMR), in the model plant species Arabidopsis.
Interestingly, HMR is the first phytochrome signaling component discovered so
far that is also required for chloroplast differentiation. HMR encodes a highly
conserved protein in land plants, and was previously shown to be associated with
plastidic transcriptional machinery. However, preliminary evidence from the
investigators suggests that HMR should be localized in the nucleus. The research
undertaken as part of this project aims to solve this dilemma, by determining
the subcellular localization of HMR and to define its localization signals using
a combination of genetics, biochemical, and cell biological approaches. The
proposed research is likely to unravel novel mechanisms linking phytochrome
signaling and the initiation of chloroplast differentiation. The elucidation of
molecular mechanisms for chloroplast differentiation will contribute
significantly to our basic knowledge of how nuclear and organellar genomes
coordinate their responses to environmental cues, and will also have deep
implications in improving yield in agriculture. In addition, the proposed
projects will provide excellent training in molecular genetic approaches for
postdoctoral fellows, graduate students, and undergraduate students. &lt;br/&gt;