* 0923441
* MRI: Development of Chiron: CTIO High Resolution Spectrometer
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2011
* Geoffrey Marcy, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey R. Pier
* 07/31/2011
* USD 603,764.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

One of the most effective means employed by astronomers to search for planets
around stars other than our sun is to try to detect the velocity shift of the
star as the planet moves about the star in its orbit. This well proven technique
employs an instrument called a spectrograph to measure the small shifts in the
wavelengths of features in a star's spectrum. The shifts are due to the familiar
Doppler effect and are directly related to the changes in the star's velocity.
Demand for telescopes that have a spectrograph of sufficient power and
resolution to find these velocity shifts is increasing and more are needed to
satisfy the demand. Dr. Debra Fischer of San Francisco State University is
building a new spectrograph designed for such studies using funds awarded from
NSF's Major Research Instrumentation program. This new spectrograph will be much
more efficient in its use of telescope time than the current instrument, and
will also allow astronomers to determine velocities much more accurately. When
completed, the spectrograph will be placed on a 1.5-meter telescope at Cerro
Tololo Inter-American Observatory (CTIO) in Chile. CTIO is publicly funded by
NSF and research time on its telescopes is available to all astronomers through
a competitive merit review process.