* 0923535
* MRI: Acquisition of an LC-MS for Multidisciplinary Research and Education
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Julia Oxford, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2012
* USD 597,877.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) program, the
Chemistry Department at Boise State University will acquire a liquid
chromatography tandem mass spectrometer (LC-MS/MS) for research and education.
The instrumentation will be used in various research projects on topics such as:
1) Global consequences of interruption of microbial population signaling
pathways. 2) Analysis of fuel combustion products: polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons in airborne particulates. 3) DNA-binding properties of synthetic
aziridinomitosenes. 4) Tyrosine-O-sulfation as a mechanism for stabilization of
molecular interactions within the extracellular matrix during vertebrate
skeletal development. 5) Environmental and health impacts of nanotechnology. 6)
Identification of aryl hydrocarbon receptor ligands during cell cycle
progression. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mass spectrometry (MS) is an analytical
technique used to identify the chemical composition of a sample and to determine
its purity by measuring the mass of the molecular constituents in the sample. A
tandem mass spectrometer system is two mass spectrometers in series to better
identify the constituents under study. Chromatography is an isolation technique
that precedes the mass spectrometry analysis. It separates a mixture into its
several constituent chemicals which are then analyzed and identified by the mass
spectrometer. These are some of the most widely used analytical instrumentation
techniques used to identify and quantify the chemical composition of a sample.
The LC-MS/MS would improve the education and training of undergraduate and
graduate students at Boise State University through its incorporation into
lecture and laboratory work in advanced instrumentation, biophysics, and
biochemistry. Faculty and investigators at surrounding institutions, College of
Idaho, Northwest Nazarene, the Boise Veterans Affairs Medical Center and State
of Idaho labs will have access to the mass spectrometer system.