* 0923037
* MRI: Acquisition of a Parallel Computing Cluster and Storage for the Marquette University Grid (MUGrid)
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* S. Scott Goldsborough, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* robert pennington
* 08/31/2010
* USD 560,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The Marquette University computational grid (MUGrid) brings together a diverse
team of investigators from mathematics, statistics, computer science, chemistry,
electrical and computer engineering, mechanical engineering, and biomedical
engineering to develop and utilize grid computing as an integral tool for
computational research.

This project expands the developing MUGrid with the acquisition of a new
parallel computing cluster, storage and network infrastructure upgrades which
will also provide the cyberinfrastructure for Marquette University's new
graduate programs in Computational Sciences. The Computational Sciences program,
part of the Department of Mathematics, Statistics and Computer Science, will
serve as the central location for formal training on cyberinfrastructure
technologies for research computing. In addition to formal training, an open-
access seminar and regularly offered MUGrid ?boot camps? will provide training
for students and faculty across campus, including individuals from traditionally
under-represented groups in STEM disciplines. MUGrid's success will be evaluated
through usage reports, longitudinal tracking of student career progress, and
user surveys, which are aimed at monitoring job preparedness and impact on
training a diverse workforce.

The new parallel computing cluster and storage infrastructure will also be made
available to the broader community through outreach activities. The resource
will be part of Southeast Wisconsin High Performance (SeWHiP,
http://www.sewhip.org) computing consortium's developing regional grid that will
directly support academic/industry partnerships for healthcare, energy and water
research in Southeast Wisconsin, the most diverse region of the state. Summer
programs for K-12 teachers and students will provide training and access to
MUGrid and SeWHiP resources. Projects developed on MUGrid will be used to
promote science and engineering through partnerships with local museums such as
Discovery World. Resources will be also made available to the Open Science Grid
and TeraGrid. Resource usage tracking, longitudinal studies of impacts on K-12
student career paths, exhibit attendance, and surveys will be used to assess the
impact of these outreach programs. Finally, training resources and software
developed as a part of this project will be made widely available through the
SeWHiP web site.