* 0923551
* MRI:  Development of an Ion Mobility Surface-Induced Dissociation Mass Spectrometer
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2009,09/30/2013
* Vicki Wysocki, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 09/30/2013
* USD 765,941.00

Support from the National Science Foundation Major Research Instrumentation
Program has allowed work to begin on a project to design and produce an
innovative ion mobility surface-induced dissociation mass spectrometer that can
produce much more structural information on large non-covalent protein complexes
or other macromolecular assemblies than is possible with present commercial
instrumentation. Proteins often carry out their functions by working together in
non-covalent multi-protein complexes. Characterization of the composition,
numbers, conformations, and spatial arrangements of the subunits in a protein
complex is challenging because of the total complex size, the presence of a
biological matrix, and the fragile nature of the non-covalent bonding of the
subunits to each other. We propose to design an ion mobility/surface-induced
dissociation mass spectrometer that can measure the m/z and shapes (collision
cross sections) of large non-covalent protein complexes and effectively fragment
shape-selected complexes to characterize the composition and structure of the
complex. The development project will improve the infrastructure for structural
biology research by providing a nanoelectrospray/ion mobility/surface-induced
dissociation tandem mass spectrometer that can characterize non-covalent protein
complexes at a level not possible with current instrumentation. The scope of
potential use of the proposed instrument is broad: biological problems that will
be addressed will focus on determination of the stoichiometry and spatial
arrangement of sub-units in non-covalent proteinprotein and protein-ligand
complexes. The development project itself will be an excellent vehicle for
combining research and education, producing students and postdoctoral associates
who will learn how to work in teams and who will be cross-trained in the
purification, handling, and analysis of biological macromolecular complexes and
in instrument development. The research results will be presented in the peer-
reviewed literature, at local seminars, to industrial collaborators, at national
and international conferences, in graduate lectures by the PI at UA in Chemistry
and Biochemistry courses, and in the MS/MS short course taught by the PI and
colleagues each year at the annual national meeting of the American Society for
Mass Spectrometry. The PI's research group will also work with two local 6th
grade science teachers at Mansfeld Middle School in Tucson - a school where the
majority of students are Hispanic (68%).