* 0923042
* MRI: Acquisition of XRD Attachments for Extending X-Ray Lab Capabilities with Temperature and Atmosphere Control
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2011
* Joseph Biernacki, Tennessee Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 09/30/2011
* USD 171,083.00

0923042&lt;br/&gt;Biernacki&lt;br/&gt;Tennessee Technological
U.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary: In situ x-ray studies are becoming
increasingly important techniques for the rapid advancement of materials
development for energy, environment and infrastructure applications. Researchers
at Tennessee Technological University (TTU) have ongoing projects on: (1) fuel
cells, batteries, gas turbines and energy transformation; and (2) advanced, high
performance materials. Next generation nano-composites made of mineral
reinforced polymer matrices for structural automotive and aircraft systems,
advanced cementitious systems for infrastructure applications and thin film
materials for fuel cell and high performance heat engine development are
specific examples of materials and material systems that are represented within
the two thrust areas. This project will expand the capabilities of TTU¡¦s
growing instrument cluster for focused multi-scale studies of material systems
to further enhance research and educational facilities for the broader science,
technology, and engineering community in Tennessee. The new instruments, a
series of three temperature stages and atmospherically controlled chambers
(attachments) for an x-ray diffraction system, will become part of existing
synergistic infrastructures consisting of a newly purchased X-ray diffraction
system, an environmental scanning electron microscope (ESEM), a closed loop
mechanical testing load frame and an optical imaging station, all previously
funded by the NSF, and will be accessible to the entire TTU research community,
industrial collaborators, the regional K-12 science, technology, engineering,
and math (STEM) education community and other university researchers. While the
concept of multi-scale interpretation is not new, the TTU team endeavors to
engage the concept as a pervasive form of investigation, extending across
multiple disciplines. The X-ray instrument attachments represents a synergistic
element that, in combination with existing tools, will enable TTU research teams
to develop multi-scale experimental datasets for environmental, structural
inorganic and organic materials systems with broad reaching 21st Century
implications including the hydrogen economy, infrastructure and nano-scale
processing. In addition to the new x-ray attachments, the team will also
integrate communications, learning and visualization technology to enhance the
applicability of these advanced tools in teaching and learning environments.
&lt;br/&gt;Layman Summary: The behavior of many materials can only be explained
by having detailed information about the structure and properties at many length
scales. Various tools for exploring materials include mechanical testing
machines and microscopes. These instruments reveal both large-scale properties,
those affecting the performance on the cm (centimeter) or m (meter) scale and
microscopic properties, those one the scale of mm (millimeters) or even ?Ým
(micrometers). To reveal information at an even smaller scale, the nanometer
scale, scientists and engineers utilize tools such as X-ray diffraction.
Diffraction is a way to generate information about the structure of matter on
the scale of the distances between the very atoms. This rather strange way of
imaging a material can reveal everything from the composition to details of the
exact location of every atom in the material. Such information is critical for
to understand the material¡¦s properties at the very smallest chemically
significant length-scale. Researchers at Tennessee Technological University
(TTU) are working on a number of new material systems that they hope will impact
the Nation¡¦s energy, environmental and infrastructure future; these include
next generation composites made of tiny nano-scale mineral reinforced polymer
matrices for structural automotive and aircraft systems, advanced cementitious
systems for infrastructure applications and thin films for fuel cell and high
performance heat engine development. To rapidly advance this work, the TTU team
will be extending their existing X-ray laboratory capabilities to include
special chambers that will enable them to study these materials in environments
that simulate the way the materials will be used in their applications. For
example, films to be used in turbine will be exposed to very high temperatures.
It is critical that scientists directly study these materials at those
temperatures in what is called real-time, this means ¡§to make direct
observations.¡¨ In addition, the TTU team knows that science training for both
college students, high school teachers and pre-college age students is crucial
to our Nation¡¦s technological and economic future. The TTU team, therefore, has
plans to integrate the new tools, into many existing and new courses for their
students and to use the same in ongoing teacher training and outreach
initiatives to reach as many potential new scientists and engineers as possible
through TTU¡¦s extended sphere of influence.