* 0923382
* MRI:   Acquisition of Instrumentation for Compound-specific Isotope Analysis at the University of Wyoming
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Carlos Martinez del Rio, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 12/31/2012
* USD 467,608.00

Support from the National Science Foundation has allowed the purchase of a GC-
combustion-isotope ratio mass spectrometer (GC-C-IRMS) and integrated quadrupole
mass spectrometer (GC-MS) system with an interface supporting on-line coupling
of HPLC and IRMS (LC-IRMS) to allow for stable isotope analysis (SIA). The SIA
of bulk biological materials allows the integrative study of processes at scales
that range from the biochemical to the biospheric. This instrumentation will add
capacity for CSIA to the University of Wyoming Stable Isotope Facility (UWSIF),
a core, multi-user research and training facility currently supporting 16
research groups from 8 departments and 3 colleges. The instrumentation will
provide a core group of users in the capacity for CSIA on fatty acids, lipids,
amino acids and carbohydrates, and be flexible enough to allow LC-IRMS on polar,
non GC-volatile or thermolabile compounds without the requirement for
derivatization. The major users conduct research in three areas that integrate
biological and geochemical systems: 1) organismal and ecosystem ecology; 2)
paleo-ecology and paleo-environmental studies; and 3) energy research. Studies
with the new instruments will focus on animal physiology, diet, food webs, plant
and ecosystem carbon cycling, diets and environments of extinct organisms,
reconstruction of past climates and ecosystem responses, and geochemical tracing
of environmental contaminants associated with energy extraction. A graduate
course taught every fall semester by Williams (PI) and Sharma (co-PI) provides
hands on training using the instrumentation acquired through NSF funding. High
school students in the NSF EPSCoR sponsored Summer Research Apprenticeship
Program (SRAP) and the NSF sponsored Science Posse program at UW have and will
continue to conduct isotope-related research involving analyses in the UWSIF.
These faculty also currently advise 26 graduate students (10 are women) and 4
postdocs (3 are women), and all include undergraduates in their isotope oriented
research projects. Results from the research projects will be disseminated
through student and faculty presentations at regional or national meetings, and
through publications in peer-reviewed journals.