* 0923680
* Collaborative research: Comparative-developmental analysis of brain architecture in social wasps
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2011
* Sean O'Donnell, University of Washington
* Continuing grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 12/31/2011
* USD 269,995.00

The evolution of social behavior can affect brain size: social species of
animals tend to have larger brains than their solitary relatives. The goal of
this project is to further our understanding of how changes in species' social
structure can affect the architecture of their brains. The research will use
social insects - paper wasps - as subjects. All species of paper wasps are
social, but they show a wide range of colony sizes, they are diverse in social
complexity, and they differ in nest architecture. Different anatomical regions
of the wasp brain serve distinct cognitive functions - some regions are
dedicated to vision, others to smell and touch. The researchers will measure the
sizes (volumes) of these brain regions as a way of estimating how much tissue is
invested in each region, and they will test whether the details of a species'
social behavior (for example, large versus small colonies) predict the relative
size of each brain region. The researchers will use information on how wasp
species are related to each other to trace the evolution of associations between
brain structure and behavior. By comparing selected species of paper wasps with
different behavioral characteristics, the researchers will determine which
elements of social behavior have impacted the investment in each brain region.
The project will also explore how evolutionary changes in the immature
development of the wasp brain have led to the observed patterns of adult brain
region investment. The research will further our understanding of how changes in
social complexity can influence brain architecture, and the findings will
indicate which social cognitive challenges can affect the amount of investment
in different brain regions. It will also contribute to our understanding of how
adult brain architecture is generated by the developmental processes that occur
during immature stages. The project includes employment and training
opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students at two universities, and
it will foster collaboration across universities. It also involves both local
elementary school and international outreach and education efforts.