* 0923518
* MRI Development: Heterogeneous, Autonomic Wireless Control Networks for Scalable Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,10/31/2014
* Kimon Valavanis, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 10/31/2014
* USD 1,620,059.00

Proposal #: CNS 09-23518 Institution: University of Denver&lt;br/&gt;PI(s):
Voyles, Richard M.; Denver, CO 80208-0000 Mangharam, Rahul; Anaraki Siavash
Pourkamali; Rutherford, Matthew J.; Valavanis, Kimon P.&lt;br/&gt;Title:
MRI/Dev.: Heterogeneous, Autonomic Wireless Control Networks for Scalable Cyber-
Physical Systems&lt;br/&gt;Project Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative
project, creating an instrument consisting of a new class of heterogeneous
wireless sensor-actuator-controller platforms, facilitates a wide range of
experimental research on Networked CyberPhysical Systems (CPS). A key aim is to
arrive at standardization for hardware and software interfaces over the platform
categories that will support protocols for time- and safety-critical
applications. Involving four universities (U Denver, Notre Dame U., U Penn, and
UT-Arlington), three categories of Networked CPS research platforms are
developed across a wide range of hardware- and software-based runtime re-
configuration. The goals also include developing standardized hardware and
software interfaces across these platforms so that nodes may be plug-n-play,
evolve parametrically and programmatically at runtime, and maintain timeliness
and reliability as connected objects for control and actuation. Existing
computational node prototypes from Penn and U Denver will be refined and
harmonized to provide a suite of interoperable nodes. These nodes will have dual
radios for the data-plane and a passive analog radio for fine-grained hardware-
based global time synchronization to add determination. An Embedded Virtual
Machine (EVM), a powerful distributed runtime system where virtual components
and their properties are maintained across node boundaries, is introduced to
maintain a set of functional invariants, such as control law and para-functional
invariants such as timeliness constraints, fault tolerance and safety standard
across a set of controllers given the spatio-temporal changes in the physical
network. The EVM software allows tightly coupled communication and runtime
control across the different hardware categories. Programming mechanisms treat
the set of physical sensors, actuators, and controllers as a single virtual
component and allow tasks to be assigned at runtime since the links, nodes, and
topology of wireless systems are inherently unreliable. The system is expected
to lower the barriers for research into reconfigurable computing across
hardware, software, and virtual autonomic computing structures, heterogeneous
sensor network timing, synchronization and task allocation strategies, and also
serve as a springboard to applications in biomedical modeling, human
surveillance and monitoring, and search and rescue robotics. Each node will
interface to a suite of modular I/O devices with attendant sensors and
actuators. Recent research activity on future wireless sensor networks and
applications has been limited to open-loop sensing and monitoring giving rise to
predominantly event-based, asynchronous platforms and systems software. Not much
research has been devoted to heterogeneous wireless sensor networks that
integrate across a range of computational and communication capabilities. When
networks are integrated with higher-rate sensors (e.g., video surveillance),
actuators with timeliness and safety constraints (e.g., real-time control), and
networks requiring significant distributed in-network processing (e.g., video
analytics and autonomous systems), investigators have to go beyond the platforms
for low-rate sensors and applications for which time-stamping is sufficient.
Consequently, heterogeneous wireless sensor networks that integrate
computational and communication capabilities are
necessary.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;The project,
involving four institutions, provides a range of interoperable control nodes to
develop applications from the MEMS/NEMS (Micro/Nano ElectroMechanical Systems)
scale to the macro scale, develops building blocks for wireless control networks
with applications in search and rescue, industrial automation, medical devices
and vehicular control. Students are involved in developing the
instrumentation.&lt;br/&gt;