* 0923483
* MRI: Acquisition of a Modern Transmission Electron Microscope for Research and Training in South Dakota
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Michael Terry, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2010
* USD 699,000.00

0923483 Ahrenkiel

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

South Dakota School of Mines & Technology (SDSM&T) requests a modern
transmission electron microscope (TEM) for nanoscience & nanoengineering
research and research training in a range of disciplines, including materials
science, physics, chemistry, and geological, chemical, biochemical, and
environmental engineering. The request is based on the research and training
need for the instrument, the existing infrastructure to accommodate and maintain
the instrument, and the institutional commitment for the long-term success of
the instrument. A modern TEM capable of lattice imaging, digital
programmability, tomography, diffraction, analytical microscopy, and scanning
TEM, with remote access capability, would bring tremendous utility to funded and
emerging research in South Dakota. The TEM will enable the research activities
of faculty members in South Dakota and the Northcentral States region, and
enhance the ability of state universities and tribal colleges to provide
undergraduate and graduate research training, and K-12 and public outreach. The
Engineering and Mining Experiment Station at SDSM&T is an established electron-
microscopy characterization hub throughout the state and region, serving both
academia and industry, and has the physical and managerial infrastructure in
place to operate, maintain, and administer the equipment. A supporting document
demonstrates the university's commitment to the acquisition, which includes
laboratory renovation, staff, and infrastructure.