* 0923435
* MRI:   Acquisition of a Scanning Electron Microscope for a Multi-User Core Facility in Science, Engineering, and Technology
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Robert Sorensen, Minnesota State University, Mankato
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2012
* USD 199,475.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support the acquisition
of a JEOL JSM-6510LV/LGS scanning electron microscope (SEM) for the Biological
Imaging Facility in the Department of Biological Sciences at Minnesota State
University, Mankato (MSUM). The facility is a core multi-user facility in the
College of Science, Engineering and Technology at MSUM. The instrument provides
detailed three-dimensional views of biological cells and tissues. For instance,
the instrument will provide a means to examine the complex architecture and
structure of blood vessels in biological tissues. The instrument will facilitate
ongoing research, educational and training activities within the university and
South Central Minnesota. Several features of the SEM system will lessen the
complexity of training and encouraging novice use. For example, the SEM will be
controlled by a computer-graphic-user-interface making its operation user
friendly for students and faculty. Furthermore, the microscope will be
accessible via the Internet for remote classroom and conference use. To expand
the utility of the equipment and to serve the needs of the university, the
proposed SEM will be equipped with a low vacuum system and an energy dispersive
spectroscopy system which will accommodate diverse variety of specimens and
provide a means to analyze the chemical elements present in a specimen. Use of
the SEM will be incorporated in established student outreach programs, which
promote scholarly activity and foster diversity. In addition, several courses
will integrate use of the SEM in their curriculum. Finally, the system will
advance existing undergraduate, graduate and faculty research projects at MSUM
and foster intercollegiate collaboration. Projects include analysis of the
three-dimensional structure of vasculature in diverse tissues and organs and
structural analysis of normal and abnormal hearts. Ongoing and future research
projects that utilize the SEM will have a high potential for widespread
dissemination at local, regional and national meetings. Outcomes of the research
projects will be communicated through presentations by students and faculty at
regional or national meetings, in peer reviewed journal publications, and the
internet.&lt;br/&gt;