* 0923125
* MRI: Acquisition of Major Research Instrumentation for Advanced Photoelectron Spectroscopy with Spin, Angle and Spatial Resolution
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Lawrence Taylor, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 09/30/2013
* USD 592,200.00

0923125 Mannella U. of Tennessee Knoxville

Technical Summary: Besides growth and characterizion capabilities with
systematic transport and structural studies, detailed investigations of the
electronic structure of advanced materials are essential in order to advance our
understanding of the fundamental underpinnings of their properties.
Photoemission Spectroscopy (PES) is one of the most powerful techniques for
characterizing the electronic structure of materials. We propose the realization
of a laboratory-based PES user facility for analysis of the chemical and
electronic properties of various forms of condensed matter that are at the
forefront of scientific and technological innovation. These include Correlated
Oxides, Physics of Low Dimensional Systems (surfaces, interfaces, and nanophase
materials), Materials for Solar Energy Conversion, Thin film superconductors,
Magnetic Semiconductors and Nanostructures, Hydrogen Storage, Lunar rocks and
Soils, Water Hydration of Minerals, Characterizattion of Electronics (PCBs) and
Biomedical Devices for Drug Delivery. The spectrometer presents truly unique
characteristics such as 1) a monochromatized x-ray source with two different
energies (Al K?Ñ = 1486 eV and Ag L?Ñ?n?­ 2984 eV) with micro-spot of ?l 130 ?Ým
for analysis of very small or inhomogeneous samples, and 2) a state-of-the-art
hemispherical electron analyzer provisioned with a mini-Mott detector for
electron spin detection. The facility will be an asset for the UT system and for
a broad range of UTK departments ranging from Physics, Chemistry, Geology,
Biology, and Material Engineering, and it is thus expected to nucleate
interdisciplinary research covered under several NSF program areas. The proposed
instrument will be based on campus, so that our students and faculty can have
easy access and copious amounts of time using a state-of-the-art electron
spectrometer. The proposed science and supporting infrastructure will provide an
excellent setting for the education and training of internationally competitive
students and postdocs from several departments. The instrument will not only
complement, but also enhance the productivity of investigations carried out at
facilities such as the Spallation Neutron Source (SNS), the Center for Nanophase
Materials Sciences (CNMS), the Joint Institute for Advanced Materials (JIAM)
which render UTK a unique place in the nation for advanced materials research.
The addition of the multiple-user photoemission facility hereby proposed will
grant UTK an invaluable asset for becoming a leading world-wide institution for
materials characterization, research and development. Laymen Summary: Materials
are the building blocks of every form of solid matter naturally existing in the
universe or manufactured by humankind. The onset of new materials has always
marked a major turning point in human society, with the material of choice of a
given era often being its defining point. More recently, impressive advances in
materials synthesis have resulted in the discovery of an ever-increasing number
of complex materials exhibiting exotic properties at the forefront of promising
revolutionary technological applications ranging from engineering to
biotechnology. Detailed investigations of the electronic structure are essential
in order to advance our understanding of the properties of advanced material. We
propose the realization of a laboratory-based user facility for carrying out
experiments using Photoelectron Spectroscopy, one of the most powerful
techniques for measuring the electronic structure and chemical nature of
materials. This instrumentation will be used to investigate the electronic
properties of a wide variety of materials, including Materials for Solar Energy
Conversion and Hydrogen Storage, Superconductors, Magnetic materials for data
storage, Polymers, Catalysts, Biomedical Devices for Drug Delivery,
Nanostructures, Lunar rocks and Soil, Biological Cells, Bacteria and Minerals.
The facility will be an asset for the UT system and for a broad range of UTK
departments ranging from Physics, Chemistry, Geology, Biology, and Material
Engineering, and it is thus expected to nucleate interdisciplinary research. The
proposed instrument will be based on campus, so that our students and faculty
can have easy access and copious amounts of time using a state-of-the-art
electron spectrometer. The proposed science and supporting infrastructure will
provide an excellent setting for the education and training of internationally
competitive students and postdocs from several departments. The instrument will
not only complement, but also enhance the productivity of investigations carried
out at other existing facilities which render UTK a unique place in the nation
for advanced materials research. The addition of the multiple-user photoemission
facility hereby proposed will grant UTK an invaluable asset for becoming a
leading world-wide institution for materials characterization, research and
development.