* 0923957
* Development of a phase and polarization modulated ultrafast laser source for nonlinear optical imaging and molecular identification
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Marcos Dantus, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2012
* USD 749,369.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award from the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation and Facilities: Instrument Development (CRIF:ID)
program, Marcos Dantus and his research group from Michigan State University
will develop a phase and polarization modulated ultrafast laser source for a
broad range of scientific applications. The proposed laser will be capable of
generating multiple individually addressable pulses from a single ultrashort
pulse. The proposed laser source will be used in a number of projects: 1) a
multimodal non-linear imaging microscope; 2) biological and biomedical imaging
applications; 3) detection of explosives or pathogens and 4) in-situ chemical
analysis of the combustion products in jet turbines. The project will be carried
out by a diverse group of scientists, ranging in experience from undergraduate
students to professors and research scientists. The work involves collaboration
with a number of American industrial partners, as well as with the Air Force
Research Laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New kinds of spectroscopy techniques
open up brand new avenues of research. The instrument developed with this award
will allow scientists to study the composition and properties of a broad range
of materials -- from biological samples to hot combustion gases. Knowledge
developed with this kind of tool can lead to: improved medical diagnostics,
improved food safety, and better materials for advanced technologies. In
addition, the researchers working with Prof. Dantus will receive invaluable
training in high technology development, an important skill in today's
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;