* 0923766
* Unique Biochemistry at the Interface of One- and Two-Carbon Metabolism in Methanogens and other Archaea
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Michael Chan, Henry M Jackson Fdn for Advmt of Military Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 08/31/2015
* USD 613,351.00

This project is providing biochemical understanding of how a unique multienzyme
complex, the acetyl-CoA decarbonylase/synthase (ACDS) complex, functions in
methanogens and other species of Archaea. The ACDS complex catalyzes an unusual
energy-yielding, metal-based decarbonylation reaction in which both the C-C and
C-S bonds of the acetyl group in acetyl-CoA are broken, or formed. ACDS plays a
central role in acetate decomposition to CO2 and methane by methanogens, with
approximately two-thirds of the annual methane production on Earth being derived
from this process. In methanogens consuming CO2 and hydrogen, ACDS acts in
reverse to synthesize acetyl groups for carbon assimilation during growth. Thus,
ACDS plays an important role in the global carbon cycle both in the release of
carbon in the form of CO2 and methane, and by its involvement in the autotrophic
fixation of CO2. Acetyl group synthesis and cleavage take place at an active
site Ni-Ni- and Fe/S-containing metal center (the A cluster) bound to the
protein beta subunit. There is considerable interest in understanding the
unusual bioinorganic mechanism of this reaction, and this project is focused on
analysis of the structure, spectroscopic, and biochemical properties of a newly
isolated acetyl-nickel organometallic intermediate formed at the A cluster,
critical to the mechanism of acetyl-CoA synthesis and cleavage. Collaborative
X-ray crystallographic analyses are being carried out on the ACDS beta subunit
in its acetylated form to provide structural information that will contribute
new insight into how enzymes are able to exploit unusual organometallic
chemistry for interconversion of one- and two-carbon substrates. Complementary
biochemical and FTIR spectroscopic analyses are being applied to the ACDS beta
subunit enzyme-acetyl intermediate to provide information defining the
reactivity and functional properties of the A cluster acetyl-Ni species. In
addition, this project is testing how steric effects generated by domain-
specific conformational changes influence the coordination geometry and
stability of the A cluster acetyl-Ni intermediate. New insight into the
mechanism of acetyl C-C and C-S bond activation is being obtained from
characterization of several domain-truncated and single site-directed mutants to
determine how different protein conformational states enforce specific metal
center coordination geometries to promote the stepwise interconversion of C-1
and C-2 intermediates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;This
research is concerned with fundamental knowledge of the biochemistry and
physiology of Archaea, organisms that constitute the third-domain of life.
Archaea comprise as much as 20% of the total microbial biomass in the oceans and
methanogens are found in especially high numbers in the digestive systems of
ruminants, as well as being widely distributed in soil and aquatic environments.
Methanogens present a direct advantage to society in their use for
bioremediation and detoxification of anoxic wastes. In addition, methane
produced as the end product of methanogenic metabolism is a clean fuel, and a
better fundamental understanding of methane biochemistry has impact on societal
efforts to develop alternative energy sources. Thus, the results from this work
have a broad impact, not only for the useful exploitation of the metabolic
potential of the Archaea for industrial and agricultural purposes, but also for
a better understanding of the world's ecology and the environment. Important
educational and teaching components of this project further extend its broader
impact. Students at all levels (high school through postdoctoral) and
technologists are actively engaged in characterizing oxygen-sensitive
multiÂ¬enzyme systems by state-of-the-art biochemical, spectroscopic, enzymatic,
and molecular biological techniques, and the project embraces participation of
underrepresented and disadvantaged students as well. Furthermore, in this
research, new collaborations have been established that are broadening the
interdisciplinary knowledge and skill sets of students and postdoctoral
associates at several institutions. This contributes significantly to
enhancement of infrastructure for research and education.