* 0923517
* MRI: Acquisition of a Multi-axial Dynamic Testing System for Characterization of Novel Materials and Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* F. Ernesto Penado, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Gary Fischman
* 07/31/2012
* USD 270,208.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acquisition of a multi-axial dynamic
testing system will significantly enhance the research capabilities at Northern
Arizona University. The equipment will be used for the characterization of novel
magnetic, composite and biologically-derived materials, magnetorheological
fluids based systems, and ratcheting of traditional materials. In particular,
experiments performed on this equipment will facilitate the understanding of the
general magneto-mechanical behavior of magnetic shape memory alloys as well as
the calibration and validation of a three-dimensional constitutive model for
these materials. In addition, as a lack of experimental results on yield
surfaces and multiaxial ratcheting strains hampers the calibration of existing
ratcheting models, the equipment will facilitate tests to be performed and
experimental data to be generated for calibration and validation of these
models. All these activities combine fundamental and applied research approaches
to advance the current knowledge base in the specified
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus at Northern Arizona University is to
provide a quality learning experience for undergraduates, a goal that is
enhanced through an increasing emphasis on developing graduate and research
programs. Acquisition of the new instrumentation will allow the University to
enrich the integration of research and teaching activities at graduate and
undergraduate levels, thus enhancing its educational mission at multiple levels.
While this equipment will be used primarily for research and research training,
it will help bridge the gap between the classroom and the research lab. The
equipment will allow faculty to involve undergraduates and graduates in
meaningful, cutting-edge research and to train them with state-of-the-art
instrumentation.