* 0923443
* MRI:  Development of an Anechoic Chamber and Instrumentation for Remote Sensing of Polar Regions and Transportation Interdisciplinary Research and Education
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2015
* David Braaten, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 09/30/2015
* USD 1,374,617.00

Proposal #: CNS 09-23443 PI(s): Leuschen, Carlton J.; Braaten, David; Gogineni,
S. Prasad; Seguin, Sarah; van der Veen, Cornelis Institution: University of
Kansas Lawrence, KS 66045-7563 Title: MRI/Dev.: Anechoic Chamber & Instr. for
Remote Sensing of Polar Regions & Transportation Interdisciplinary R&E Project
Proposed: This project, developing an anechoic chamber at the Center for Remote
Sensing of Ice Sheets (CReSIS) to measure ElectroMagnetic Interference and
ElectroMagnetic Compatibility (EMI/EMC) and antenna characteristics, aims to
improve sensor performance to meet environmental issues. The chamber offers an
electromagnetically quiet room for detecting extremely weak emissions and
accurate antenna pattern and impedance measurements. The facility covers a wide
frequency range and attenuation of incident plane-waves. Coupling effects on
array scale models are necessary to be able to optimize critical signal
processing algorithms. Optimizing antenna array performance requires radiation
patterns and mutual coupling between elements. The chamber enables antenna-
pattern measurements using both far-field and spherical near-field scanning
techniques over the entire frequency range. Thus, the work involves designing
and developing a radar and sensor technology for observation of Greenland and
Antarctic ice sheets (systems sensitive to sound) and image the coastal regions
where rapid melting due to climate change is most evident. This ultra sensitive
sounding and imaging radars enable radio frequency (RF) and microwave emission
measurements 40 dB below the thermal noise and operates over a large frequency
range from 100MHz up to 18 GHz, with attenuation of plane waves by about 100dB
at the proposed chamber boundaries.

Broader Impacts: Beyond the potential contribution to ice-sheet modeling,
glaciology, and the overall international polar research community, the facility
is likely to have significant impact on education. It enables new coursework in
emerging and increasingly critical EMC/EMI field incorporating laboratory
exercises into courses. Hence, the project provides educational and training
opportunities for students at all levels in an EPSCoR state, provides business
opportunities for businesses in the area, and clearly addresses international
needs.