* 0923301
* Neurobiology of Social Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Elliott Albers, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 06/30/2014
* USD 599,968.00

Studies on aggression represent one of the oldest areas of scientific inquiry;
however, we still know very little about the neural mechanisms controlling
aggression. Developing a better understanding of these neural mechanisms is
critical because aggression plays a fundamental role in the formation and
maintenance of stable social relationships in many species. Social experience
has profound effects on determining an individual's aggressiveness and to
understand the mechanisms controlling aggression we must understand how social
experience interacts with neural mechanisms and with naturally occurring
fluctuations in hormones that influence aggression. This project will examine
how competitive and non-competitive social experience interact with the male
hormone testosterone to alter aggressiveness. This project will go on to
determine whether social experience and testosterone alter aggressiveness by
altering the efficacy of a neurochemical signal called arginine-vasopressin
(AVP) to influence aggression by its actions in specific areas of the brain. We
believe that the data generated by this project will provide critical new
insights into the basic principles that govern how neural and endocrine
mechanisms control complex social behaviors. This research project will provide
opportunities for undergraduates, graduate students and postdocs to be trained
in basic neurobiological research.