* 0923706
* SBIR Phase II:   Relief-Free Infrared Diffractive Optics Based on Semiconductor Materials
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2011
* Sergei Krivoshlykov, ANTEOS, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 07/31/2011
* USD 361,416.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop a new generation of relief-free
thin-plate components of diffractive optics operating in the infrared region of
spectrum. The diffractive optics employs volume phase holographic structures,
which are optically recorded in semiconductor materials transparent at the
infrared wavelengths using proprietary process of photo-modification for
producing dramatic change of the material refractive index under illumination
with low intensity light. Phase I of this project proved feasibility of the
proposed concept by demonstrating photo modification of ZnSe infrared material
and fabricating the first model components. The developed technology can be
immediately applied to fabrication of diffractive optics, volume phase
holographic gratings, and phase retardation plates for wavelengths up to 1.9 ìm,
as well as antireflection layers for wavelengths up to 8 ìm. In Phase II project
the technology will be optimized and applied to fabrication of the prototype
components of infrared diffractive optics operating at longer wavelengths,
including the important wavelength of CO2 laser 10.6 ìm and windows of
atmospheric transparency 3-5 and 8-12 ìm. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
developed photo-modification process is highly adaptable and creates a rich
technology platform for fabrication of a broad range of products for a large
variety of markets. Successful implementation of this technology will result in
a new generation of high efficiency relief-free infrared diffractive optics and
sub-wavelength components, including diffraction gratings, beam splitters, beam
shapers, semiconductor materials with artificial birefringence, phase
retardation plates and wave plates. The relief-free components of infrared
diffractive optics based on semiconductor materials are capable to withstand
high light intensities and perform complicated light management functions.
Another important application is the fabrication of highly stable anti-
reflection (AR) layers on infrared semiconductor optics. The market for infrared
diffractive optics includes defense and airspace industry, laser industry,
spectral devices, sensors and detectors, night vision optics, industrial process
control, material processing, cutting and welding, environmental monitoring,
medical diagnostics and surgery.