* 0923727
* Molecular Genetics of Ethylene-auxin Interactions in Arabidopsis
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Jose Alonso, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 06/30/2013
* USD 733,503.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Intellectual Merit Survival of plants largely depends on their ability to
coordinate internal programs, such as growth and development, with the external
conditions of the ever-changing environment. Understanding how plants integrate
internal and external signals is critical for coping with the consequences of
the global environmental changes facing our planet. It is becoming increasingly
clear that interactions between different hormones (or hormones and other
signaling pathways) are at the center of the signal integration process
underlying the tremendous plasticity in plant characteristics required for their
survival in hostile environments. While crosstalk between hormones and
developmental signals occurs at several different levels, the regulation of
hormone biosynthesis is emerging as one of the essential factors in signal
integration biology. It is, therefore, paramount to decipher how hormones are
synthesized, how their synthesis is regulated, and to determine the
physiological significance of such regulation. In this project, several of the
basic questions regarding biosynthesis of the essential plant hormone auxin will
be addressed. The biological significance of local auxin biosynthesis in several
well-defined developmental processes and in response to the stress hormone
ethylene will be investigated. The relationship between different routes of
auxin production (currently believed to be independent) will be examined.
Finally, additional genes involved in auxin biosynthesis will be identified. The
information gained from this project will be essential for the intelligent
manipulation of specific plant responses to environmental factors for the
benefit of agriculture and conservation biology.

Broader Impacts The project targets students at all levels and includes outreach
to students in elementary school, involvement of undergraduates in research, and
postdoctoral mentoring. In addition there is a special effort for broadening
participation by including students who are traditionally underrepresented in
science. Specifically the PI will target the Hispanic community at North
Carolina State University as well as students from North Carolina Central
University, a historically black college. Minority students from both
institutions will be recruited to participate in an existing Summer Research
Experience for Undergraduates. To stimulate and foster interest in science in
elementary school children, a bi-lingual (English and Spanish) experimental plan
consisting of several "do-it-yourself" biology modules for children will be
developed. To facilitate parental dialogue with students the science experiments
will be described in brochures that students can share with their parents.