* 0923133
* MRI:   Acquisition of a Confocal Microscopy System for Research and Education
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* James Berry, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2012
* USD 482,314.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award funds the acquisition of a
state-of-the-art confocal microscope to enhance research and education at the
University at Buffalo (UB). This multifunctional instrument meets the needs of a
diverse interdisciplinary user group on the University of Buffalo North Campus,
where accessibility to confocal imaging is lacking. Users include faculty within
Departments of Biological Sciences, Physics, and Chemical and Biological
Engineering. Research ranges from cell and nuclear organization, developmental
biology, neurobiology, stem cells, tissue engineering, plant biology, and
molecular evolution, in organisms ranging from animals, plants, fungi,
nematodes, insects, and arthropods. Some users require basic confocal
applications, while others require advanced features. The instrument that meets
these diverse needs is a motorized inverted Nikon A1R Confocal Microscope, which
combines precision point and ultra-fast resonant scanning, together with Nikon's
exclusive Perfect Focus. An environmental chamber will enable long-term live
cell imaging. A complete set of lasers allows imaging of a full range of
fluorescent molecules, FRET, and photo-activatible GFP. An integrated Becker-
Hickl FLIM module allows for FLIM FRET, and a unique Fianium supercontinuum
SC400 laser maximizes versatility by covering the entire 400 nm to 2000 nm
spectrum. This microscope will be accessible to faculty, postdocs, and students
in a variety of scientific disciplines, and will be a central component of new
courses and workshops. Additionally, the primary investigators will work with
University of Buffalo-based outreach programs to promulgate accessibility of
associated courses, training, seminars, and workshops to underrepresented groups
within our academic populations, providing research and education tools that
would otherwise be unavailable.