* 0923456
* MRI: Acquisition of Futuro: A Data Intensive and High Performance Computing Cluster for Integrated Research and Education
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Juan Iglesias, The University of Texas at Brownsville
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2013
* USD 704,293.00

Proposal #: MRI 09-23456 PI(s): Lei, Hansheng; Benacquista, Matthew J.;
Figueroa, Andres; Iglesias, Juan R.; Mukherjee, Soma Institution: University of
Texas - Brownsville Title: MRI/Acq.: FUTURO: A Data Intensive and High
Performance Computing Cluster for Integrated R & E

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Project Proposed: This project, acquiring Futuro, a computer cluster for
interdisciplinary research projects and Computer Science education programs,
enables research activities in data mining, pattern discovery, genetic data
analysis, experimental astronomical physical, collaborative filtering, theory of
computation, high dimensional visualization, and other computational areas.
Seeking to lay the foundation for a strong research and education integration
centered on CS in two minority-serving universities, UT-Brownsville and UT-Pan
American, it enables the following potential transformative goals: - Terabyte
scale data mining and pattern discovery in time series datasets obtained from
heterogeneous sensor networks (addresses data analysis problems in Laser
Interferometer Gravitational Wave Observatory (LIGO)) - Genetic data analysis in
complex human diseases to identify susceptibility factors enabling understanding
of genetic causes of complex diseases such as schizophrenia (potential to lead
to new therapeutic strategies) - Studying the dynamical systems and Stellar
populations to model the behavior of black hole binaries in globular cluster and
galactic nuclei (creates models of formation of stellar systems via intensive
computation that can provide information for interpretation of results from
operating gravitational wave detectors) - Exploring and creating computing-
effective, scalable, robust and intelligent learning algorithms for large
recommender systems based on collaborative filtering by incorporating
multispectral information (may lead to next generation recommender systems) -
Visualizing high dimensional streaming data from heterogeneous sensors
(potential to contribute in developing new data reduction methodologies that
incorporate intelligent computation such as data mining and thus more advanced
visualization systems with cross-disciplinary utility) - Benchmarking and
developing algorithms for approximating NP-hard subgraph isomorphism problem
with best possible practical performance (benefits applications such as image
recognition and bioinformatics) Futuro will serve as laboratory in which core
research can be conducted in a collaborative fashion at a high level providing
real-world test applications while training students.

Broader Impacts: This project benefits many users from physics, bioinformatics,
computational engineering, and environmental engineering in two minority-serving
universities. Futuro forms the nucleus for collaboration between computer
scientists and researchers from other departments. The project will train
students at the Rio Grande Valley, a historically underrepresented region with
more than 90% Hispanics, in areas that are expected to have great national
impact. The work provides experience in parallel programming and scientific
computing, the CS curriculum will be enriched by the lab modules enabled by the
cluster facility.