* 0923417
* MRI: Development of a passive phase-stabilized femtosecond laser system for spatio-temopral imaging and frequency metrology in the infrared
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Norval Fortson, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Siu Au Lee
* 08/31/2012
* USD 679,482.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Recent progress in ultrafast laser technology has enabled new spectroscopies for
probing matter in fundamentally new optical regimes with regard to frequency
precision, temporal resolution, and in combination with novel nanooptical
techniques, ultrahigh spatial resolution. So far, most efforts have concentrated
on the visible spectral region with the infrared (IR) and terahertz (THz) range
having been taken comparatively little advantage of due to the lack of suitable
laser sources with regard to pulse energy, tunability, spectral range, and
control of the carrier-envelope phase (CEP).

The goal of this interdisciplinary project is the development of a new ultrafast
infrared laser light source as the foundation of a broad scientific program
aimed at testing basic symmetries and laws of physics using ultracold molecules,
implementing fast quantum logic gates with trapped ions, developing new optical
clocks, designing optical antennas for IR plasmonics, and at studying finite
size effects in nanomaterials by spatio-temporal vibrational imaging.

Situated at the intersection of the scientific frontiers of atomic physics,
nanoscience, and ultrafast spectroscopy, the highly interdisciplinary research
enabled by this instrument provides a rich learning environment for graduate and
undergraduate students. Technological applications that can be derived from this
research include novel microscopy techniques, molecular sensors, and optical
antennas.