* 0923691
* Students Participation for Emergence in Chemical Systems 2.0 Conference
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2009,09/30/2009
* Jerzy Maselko, University of Alaska Anchorage Campus
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 09/30/2009
* USD 14,475.00

Abstract: The modern approach to understanding natural complex systems relies on
new mathematical visions and ideas from computer sciences to infer and explain
features of these systems. In exemplary nonlinear dynamical systems simple
equations can lead to rapid increase in complexity, even strict rules can lead
to chaotic behaviors, and properties that do not exist in its individual
components emerge in the system. The complexity theory substantiates the view
that life will spontaneously develop within systems provided with a sufficiently
complex chemistry. There is an enormous gap, however, between this conceptual
advance and our actual experimental ability to demonstrate spontaneous emergence
of even the most simple life?]like properties. The leading theme of the
conference on ?gEmergence in Chemical Systems 2.0?h will be the search for
chemistries that can lead to increasingly complex behaviors and emergent
properties.

To computer scientists many aspects of complex systems come naturally, both by
tradition and by training. For example, building on the continuing progress
stemming all the way from Zuse and von Neumann, Chou and Reggia described a
cellular automaton leading with close?]to?]certainty to self?]replicating
structures regardless of a randomly chosen initial state. One of the goals of
the conference is to facilitate chemical grounding of these concepts, which in
turn will lead to experimental breakthroughs in designing new and understanding
existing complex chemical and biochemical systems.

Sessions at the conferences are planned for bringing together scientists
bridging computer science and chemistry in order to develop novel ideas for
molecular computing and programming. The sessions will cover wide range of
topics, from purely theoretical treatment of computing with chemical reaction
networks in vitro and in vivo, through implemented examples from biocomputing
and synthetic biology, to existing chemical systems in which implementation of
local rules can lead to complex chemical synthesis and self?]assembly. The
webpage of conference is:
http://www.math.uaa.alaska.edu/~afkjm/chemicalemergence/index.php funding will
be used to cover travel costs for up to 10 promising junior scientist that are
on the ?gpath to independence?h. While we will focus on the recruitment of
graduate students and postdoctoral fellows, recommended undergraduate students
and other non-faculty members will be considered as well. We will strive to fill
50% spots with underrepresented groups in science.