* 0923013
* MRI: Acquisition of a Molecular Beam Epitaxy System for Nano-Engineered AlGaInN Optoelectronic Devices: Research, Training, and Education
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Mark Holtz, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2012
* USD 646,520.00

We propose the acquisition of a plasma-assisted molecular beam epitaxy (PAMBE)
system. The state-of-the-art crystal growth system will use plasma-generated
active nitrogen to greatly reduce the presence of critical impurities. The
system will benefit a large, interdisciplinary group of researchers including
collaborators from academia and industry. The PAMBE system will become a focal
point of our extensive laboratory, opening new frontiers for novel
optoelectronic devices based on group-III-Nitride (III-N) semiconductors. It
will benefit ongoing projects and anchor new and transformative research and
education efforts based on InN, In-rich InGaN, and AlInN. We will develop
intrinsic III-N materials with low concentrations of unwanted impurities,
specifically carbon, oxygen, and hydrogen. Sources with low vapor pressure will
facilitate maintenance of a pristine growth environment for intentional doping
experiments. &lt;br/&gt;The new system will open new areas of III-N materials
research with numerous applications including: deep ultraviolet light emitting
diodes, BioFETs for use in tag-free, portable DNA sensors, heterostructure-based
field effect transistors, and tandem photovoltaic cells. &lt;br/&gt;Research in
optoelectronic materials has tremendous potential benefit for our national
economy such as development of efficient solid-state industrial and domestic
lighting sources promises enormous energy savings, and applications in
biological, chemical, and environmental sensing, addressing present and
anticipated national security needs. The PAMBE apparatus will impact ongoing
interdisciplinary research and will enhance our interactions with industry as
well as other universities and colleges. Research, education, and training are
an integrated to provide excellent technical, team, and leadership building
opportunities for students. &lt;br/&gt;