* 0923393
* MRI: Development of a Next-Generation Interactive Virtual-Reality Display Environment for Science
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2009,09/30/2015
* Andries van Dam, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 09/30/2015
* USD 1,999,983.00

Proposal #: CNS 09-23393 PI(s): Laidlaw, David H.; Hesthaven, Jan S.;
Karnadiakis, George E.; van Dam, Andries Institution: Brown University
Providence, RI 02912-9002 Title: MRI/Dev.: Next-Generation Interactive Virtual-
Reality Display Environment for Science

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).



Project Proposed: This project, developing a world-class interactive large-
field-of-view 95 megapixel immersive virtual-reality environment, aims at
creating a novel, demonstrably useful, rich, and expressive interaction,
visualization, and analysis that truly leverage the human visual and motor
systems in Virtual Reality (VR). This work intends to help accelerate scientific
work, research into innovative visualization methods for accelerating science in
the future, and even leverage the fundamental advantages of immersive large-
field-of-view visualization and body-centric human-computer interaction. Two
decades of research have established the value of immersive displays as a
research tool in many scientific domains and has also identified a set of
currently unmet needs that block application of such displays to new problems
and domains. These needs encompass high display resolution, brightness,
contrast, and size; fast, responsive tracking with high accuracy and low
latency; ease of use in working with new kinds of data; and reliability.
Although a few multi-million dollar systems exist that may be able to address
these needs, these few systems do not match the proposed display?s color gamut,
small physical space requirement, and lower replication cost. The system is
expected to support more natural and effective interaction with data than the
current 3D point-and-click wand driven CAVEsTM by maximally utilizing as
appropriate full-body, motion-captured user interactions and gestures. More
display information will be made accessible to the human visual system with less
user effort by matching, or exceeding the perceptual qualities of a modern LCD
monitor. An immersive stereo display will be integrated with the perceptual
resolution of a desktop display and superior brightness and contrast.
Integration of software tools for creating virtual-reality applications quickly
will address ease-of-use and reliability. The new tools are expected to be
simple, support a spectrum of displays, and provide rich support for gestural
interaction. A monitoring process to identify potential problems among the
interacting hardware and software components will be put in place to identify
and address problems before instruments are delayed. Users of the system include
planetary geologists, systems biologists, brain scientists, cell and molecular
biologists, biologists studying animal motion (including flight), fluid
dynamicists, bioengineers studying arterial hemodynamics, visual designers
developing interactive techniques for scientists, digital literary artists, and
visualization and interaction researchers. Within interaction research,
experiments using the system are expected to establish the appropriate level of
display technology (e.g., resolution, interactivity, or stereographic display)
needed for different classes of scientific analysis. The techniques, monitoring
system, and software environment will be distributed on SourceForge to
respectively help accelerate scientific progress nationwide, for developing
multi-display applications, and for ensuring reliability.

Broader Impacts: While educating many students, the instrument is expected to
enable new advances in all of the scientific disciplines of the users listed
above, including a better understanding of the workings of cells and genes and
proteins they contain (which could consequently improve quality of life
broadly), behavior of fluids in arteries and around moving animals, animal
locomotion (which could lead to improved biomimetic locomotive, floating, or
flying vehicles), the wiring of the human brain, how it affects human
capabilities, and how it can degrade; and Mars. The efforts are likely to
produce a new generation of scientists who can better analyze research problems
using scientific visualization, computer scientists more cognizant of
scientists? analytical needs, and artists and designers who can accelerate the
design process for immersive scientific visualization tools.