* 0923379
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Nano-to-Micro-Scale 3D Live-Cell Imaging System for Biomedical Research and Education
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Alexey Vertegel, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 07/31/2011
* USD 299,986.00

0923379&lt;br/&gt;Nagatomi&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To fill a regional need for
biomedical research capability, the acquisition of an Asylum Research scanning
probe microscope and an Olympus spinning disk confocal imaging unit and their
integration with an existing epifluorescence microscope at Clemson University is
proposed. This innovative combination will permit simultaneous 3D imaging and
mechanoelectrical testing of live biological specimens in the molecular-,
cellular-, and tissue-level research Clemson researchers and their collaborators
are engaged in. The Asylum MFP-3D uses a cantilever with large-range z-scanner
and is suitable for imaging biological-specimen topography and mechanical,
electrical, or piezo responses in live cells. The MFP-3D is designed to sit on a
stage of an optical microscope; it thus allows simultaneous imaging of
fluorescently labeled molecules within cells, which other scanning probe scopes
do not. The Olympus DSU will enhance this optical imaging capability by adding
3D imaging. Instead of laser light, which can damage live cells, the DSU¡¦s
spinning disc technology with white light captures clear, continuous, optically
cross-sectioned images of live cells and tissues, which are immediately
constructed into 3D images. The proposed system will deliver extraordinary live-
cell data, including images that combine surface topography and internal 3D
structure