* 0923863
* SBIR Phase II:  Development of Low-Cost, Biodegradable Substitutes for Disposable Plastics
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Dara Woerdeman, Green Materials, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 07/31/2013
* USD 603,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will use readily
available plant protein and innovative, environmentally friendly processes to
develop bio-based plastic prototypes such as packaging products. The resulting
formulation and production processes for each prototype will meet the needs of
large manufacturing companies and consumers who seek biobased and biodegradable
products. The prototypes will be designed to meet production requirements,
product characteristics and costs that compete with incumbent petroleum-based
plastics. Phase II goals are to refine the formulations and processes from Phase
I to produce acceptable prototypes for our potential customers, particularly in
the packaging industry. The results of a defined formulation and process for
each product will enable R&amp;D Green Materials to develop, in Phase III, a
scalable pilot process to produce the bio-based products and show that economic
implementation can be achieved by our industrial
partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will result in unique processes and
technologies to produce biobased, biodegradable plastic products that are
functionally equivalent to nonbiodegradable petroleum-based plastics. R&amp;D
Green Materials will develop environmentally friendly, cost-effective
alternatives to plastic products through technologies that utilize plant-based
materials that remain non-toxic from manufacture to disposal. The results will
allow industrial partners the freedom to utilize bio-based plastic products
without the current problems of high cost and inappropriate characteristics of
the process and/or product. As use of the biobased plastics becomes widespread,
the general environmental benefits and reduction of plastic pollution is likely
to exert a positive effect on human health through reduced exposure to
carcinogens and endocrine disruptors. Compared with synthetic polymers, the
unique biobased polymers used in the Phase II prototypes can reduce
environmental impact, minimize pollution, and conserve
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;