* 0923376
* MRI: Acquisition of the Multi-Probe Wide-Temperature Parameter Analysis System for Low-Voltage Low-Noise Measurements
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2009,06/30/2011
* Martin Margala, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 06/30/2011
* USD 100,607.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
research is to study the characteristics and operational phenomena of new
ballistic nanoscale devices and circuits based on compound materials and
graphene. The project also includes the study of the impact of defects on high
power GaN power performance. All experimental studies are conducted using the
acquired multi-probe wide temperature range semiconductor parameter analysis
system. The system consists of a high precision semiconductor parameter analyzer
system combined with a multi-probe high accuracy system with integrated wide and
rapid temperature control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Issues
addressed by the research focus on two topics: development of a new class of
digital/analog circuits based on newly invented room temperature ballistic
deflection transistors operating at terahertz frequency, and the investigation
of failure mechanisms causing gate leakage and power failures in GaN
transistors, particularly for short channel GaN HEMTs at frequencies above 20GHz
and at temperatures up to 400C.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
broader impacts of this research include improved nanodevice research capability
and enhanced graduate and undergraduate education. UMass Lowell provides
education for a diverse group of students. It is located in a region with a high
concentration of immigrant families, especially from Latin America, Southeast
Asia and Africa. This population represents the three largest minority groups.
The acquired system will be instrumental in research training and preparing the
next generation of minority engineering students for advanced study in
nanotechnology and nanodevices. Further, the acquired system will expand
research collaborations with other research institutions and partners in the
area.