* 0923961
* Collaborative Research: Dynamics of carbon release and sequestration: Case studies of  two early Eocene hypsithermals
* GEO,EAR
* 01/30/2008,08/31/2010
* Heather Stoll, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2010
* USD 121,973.00

ABSTRACT

Intellectual Merit: The ocean is the largest sink for anthropogenic CO2 and has
absorbed nearly 130 PgC of the 380 PgC emitted to the atmosphere since the onset
of the Industrial Revolution. If emissions continue to rise unabated for the
next three centuries, an additional 4000 PgC or more will be input to the
atmosphere and ocean. Published model simulations of the ocean/atmosphere
response to the eventual complete utilization of fossil fuels indicate that
atmospheric CO2 will rise to levels that Earth likely hasn't experienced for at
least 40 million years, and the surface ocean may undergo acidification to the
extent that corals and other calcifying organisms will be unable to precipitate
their skeletons. Confidence in and refinement of these model simulations will
benefit from application to, and comparison with, analogous events in Earth
history. Approximately 55 million years ago (Mya), Earth experienced a similar
episode of rapid and extreme transient warming, the Paleocene-Eocene Thermal
Maximum (PETM), likely the product of massive carbon release. Intense study of
the PETM over the last five years has led to a far clearer understanding of the
consequences of this event on climate, biota, and biogeochemical cycles. One of
the more prominent advances is the documentation of evidence for widespread
ocean acidification and buffering, consistent with carbon cycle theory. A
related advance was the discovery of second warming and ocean acidification
event at ~53 Mya. This event, known as ELMO, was less extreme than the PETM in
every sense, from the carbon cycle perturbation to the magnitude of warming.
These global warming events, termed hyperthermals, provide a unique opportunity
to gain insight into the long-term impacts of rapidly rising CO2 levels on
modern climate, ocean carbonate chemistry, and biotas. They also provide an
opportunity to identify potential non-linear feedbacks, and test climate and
biogeochemical model sensitivity. To this end, an interdisciplinary group of
scientists with expertise in carbon cycle dynamics, sediment geochemistry,
paleoceanography and paleobiology has been assembled, and will embark on a
4-year project to address critical questions regarding two hyperthermals, and
their implications for understanding of the carbon cycle including: 1) what were
the mass, rate, and origin of carbon released during the hyperthermals? 2) what
were the rates of sequestration and recovery and what biogeochemical feedbacks
came into play? and 3) how did associated extreme changes in ocean carbonate
chemistry affect planktonic calcifiers? The strategy will involve integration of
the observational database with numerical models. The observational database
will be used to constrain and test the carbon cycle models. This includes
records of biogenic carbonate production, accumulation and preservation in
3-dimensions through the PETM and ELMO. This will also require substantial
refinement of age models. With a highly resolved and multifaceted data set for
input, three modeling approaches will be used, each involving specific
opportunities and compromises in terms of the time scales and scope of processes
that can be modeled. Earth system models (GENIE and CCSM) will provide boundary
conditions for the process-oriented models. Process model simulations will be
designed to investigate problems identified during data/model validation of the
Earth system models and to develop hypotheses to be tested with model
simulations. Broader Impacts: This highly interdisciplinary project will provide
important insight into the short-term and long-term fate of anthropogenic CO2 on
the global carbon cycle, climate, and biota. Such information is essential to
providing scientific leaders and policy makers with a better sense of the
consequences of unabated anthropogenic CO2 emissions for global climate, ocean
carbon chemistry and marine food chains. Moreover, the project places
significant emphasis on a number of closely integrated research and educational
activities that will lead to the development and circulation of educational
materials related to abrupt climate change and training in how to integrate them
in curricula. In addition, we will take advantage of highly successful existing
programs to provide opportunities for undergraduates from under-represented
groups to participate in cutting-edge, relevant, carbon-cycle research.