* 0923323
* MRI: Acquisition of Two High-Resolution Mass Spectrometers for Gas and Particle Measurements in Collaborative Laboratory Research and Field Studies
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2010
* Donald Blake, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* caroline weiler
* 07/31/2010
* USD 680,680.00

This project supports acquisition of two different state-of-the-art high-
resolution mass-spectrometers designed for sensitive, real-time analysis of
trace gases and airborne particles. They will be used for both field and
laboratory applications. The equipment will be used for multiple studies
concerning the role of halogens and organics in secondary organic aerosol
formation, climate change and urban air pollution. Multiple other applications
are foreseen, including using the instruments to better identify the effect of
indoor and outdoor aerosols on human respiratory health and how pollutants
interact with biological systems. The first instrument is a high-resolution
proton-transfer time-of-flight mass spectrometer (PTR-TOF-MS) from Ionicon
Analytik designed for gas-phase constituents. The second is a high resolution
time-of-flight aerosol mass spectrometer (TOF-AMS) from Aerodyne Research
designed for aerosol particles. These instruments will become a multi-user
resource for a large number of researchers from AirUCI, a recently established
organized research unit at the University of California at Irvine which focuses
on use, air quality, and impacts of air pollutants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. The acquisition and application of
this instrumentation will significantly advance our understanding of atmospheric
sources and reactions of air pollutants and atmospheric compounds produced
through biological processes, their impacts and how they are affected by new
technologies. This equipment will enable significant advances in understanding
the role of trace gases, particularly halogen-containing species and oxygenated
organics, in the oxidative capacity of the atmosphere and in secondary organic
aerosol formation. The studies have direct applications to climate change and
urban air pollution. Experiments using the equipment should reveal previously
unrecognized pathways for the formation, fate and impacts of heterogeneous
chemical reactions in the atmosphere. Results will also be important in
assessing the impacts of new energy technologies on these processes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The results produced using the acquired
instrumentation will be disseminated through research meetings, peer-reviewed
publications, the Internet, and public media sources. These data are critical
for developing cost-effective control strategies for local and regional air
pollution to climate change. This research will also provide training to at
least 75 graduate students and postdoctoral fellows as well as a number of
undergraduates over the next five years in cutting edge instrumentation and its
application to important atmospheric problems. Historically, trainees have come
largely from underrepresented groups in science and it is anticipated that this
will continue to be the case. In addition, this instrumentation will be used to
introduce K-12 teachers to the current state of knowledge and fundamental
science behind air pollution and climate change, and to illustrate these to the
public as well. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Postdoctoral Mentoring. AirUCI faculty
have a strong postdoctoral mentoring program in place that not only provides
state-of-the-art research training but also improves communications skills
through the presentation of their research at regular intervals to the institute
as a whole, at annual workshops and at professional meetings such as AGU. In
addition, they interact with 7-12 teachers and the public through the AirUCI
outreach programs. Confirmation of the success of past mentoring efforts is
found in the placement of their postdoctoral fellows in faculty positions in
both research and primarily undergraduate universities, in state and federal
government agencies (EPA, California Air Resources Board), and industry.