* 0923469
* MRI:   Acquisition of Integrated Infrastructure enabling Multidisciplinary Research in Systems Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Susan Bridges, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2012
* USD 800,867.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Support from the National Science Foundation Major Research Instrumentation
Program has allowed Mississippi State University to purchase a Thermo Scientific
LTQ Velos Orbitrap mass spectrometer for quantifying and describing proteins and
their modifications. Being able to do such work is a fundamental component for
understanding the functional complexity and emergent properties of life from
genome sequences upwards. This equipment advances our "omic" biology research
and education in 13 departments in five colleges and promotes greater trans-
disciplinary research and teaching collaborations. It is used in many areas of
bioscience in Mississippi including: bacteriology, cell physiology, computer
science, bioenergy, forestry, immunology, informatics, neuroscience,
parasitology, plant science, reproductive biology, toxicology and virology.
Specific example projects include: genome-wide mapping of histone state and
epigenetic regulatory networks in Arabidopsis to understand transcription
control; enabling proteomics mass spectrometrists to derive more value from
their mass spectral data by combining quantum mechanics computation with
experimental- and computational-proteomics using new algorithms for
peptide/protein identification; developing novel computational methods to
improve signal processing sensitivity in biological mass spectrometry;
understanding interactions between the foodborne pathogen Listeria monocytogenes
and it's human and animal hosts; using computational systems biology and
experimental validation to understand how complex interconnected functional
networks of proteins, metabolites, nucleic acids and other molecules orchestrate
cellular functions and responses to external and intrinsic signals. We continue
our existing work to leverage methods used in biomedical organisms, like mouse,
to solve problems in species that have important economic and environmental
impacts. Training workshops will be conducted for teachers and students, and
networking will foster collaborative research and teaching interactions between
regional institutions. Project outcomes will be disseminated by student and
faculty presentations at regional or national meetings, published in peer-
reviewed journals, and made available via the AgBase Database
(www.agbase.msstate.edu).