* 0923260
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Small-Angle Scattering Instrument for Nanoscale Materials Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Sean Agnew, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 09/30/2012
* USD 474,754.00

0923260&lt;br/&gt;Green&lt;br/&gt;U. Virginia&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This award
is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary: Our objective is to acquire a
small-angle x-ray scattering instrument (SAXS) to establish the X-Ray Scattering
Facility for Quantum and Nanoscale Research and Education. The proposed user
facility is designed to serve the robust and growing NanoScience community at
the University of Virginia (UVa). Existing research thrusts are
interdisciplinary, connecting the Schools of Engineering, Arts and Sciences, and
Medicine in target areas including Nanomedicine, Nanoelectronics, Energy, and
the Environment. The state-of-the-art facility will be established through the
addition of a SAXS instrument. SAXS is a powerful technique for characterizing
the size, shape, and internal structure of materials from length scales spanning
1 to 115 nm, providing critical information about the structure of materials as
diverse as crystalline and amorphous nanoparticles to functional proteins. The
core faculty will use the SAXS to develop new devices and processes with broad
societal impact such as new quantum computing materials for smaller integrated
circuits; biodegradable polymer-metal block copolymers for improved drug
delivery; and amorphous/nanostructured metallic alloys for high efficiency
energy conversion. The proposed instrument will be housed in Wilsdorf Hall, a
$68M multidisciplinary research building completed in 2006. In conclusion, the
SAXS instrument will support significant research programs, the instrument will
be highly integrated into undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral studies, and
will be used to expose underrepresented minorities to cutting-edge research as
well as recruit them into UVa?s graduate science and engineering
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Layperson Summary: The use of x-rays impacts
countless lives across multiple disciplines, most notably in medicine. In
addition to familiar radiological applications, x-rays also provide critical
information regarding the structure of materials over a range of sizes depending
on instrument configuration. Hence, our objective is to acquire a small-angle
x-ray scattering instrument (SAXS) to establish the X-Ray Scattering Facility
for Quantum and Nanoscale Research and Education. The proposed user facility is
designed to serve the robust and growing nanotech communities at the University
of Virginia (UVa), surrounding universities, and our commercial partners.
Existing research thrusts are interdisciplinary, connecting the Schools of
Engineering, Arts and Sciences, and Medicine in target areas including medicine,
electronics, energy, and the environment. The high-tech facility will be
established by adding the SAXS apparatus to existing instrumentation, all of
which will be overseen by experts in x-ray analysis. Overall, SAXS represents a
state-of-the-art technique to determine the size, shape, and architecture of
materials with dimensions spanning 1 nm to 100 nm. Thus, SAXS can provide
important information about the structure of materials as diverse as crystalline
and amorphous nanoparticles used in the mechanical reinforcement of composites
as well as functional proteins involved in biological processes such as vision.
To this end, the core faculty will use SAXS to develop new devices and processes
with broad societal impact such as novel electronics for next generation
computers; biodegradable polymers for improved drug delivery; lightweight carbon
nanotube composites for ultra-responsive sensors; and nanostructured metals for
high efficiency energy conversion. The proposed instrument will be housed in
Wilsdorf Hall, a new $68M nanotechnology research building recently completed in
2006. In conclusion, the SAXS instrument will support significant research
programs, the instrument will be highly integrated into undergraduate, graduate,
and postdoctoral studies, and will be used to expose underrepresented minorities
to cutting-edge research as well as recruit them into UVa?s graduate science and
engineering programs.