* 0923658
* US Egypt Cooperative Research: Computer Aided Pronunciation Learning Application
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Ahmed Elgammal, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 09/30/2013
* USD 75,051.00

This collaborative research project is being undertaken by Dr. Ahmed Elgammal,
Rutgers University, and Dr. Sherif Abdou, Cairo University in Egypt, in order to
create an automated system that will input pronunciations from language learners
along with dynamic images of their faces as they speak. Using this information,
the proposed system will assess whether the user has produced an accurate
pronunciation of a particular word or phrase in the target language. The system
will then offer specific feedback to the user regarding the quality of their
pronunciation, with suggestions for improvement. Specifically, the research will
entail analyzing pronunciation errors that occur for non-native speakers of
English and Arabic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers anticipate that this
speech recognition system will be robust enough to withstand large
mispronunciations that may occur when the user has a non-native tongue.
Additionally, the system will be designed to assign a pass or fail score to the
user?s utterance, detect where the error occurred, and classify the error in
order to give adequate feedback on how the pronunciation should be altered. In
order to create such a system, novel algorithms will be developed for combining
visual cues with audio cues for the task of mispronunciation detection. This
will be achieved by deploying lip tracking algorithms and studying the
correlation between lip movement and speech through style-dependent models of
individual users. The research plan will also result in collection of a large
audio-visual database of the phonemes by native and non-native Arabic and
English speakers. The significance of initially developing the mispronunciation
detection for English and Arabic is that these two languages are both
phonetically rich and different from one another, leading to an assumption that
the mispronunciation detection has a wide working
spectrum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The societal benefits of efficient speech
training systems are significant. In addition to numerous benefits for language
learning, the expected outcome of this collaborative research is a tool that
would be one of the core components for any Computer Aided Language Learning
(CALL) system. Such an outcome could provide a cost effective and personalized
tool for hearing-impaired speakers where the acquisition of an acceptable
pronunciation can be challenging.&lt;br/&gt;