* 0923747
* Households and the Institutionalization of Ancient Maya Kingship at Actuncan, Belize
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,12/31/2013
* Lisa LeCount, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2013
* USD 225,979.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Lisa LeCount and a team of
international colleagues and students will conduct three field seasons of
archaeological research at the ancient Maya site of Actuncan, Belize. The
Actuncan Archaeological Project will examine the rise of hereditary kingship and
how processes that led to centralized authority affected households during the
Preclassic to Classic transition (B.C. 400 to A.D. 600). During this little
known time span, many Maya sites became sufficiently large and complex to be
considered archaic states. The first royal dynasties were recorded in
hieroglyphic texts at the large sites such as Tikal and Copan, and rulers at
smaller centers, such as Actuncan, actively commissioned the building of
palaces, courts, temples, and elaborate tombs. Although most archaeologists
acknowledge that a suite of causal factors led to centralized authority among
the ancient Maya, the intellectual debate is polarized between materialistic
approaches that view elite control over the production and distribution of
resources as the source of paramount power and ideational approaches that
emphasize moral and religious constructs and knowledge as the source of
centralized authority. To move beyond this impasse, the project will investigate
organizational changes in households as rulers increasingly centralized their
authority during the Preclassic to Classic transition. A household approach to
understanding the rise of Maya kingship is rarely explored, since most
researchers investigating this question focus predominately on the monuments and
tombs of rulers. The actions of rulers, however, cannot be fully understood
without investigating households that held kin-based power through their control
of land, labor and ancestral sources of religious authority. As independent
sources of power, households are significant indicators of the successes and
failures of political strategies to consolidate kingly
authority.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Examining the affects of political authority on
households requires the excavation of domestic structures and a Maya palace to
document changing residential structure layout, size and prosperity through
time. Two major alternative hypotheses are tested. If rulers successfully
instigated strategies that limited kin-based control over land, labor, and
wealth, then once powerful families would have experienced a loss of wealth and
status as measured by reductions in house sizes and luxury goods, as well as
novel changes to domestic activities. Alternatively, it is also possible that in
some smaller polities like Actuncan kin-based authority remained well-developed,
and rulers were unable to consolidate authority over social groups. Indeed, if
this was the case, then residential structures will illustrate consistent
patterning in size and access to wealth as they develop over time. Specific
field and laboratory tasks include 1) excavating half of all Actuncan households
from the latest to earliest construction phases, 2) mapping the layout and size
of each construction phase, 3) analyzing soil and plaster chemistry to determine
shifting use of domestic space, and 4) analyzing artifacts to determine access
to luxury goods. The goal is to chart the status and wealth indicators for seven
different structures through the thousand years that span the rise of
centralized authority at Actuncan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of
this research have the potential to transform understanding of the nature of
kingship in early Maya states. Indeed, the consolidation and coordination of
political, social, economic and ideological powers may have developed very late
in state-level societies. Further, the project will provide Belizean students at
Galen University and local individuals' opportunities for increasing their
knowledge of Maya prehistory and training in archaeology, especially for eco-
tourism related ventures. The project's commitment to Belizean communities
affords North American graduate students working on MA and Ph.D. projects closer
interaction with modern Mayan peoples today.