* 0923131
* MRI: Development of Versatile Mobile Range Scanning System?Enabling Large-scale High-density 3D Data Acquisition for Cross-Disciplinary Research
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* William Seales, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,021,681.00

Proposal #: CNS 09-23131 PI(s): Yang, Ruigang; Crothers, George M.; Dinger,
James S.; Seales, William B.; Weisenfluh, Gerald A. Institution: University of
Kentucky Lexington, KY 40506-0057 Title: MRI/Dev.: Versatile Mobile Range
Scanning System Enabling Large-scale High-Density 3D Data Acquisition for Cross-
Disciplinary Research

Project Proposed: This project, developing a versatile mobile range system based
on the principle of Light Detection and Ranging (LIDAR), enables: - New data
driven approaches in 3D reconstruction and modeling, pattern recognition, and
data mining; - Quantitative studies in geology (e.g., analysis of hill slope
movement and characterization of outcrops; - Archaeological recording of fragile
sites with limited access (e.g., those in caves). The system consists of 3 LIDAR
sensor heads, GPS and inertial measurement unit, high-resolution digital
cameras, and processing software to generate high-resolution, accuracy colored
point clouds that are geo-referenced. Unlike typical laser scanning system, it
supports both stationary and high-speed mobile scanning. For example, when
mounted on a vehicle, it should be able to generate over 50 points per meter
given a speed of 100km/hr. In comparison, the typical density from an airborne
LIDAR system is only 1-2 points per meter. This level of density at high
scanning speeds allows rapid 3D scanning of large scenes not possible with
either stationary systems (too slow) or airborne systems (too sparse). Through
relatively simple hardware modification and more sophisticated processing
algorithms, the state of the art in scanning range, density, and operational
conditions is expected to advance as follows: - Increasing the scanning range
over 6 times in the mobile mode, from the original 100 m (specified by the LIDAR
sensor vendor) to greater than 600 m. - Improving the point density over 10
times by applying the principle of compressing sensing and information from the
high-resolution color image, without changing the hardware configuration. -
Developing the ability to scan beyond line of sight with inexpensive self-
calibrating reflective mirrors, and develop real-time vision and inertial-based
navigation to allow GPS-free operations for mobile scan (critical for scanning
in underground areas, where many archaeological sites reside). Plans also
include building a large scale 3D cityscape database with over 30 billions of
raw data samples to cover the entire Lexington metro area. The database will be
shared to enable research beyond graphics and vision, including, but not limited
to, data compression, transmission, visualization, index and retrieval, and
computational geometry.

Broader Impacts: The instrument is expected to be the first university-owned
mobile laser range sensing system, which might inspire and facilitate many
exciting new research venues. The scanning and processing tasks will be carried
out and documented by undergraduate students. The geological and archaeological
studies will be used to attract local students, in particular those
underrepresented from Appalachia. The system will have commercial values to
provide on-demand scanning for applications ranging from construction, city
planning, law enforcement, survey and mapping, to 3D imaging. Commercial users
will be charged a fee to maintain operation and sustain the enabling data beyond
the life of the award.