* 0923799
* SEEDS - Promoting Diversity in Ecology
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Teresa Mourad, Ecological Society of America
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 09/30/2013
* USD 96,683.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of
2009&lt;br/&gt;(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the
Strategies for Ecology Education, Diversity and Sustainability (SEEDS) program
of the Ecological Society of America (ESA) is to build undergraduate minority
student interest in pursuing ecology studies within a nurturing and
intellectually stimulating environment. SEEDS is specifically designed to serve
under-represented students in ecology, including African Americans, American
Indians, Hispanic Americans, and Native Pacific Islanders. Funding is requested
to support 15 SEEDS students with travel awards to ESA annual meetings from 2009
through 2012. This supports the larger ESA objective to foster a diverse
scientific community within the ecology profession, engendering new research
perspectives and enhancing the relevance of ecology to all of society. A wide
range of activities will be offered to students over seven days at these
meetings, including a student orientation, welcome and meetings with ESA members
who have been selected as mentors, field trips, a career workshop, SEEDS campus
chapter meetings, special events including a diversity luncheon and mixer,
activities sponsored by the ESA student section, as well as the regular
scientific sessions. These events help integrate new SEEDS students into the
ecology community. Students are provided a workbook which allows them to note
ideas from sessions and collect information from meeting participants who may be
potential employers and graduate studies advisors. Mentoring at the meetings is
critical and students will be matched ESA members based on mutual research
interests and a willingness to commit to communicating with students throughout
the year. The professional mentor will discuss appropriate interests and career
goals and respond to questions about ecology and the profession, as well as help
students select the most relevant scientific sessions to attend while at the
meetings.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project addresses two key factors in
increasing diversity in the ecological sciences: mentoring and exposure to
ecology as a viable course of study and career opportunity. When set upon a
foundation of peer support provided by the SEEDS network, it increases the
likelihood of underrepresented students continuing to pursue ecology. From
2002-2007, 80% of SEEDS students have either gone on to graduate school, are
employed in an ecology related field or continue to study ecology. This new
support will increase the participation of and encourage leadership by under-
represented students in the ecological sciences. As these students enter the
scientific workforce, they will be able to serve as positive role models for
younger students, filling the critical gap of minority mentors who are vital in
fostering the interest of minority students in ecology. ESA has the ability to
track the program over time, helping provide insights for others seeking to
better understand how to work with underrepresented students more
effectively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;