* 0923345
* MRI: Development of an Ultrafast Fluorescence Microscope Based on Femtosecond Image Amplification in the Visible and Near-IR.
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Piotr Piotrowiak, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2012
* USD 540,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) program, Piotr
Piotrowiak and his research group from Rutgers University - Newark will develop
an ultrafast fluorescence microscope. The proposed microscope will combine
ultrafast laser technology with non-linear optical detection to create images
with sub-100 femtosecond resolution. The proposed microscope will be used to
study nano- and micro-structured materials. The project will be carried out by a
diverse group of young scientists, from high school students through the
American Chemical Society's Project SEED Program, through post-doctoral
scientists.

New kinds of microscopy techniques open up new avenues of research. The
instrument developed with this award will allow scientists to study very fast
physical processes in nano- and micro-structured materials. In this way, a
deeper understanding of important processes in new materials will be developed
more quickly. Too often, bulk measurements do not provide the answers that
scientists need to understand the behavior of nano- and micro-structured
materials, which can only be answered through microscopic measurements of
isolated particles, defects, or structures. The research that is enabled by this
technology is important in the fields of chemical sensing, catalysis,
photovoltaic development and optoelectronics -- all cutting-edge technologies
important to society. In addition, the researchers working with Prof. Piotrowiak
will receive invaluable training in technology development, an important skill
in today's workforce.