* 0923846
* SBIR Phase II:   Global Correlation Service for Network Security Applications
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2009,04/30/2013
* Livio Ricciulli, MetaFlows Inc
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 04/30/2013
* USD 750,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project is directed toward
fulfilling the need of business and Government organizations to more effectively
monitor and protect their electronic networks. Network security devices (NSDs)
such as Anti-virus, Intrusion Detection/Prevention, spam/phishing filtering, and
bandwidth anomaly detection systems have become an integral part of our networks
as they provide invaluable services in maintaining data integrity and
confidentiality, while protecting the availability of computing resources. This
research aims at significantly increasing the timeliness, accuracy and cost-
effectiveness of NSDs in combating fast-changing and ever-more sophisticated
network security attacks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The programming and maintenance
of NSDs is today a very significant obstacle to their wider adoption. The most
common and significant complaints of existing NSDs users are (1) excessive
amounts of false positive events (events that should not be generated) and the
difficulty in analyzing security events (2) their extreme sensitivity to the
timeliness of the security updates to catch emerging threats and (3) the
expertise required in the installation, maintenance and operation of these
systems. These obstacles limit adoption by many smaller companies that cannot
afford to hire expert system administrators and network security analysts.
MetaFlows seeks to capitalize on these deficiencies by providing ways to
outsource this complexity. If successful, this research effort will
inexpensively and thoroughly improve the manageability, accuracy and return on
investment of many existing NSDs.