* 0923992
* A Toolkit for in Vivo Visualization/Modulation of Plant Cell Wall Polysaccharides
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2017
* Michael Hahn, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 02/28/2017
* USD 4,340,407.00

PI: Michael G. Hahn (University of Georgia)

CoPIs: Geert-Jan Boons, Harry Gilbert, Christopher S. King, Malcolm A. O'Neill,
and William S. York (University of Georgia)

There are currently no tools that can be used for in vivo imaging plant cell
wall polysaccharides and glycoproteins. This project will provide a set of
molecular probes for cell wall polysaccharides in the form of single-chain
antibody fragments (ScFvs) and carbohydrate-binding modules (CBMs) as tools for
in vivo imaging of plant cell walls using microscopy. The specific goals are: 1)
to generate, either from hybridoma cell lines or from carbohydrate binding
domains, a comprehensive series of tagged molecular probes that can be expressed
in plant cells and will bind to cell wall glycans in vivo; and 2) to demonstrate
that the probes generated will permit the localization of diverse carbohydrate
structures within living plant cells or alternatively alter cell wall structure
by selectively disrupting polysaccharide incorporation into walls in transgenic
plants. It is anticipated that the molecular probes generated during the course
of this project will be instrumental to those interested in the dynamics of
plant cell wall polysaccharides and that some of these probes will disrupt cell
wall assembly and structure through their interaction with the
polysaccharides/glycoproteins and serve as valuable tools to discover the
functions of cell wall polysaccharides in the biology of plant cells.

With respect to outreach and training, project personnel will teach a one week
course to be held during each summer at the Complex Carbohydrate Research Center
during the tenure of the grant to teach polysaccharide localization methods to
interested scientists. An explicit effort will be made to involve undergraduate
students in the research carried out under this grant. The participation of
historically underrepresented groups in the research will be fostered by
recruiting undergraduate students through the University of Georgia Summer
Undergraduate Research Program (SURP)
(http://www.grad.uga.edu/outreach&diversity/surp.html). All students and post-
doctoral associates will be closely mentored to encourage and foster their
development as research scientists. Information about all antibodies, ScFvs, and
CBMs generated through this project, will be made available immediately to the
scientific community via posting to a web-based antibody database
(http://www.wallmabdb.net). All molecular probes will be made available to the
research community without restriction through CarboSource
(http://www.carbosource.net). Plasmids and transgenic plant lines generated in
the molecular probe function validation studies will be available through the
Arabidopsis Biological Resource Center (http://abrc.osu.edu).