* 0923988
* SBIR Phase II:Disruptive Performance From Engineered Piezoelectric Organic Polymer Nanocomposites: Inventive Approach To New Electrical and Mechanical Energy  Conversion Materials
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Earl Wagener, TETRAMER TECHNOLOGIES, L.L.C.
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 07/31/2011
* USD 549,996.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase II project aims to commercialize and expand the application of
piezopolymer nanocomposite technology. Piezoelectric materials are an
alternative energy source, which interconvert mechanical and electrical energy.
Applications include transducers, actuators, sensors, energy harvesting,
vibration dampening, and smart polymers. A strong market need has been for
piezopolymeric materials that compete with the temperature and performance level
of piezoceramics. In addition to films and fibers, this technology can form
nonwoven fabrics, which are excellent geometries for smart materials and wound
healing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project will be the transformation of new energy processes that play an
increasingly important role to the public in the business and social foundation
of the US as costs of fossil fuels rise. Alternative energy transformations such
as solar, wind, biomass, wave and fuel cells are now more actively under
commercial development and will no doubt continue to demonstrate growth
technically and economically. Piezoelectric energy conversions are more
versatile than those mentioned above. Benefits come in forms such as
transducers, actuators, sensors, energy harvesting, vibration dampening, and
smart polymers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;