* 0923365
* MRI: Acquisition of Instrumentation to Create a Transformative Large- and Full-Scale Wind Testing Capability in Support of Sustainable Windstorm-Resilient, Energy-Efficient Communi
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2015
* Amir Mirmiran, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* David Mendonca
* 07/31/2015
* USD 300,715.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will greatly expand the capabilities of
Florida International University?s (FIU) Wall-of-Wind (WoW), and transform it
into a next generation full- and large-scale testing facility for wind and/or
thermal effects on buildings and other structures. The award will enable it to
become a national multi-user facility, by acquiring instrumentation allowing
interdisciplinary research by academia and industry, based on: (1)
aerodynamic/aero-hydrodynamic/aeroelastic testing of tall buildings, flexible
bridges, and other infrastructure/life-line elements in simulated atmospheric
flows at large Reynolds numbers unachievable in conventional facilities, thereby
reducing losses and consumption of materials and energy embodied therein; (2)
testing to promote energy-efficient buildings. Errors inherent in small model
scales will be significantly reduced through: testing of building models with
reproduction of important architectural details; testing of full/large-scale
traffic and electrical infrastructure elements with real materials/connections;
full-scale testing of photovoltaic panels; full-scale thermal testing of one-
floor building envelopes in turbulent flow; and interdisciplinary wind/thermal
performance research. The research will increase community resilience by
reducing losses in extreme winds, and promote energy-efficient buildings by
reducing adverse environmental effects on building envelope performance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research using the equipment purchased through this award
will enhance the scientific underpinnings of design for wind, and help attain a
national objective: sustainable and energy-efficient communities with enhanced
human safety and comfort, and reduced property loss and insurance costs. The
project will foster integration between learning and discovery processes,
promote undergraduate and graduate education, and develop a trained workforce
transferring technology from academia to applications. As they have in the past,
women will strongly participate in WoW activities, and members of minority
groups will be involved through collaboration with and recruitment of students
from minority serving institutions. FIU itself primarily serves minorities, and
the project will help increase the number of underrepresented students. Results
of the research utilizing this equipment will be disseminated through journals,
conferences, and reports to policy makers and committees, to advance the state
of the art and improve current standards.&lt;br/&gt;