* 0923422
* MRI: Acquisition of Mass Spectrometry Instrumentation for Chemistry and Biology Research
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Clark Lindgren, Grinnell College
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2012
* USD 428,295.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award from the Major Research
Instrumentation (MRI) program, the Chemistry Department at Grinnell College will
acquire an ion trap gas chromatography mass spectrometer (GC-MS) and a time-of-
flight (TOF) mass spectrometer for use in multi-departmental research projects
spanning biology, chemistry, and neuroscience. The instrumentation will support
a range of research activities, including 1) investigations to probe solution
structure, ligand binding and protein dynamics by hydrogen/deuterium exchange
mass spectrometry; 2) characterization of organoheterobimetallic complexes to
investigate their chemical ionization pathways; 3) studies of gas phase cation
small molecule reactivity thereby examining metal-metal cooperativity; 4)
investigations to differentiate Rubisco activase proteins that have been
implicated in heat-stress response in plants; 5) measurements of
endocannabinoids (eCBs) or their metabolites at the lizard neuromuscular
junction; 6) identification of residues of nicotinic receptors that comprise the
binding site for an allosteric modulator; and 8) studies of herbicides and
pharmaceutical contaminants and their degradation products in ground and surface
waters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mass spectrometry (MS) is used to identify the
chemical composition of a sample and determine its purity by measuring the mass
of the molecular constituents in the sample after they are ionized and detected
by the mass spectrometer. Chromatography is an isolation technique that precedes
the mass spectrometry analysis. It separates a mixture into its several
constituent chemicals which are then analyzed by the mass spectrometer. These
are widely used analytical techniques to identify and quantify the chemical
composition of a sample. It is important for undergraduate students to be
trained in the technique using modern instrumentation. The instrumentation will
be used by research students, in laboratory class instruction and in an outreach
program involving middle school students.&lt;br/&gt;