* 0923607
* Inhibition of RNAi by Cell Death Signaling
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* James Birchler, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Roy Welch
* 08/31/2012
* USD 300,000.00

The completion of this project will address unexplored aspects of the RNA
interference (RNAi) gene silencing process. In preliminary experiments, it was
discovered that cell death produces a signal to adjacent cells that inhibits RNA
interference. The research will involve a characterization of modifier mutations
that increase or decrease the magnitude of this signaling. The modifier
collection will be examined for their effect on the molecular block of RNAi that
occurs at the conversion of double stranded RNA to small interfering RNAs. By
precise genetic and cytological localization of the mutations recovered,
eventually to the single gene level, insight into the molecular basis of the
signaling will be revealed by the identification of the corresponding genes
involved. Secondly, because cell death signaling increases the expression of
retrotransposons, a test of whether novel insertions occur at a greater
frequency in conjunction with chronic cell death than in control conditions will
be performed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Gaining insight in the
mechanism of inhibition of RNA interference by cell death signaling will reveal
the impact of cell death on viral resistance, transposable element and
endogenous gene expression and any consequent impact on mutation rate due to new
retrotransposon insertions. RNAi as a reverse genetic tool is impacted by its
inhibition by cell death signaling. Thus, an understanding of this process has
implications for the basic and applied use of RNAi because its effectiveness
could be compromised under such circumstances. The modifier mutation
characterization and transposon insertion projects will be conducted by a
diverse set of undergraduates so that they will gain a practical appreciation
for the principles of classical and modern genetics and potentially be inspired
to pursue postgraduate careers. The postdoctoral associate on the project will
gain experience in mentoring undergraduates.