* 0923388
* MRI: Acquisition of a Modern NMR Spectrometer for the University of Wisconsin - La Crosse Chemistry Department
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Adrienne Loh, University of Wisconsin-La Crosse
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2012
* USD 390,335.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) program, Adrienne
Loh and her colleague Heather Mortell from University of Wisconsin La Crosse
will acquire a 400 MHz NMR spectrometer to support chemical research of faculty
at La Crosse as well as Luther College (Decorah, IA). Proposed research spans a
number of areas in chemistry, including: 1) protein structure and dynamics; 2)
design of siderophore models; 3) discovery of new antimicrobials; 4)
characterization of agonist binding sites in serotonin receptor proteins; 5)
investigation of organometallic molecular switches; 6) development of soy-bean
derived bioplastics and 7) the preparation of inorganic solids as oxidation
catalysts. The instrumentation will also be used in teaching and training of
undergraduate students in coursework at the University, as well as being an
integral part of ongoing outreach activities to middle school and high school
students in the area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR)
spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools available to chemists for the
elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is used to identify unknown
substances, to characterize specific arrangements of atoms within molecules, and
to study the dynamics of interactions between molecules in solution. Access to
state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential to chemists who are carrying out
frontier research. The results from these NMR studies will have an impact in
synthetic organic/inorganic chemistry and biochemistry.&lt;br/&gt;