* 0923476
* MRI:  Acquisition of Advanced Scientific GPS Receivers for Magnetospheric and Ionospheric Research
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2011
* Mark Engebretson, Augsburg University
* Standard Grant
* Carrie E. Black
* 06/30/2011
* USD 444,081.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This is a 2 year project to purchase and deploy 10 advanced GPS receivers. Pairs
of receivers will be installed at three sites of the Magnetometer Array for Cusp
and Cleft studies (MACCS) in Arctic Canada and at two lower latitude sites in
Minnesota at Augsburg College, Minneapolis, Minnesota State University Moorhead.
Co-location with the magnetometer array provides simultaneous coverage of
magnetic and ionospheric phenomena over a common region which will yield
important new results on, for example, ionospheric convection and scintillation.
The instruments are also located within the region covered by SuperDARN,
satellites such as THEMIS, and ionosondes, providing opportunities for
extensive, multi-instrument studies which are proving essential for unraveling
the complexities of solar wind-magnetosphere-ionosphere coupling. The GPS
receivers will fill critical gaps in GPS data collection at high latitudes. The
acquisition will provide the only known network of continuously operating
scintillation monitoring receivers that will make data available to the public
and available in near-real-time from at least one Arctic site.

The broader impacts of this project include significant extension of the ground-
based observational infrastructure used by many space scientists worldwide;
broad data dissemination that builds on a well-developed MACCS web server, and
including undergraduate students in the research enterprise. The data reduction
and analysis efforts associated with this project are highly suitable for
undergraduate student research. Thus, the project will provide additional
opportunities to expose undergraduate students to space physics, radio science,
satellite navigation science and engineering, and signal propagation and
processing, in particular via incorporation into senior-level advanced
laboratory courses. Further, the project will strengthen a collaborative
relationship between Augsburg College, Minnesota State University-Moorhead, and
the Center for Remote Sensing Inc, a small business focused on scientific
instrumentation.