* 0923141
* MRI: Acquisition of Instrumentation for Imaging Plasma Waves and Particles
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2011
* John Goree, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 07/31/2011
* USD 272,504.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support acquisition of
laser illumination/high-speed video imaging instruments that will allow for the
study of particle motion in 3D particle suspensions and the collective behavior
of dusty plasmas, i.e., studies of wave modes, includes frequency components
that cannot be resolved with presently available commercial video cameras
operating at 30 frames/s. Acquisition of video cameras that can record images at
thousands of frames/s will permit detailed studies of dust wave modes that are
either self-excited in the plasma or excited at frequencies synchronized by
external modulation of discharge parameters. A laser with increased power and
stability coupled with an image intensifier and high speed video camera will
result in an LIF system with a signal-to-noise ratio that is presently
unavailable. This powerful diagnostic will permit multi-point correlation
studies of new nonlinear wave structures as well as the detection of linear
waves of very small amplitude.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The science enabled by this
acquisition will have an interdisciplinary impact in other areas of plasma
physics, including fusion energy and astrophysics, as well as biotechnology and
soft condensed matter. The ability to make more sensitive and detailed
measurements will be realized as an increase in the understanding of wave-
particle interactions and a more detailed understanding of physics of dusty
plasmas and soft condensed matter. The wave-particle interaction problem is a
central issue in plasma physics which impacts space and astrophysical plasmas as
well as fusion plasmas. Dusty plasmas are ubiquitous in space (Saturn's rings)
and astrophysical (planetary nebula) plasmas as well as plasmas used in
materials processing. The research enabled by this instrumentation will be
conducted as part of the educational mission of the University. This includes MS
and PhD thesis research of graduate students and research projects conducted by
undergraduate physics students as part of the BS degree requirements. The
presence of modern research equipment in laboratories is essential to the
ability to attract and retain top students. The PIs maintain collaborative
efforts with researchers at undergraduate colleges as well as with colleagues at
other universities who are members of underrepresented groups by gender and
ethnicity.