* 0923243
* MRI: Acquisition:  Characterization of and I/O for Magnetic Logic Structures
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2009,06/30/2011
* Wolfgang Porod, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Andreas Weisshaar
* 06/30/2011
* USD 658,070.00

The objective of this project is the acquisition of a deposition tool for the
precise sputtering of materials for the study of nanomagnetic computing systems,
and a vibrating-sample magnetometer to determine their magnetic properties. The
investigators have selected a sputtering system capable of depositing a variety
of multilayers with excellent control, which comprises three separate chambers
capable of RF/DC co-sputtering and plasma oxidation. The team of investigators
will also acquire a vibrating-sample magnetometer/alternating-gradient
magnetometer that is capable of generating hysteresis curves for these
materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit - This equipment will be
used for research on nanomagnetic logic. The Notre Dame group has pioneered
magnetic quantum-dot cellular automata for digital logic, which are non-
volatile, dense, low-power, radiation hard, and operate at room temperature.
This new deposition system will allow the development of optimum magnetic
materials, input/output structures based on magnetic tunnel junctions, and
magnetically-yoked clocking wires. This work offers the promise of all-magnetic
information-processing systems, which combine memory and logic.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts - This equipment will enable advances in
nanomagnetic logic, which is becoming an important topic within the larger
context of nanoelectronics. Moreover, this research has implications beyond
magnetic logic since the study of magnetic stacks is relevant to commercial
magnetic random-access-memory technology. Laboratory experiences at both the
undergraduate and graduate levels will be offered, with participants from both
Notre Dame and elsewhere. Moreover, these tools will be used in summer
experiences for teachers and their students. Special attention will be given to
the Minority Engineering Program and the Society of Women Engineers.