* 0923810
* Epigenetic Mechanisms for the Inheritance of Acquired Mutations
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Laura Landweber, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 08/31/2012
* USD 807,950.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RNA, normally thought of as a conduit
in gene expression, has a novel mode of action in ciliated protozoa. The PI's
lab has shown that maternal RNA templates provide both an organizing guide for
DNA rearrangements in Oxytricha and a template that can transmit spontaneous
mutations that may arise during somatic growth to the next generation. This
opportunity for RNA-guided DNA repair is profound in the ciliate Oxytricha,
which deletes 95% of its germline genome through global DNA rearrangements that
severely fragment its chromosomes, and then sorts and reorders the hundreds of
thousands of pieces remaining. The programmed information for reordering comes
from transiently-expressed maternal RNAs. This means that changes that arise in
the maternal somatic genome, whether at the level of point mutations or new DNA
rearrangement patterns, have an opportunity to be passed on to the next
generation, bypassing the usual mode of inheritance via germline DNA.
Furthermore, the occasional transfer of point mutations in these RNA templates
to the F1 generation provides a mechanism for stable inheritance of acquired,
spontaneous somatic substitutions, without altering the germline genome. This
suggests the somatic macronuclear genome is really an "epigenome", formed
through templates and signals arising from the previous generation. The research
will address 3 specific aims, which will yield detailed insight in Oxytricha
into the following:&lt;br/&gt;1) Epigenetic inheritance of nucleotide
substitutions via RNA templates, by exploring possible polymerases involved in
RNA-guided DNA repair;&lt;br/&gt;2) Epigenetic inheritance of intron loss via
programmed DNA deletion, which would contribute to developmental streamlining of
a somatic genome;&lt;br/&gt;3) Epigenetic inheritance of copy-number variation:
The third specific aim will explore an additional newly-discovered role for
maternal template RNAs in regulating DNA copy number. This provides a heritable
non-Mendelian mechanism for adaptation to the
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: While the study of RNA
templates and their expected development as novel synthetic tools to drive
genome rearrangement are likely to have a great impact on the field of molecular
biology, the first major impact of this research will be the scientific and
professional training of three independent researchers (each will be the lead
individual responsible for one of the three specific aims) in a broad new
interdisciplinary area that combines RNA biology, DNA recombination,
epigenetics, evolution, ciliate molecular biology, microbial diversity and
genomics. All three specific aims address novel mechanisms for epigenetic
inheritance, further developing Oxytricha as a model system. In addition to the
training of doctoral and postdoctoral students, the investigator will also
mentor undergraduates, an activity central to this project. All Princeton
undergraduates perform intensive junior and senior independent work, often
leading to publications, and the PI has a strong record of recruiting women and
minorities to her lab and to Princeton's graduate program in Ecology and
Evolutionary Biology. High school volunteers will also be invited to participate
in research during the summer, and the opportunity to mentor younger students
will provide the senior lab members with critical experience in training others
to perform laboratory research. The investigator is also very active in
developing a new model of publishing, as co-Editor-in-Chief of Biology Direct,
which offers open, signed and published peer review and author responses, plus
open-access readership, all of which encourage open scientific debate. The
transparency of biology-direct.com also provides a novel vehicle for teaching
students about the steps involved in publishing their work.