* 0923155
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Confocal Microscope for Multi-disciplinary Research and Teaching in the Central Michigan University Multi-user Microscopy Facility
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Philip Hertzler, Central Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2012
* USD 463,150.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Biology Department Microscopy
Facility at Central Michigan University will acquire a Laser Scanning Confocal
Microscope with this award from the Major Research Instrumentation program. The
new instrument will have increased sensitivity, resolution, and scan speed to
enable larger numbers and more diverse researchers across campus to conduct co-
localization studies and enhanced 3-dimensional reconstructions of
fluorescently-labeled samples. The users whose research will benefit from the
new instrument include ten faculty and their students who work in the areas of
developmental biology, cell biology, molecular genetics, neuroscience, and plant
biology. The upgraded features of the instrument allow live-cell analyses
required to study the dynamic changes in localization of proteins in both aging
eggs in worms and in response to calcium levels in the slime mold. The improved
image acquisition and rendering software will also allow for a better
understanding of muscle and germ cell development in shrimp. Additional laser
lines will enhance several studies including: chromatin structure in response to
fermentation inhibitors in yeast, stem cell differentiation and neuroadaptation
in rats, and regulation of early development in maize. Acquisition of the new
laser scanning confocal microscope will also positively impact and expand the
training opportunities of our undergraduate and graduate students. Students who
pursue the Microscopy option of the B.S. degree in Biology take a required
course in confocal microscopy and will particularly benefit from a new, state-
of-the-art instrument. Program graduates should continue to have an excellent
track record of job placements at premier research institutions across the
country. Positive impacts and outcomes of this award will include increased
research productivity and enhanced student training and will be disseminated on
the departmental website and in peer reviewed journals.