* 0923287
* MRI Instrumentation Development: Construction of a Real-Time Fluorescence and Phosphorescence Lifetime Imaging 3D Microscope Based on a Novel Analog Acquisition Method
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Warren Zipfel, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 07/31/2013
* USD 675,176.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This instrument development project creates a new type of 3D fluorescence and
phosphorescence lifetime imaging microscope based on a novel decay time
measurement technique that operates in real-time. The decay time or lifetime is
the time a molecule remains in an electronically excited state after absorbing a
photon. Excited state lifetime measurements are insensitive to differential dye
distributions and sample scattering and absorption differences, parameters that
plague fluorescence intensity-only measurements, and can be used to measure ion
concentrations, interactions between labeled or energy metabolism via NADH
imaging. Phosphorescence lifetimes of certain compounds can be used for
measuring oxygen concentrations. In fluorescence lifetime imaging microscopy
(FLIM), the image pixel values reflect the fluorophore's lifetime rather than
the intensity. In the project described here a new type of lifetime
determination method is developed and applied in a FLIM system in which the
lifetime image is displayed directly on the screen in real time enabling
dramatically faster acquisition of lifetime images. The microscope construction
will be carried out in the Developmental Resource for Biophysical Imaging
Optoelectronics (DRBIO). Two instruments will be built, one designed for
phosphorescence timescales (microsecond) which will be tested in projects
requiring 3D-resolved oxygen imaging using oxygen-sensitive phosphors. A second
instrument will be developed for fluorescence timescales (nanosecond) and tested
a project that will utilize faster lifetime imaging for better elucidation of
the regulation and interactions of molecular transcription initiators in vivo.
The unique capabilities of the instrument - 3D-resolved lifetime imaging carried
out 10-1000 times faster than possible on the currently available FLIM systems -
will ensure that a number of future collaborative projects that will benefit
from the system. The novel technique developed is not only applicable as an
imaging modality, but can be applied in a number of analytical applications such
as oxygen concentration sensing through an optical fiber. Design and fabrication
of the instruments will provide an excellent opportunity for training graduate
students and other researchers in optics, nonlinear optics, high speed
electronics, biophysics and photophysics. In addition to the initial
collaborating laboratories involved in the test bed experiments, the microscope
will be available to researchers from around the world through DRBIO, a
collaborative bioimaging center. Once developed and tested, the instrument
design will be made commercially available by implementation on commercial laser
scanning imaging systems.