* 0923428
* MRI: Acquisition of Advanced Nanomechanics Instruments for Nanomechanical, Biomechanics and Nanotribological Experiments
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Ioannis Chasiotis, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 07/31/2013
* USD 566,774.00

The grant will enable the acquisition of state-of-the art equipment for
nanoscale mechanical testing, which includes a versatile stand-alone
nanoindenter/nanoscratch instrument, a specialized nanoindenter used inside a
transmission electron microscope and a sub-nanoindenter capable of sub-nanometer
indentations. The instruments will enable measurements of the mechanical
behavior at scales from few Angstroms to microns of a plethora of engineering
and biological materials. Specifically, the equipment will advance research
projects on a range of diverse materials research problems on biological
materials, thin films, microelectromechanical systems, and nanocomposites. In
the area of bioengineering, biological tissues, biomaterials, cells, and
biological systems such as ant jaw traps, will be investigated. Characterization
of in-situ properties at the micro- and nano-scales will enable fundamental
understanding of their hierarchical structures, will lead to design of novel
bioinspired systems, and serve as sorely needed inputs for modeling. In the
areas of nanoscience and nanotechnology, novel nanoscale materials, devices,
systems and processes, as well as new composite and construction materials, will
be characterized to design fabrication processes and to tailor properties of
novel engineering materials for a range of technological applications. This
equipment will also advance the fundamental knowledge of micro- and nano-scale
tribological phenomena in thin films and advanced materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The equipment will be housed in a shared user facility at
the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, open 24 hours to the entire campus
and outside users. The facility houses a range of materials and surface
characterization equipment and is accessed by over 700 users. The instruments
will be integrated in a graduate laboratory course and will also be introduced
to researchers in an established annual workshop. A dedicated website will also
be developed addressing fundamentals and advanced topics on nanoindentation and
it will include results of different research groups using this equipment
serving as forum to exchange scientific ideas in the open community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;