* 0923181
* MRI: Acquisition of Instrumentation for Nanoscale In-Situ Studies in Auger Electron and X-Ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Toh-Ming Lu, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 09/30/2013
* USD 500,895.00

0923181 Hull Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute

Technical Summary: The proposed instrumentation will establish an in-situ
laboratory for the evolution and characterization of nanoscale chemistry in a
broad range of materials systems. This will be achieved by equipping state-of-
the-art Auger Electron Spectroscopy (AES) and X-Ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy
(XPS) systems with a set of sample holders and specimen modification
environments. These capabilities will enable in-situ studies of the evolution of
nanoscale surface chemistry during deposition, etching, and surface modification
in a wide range of materials systems of relevance to nanotechnology, renewable
energy, the maintenance of national infrastructure, and future generations of
electronics technologies. Specifically the instrumentation will enable sample
heating, cooling, sputtering, oxidation, reaction and deposition in environments
that are coupled to the exquisite chemical sensitivity and resolution afforded
by new generation AES and XPS methods. Specific research projects include
enhancing the understanding of the evolution of nanoscale surface chemistry in
semiconductor nanostructure systems of relevance to future nanoelectronic
architectures, the reactions that govern storage and release of hydrogen in
novel nanostructured ?nano-blade? materials, the engineering of hybrid organic ?
metal thin film systems, the fundamental nanoscale mechanisms of corrosion, and
the development of new methods for the measurement of three dimensional
nanoscale structures and chemistry. Together these research projects span about
ten faculty and senior researchers, a dozen graduate students, and several
undergraduate and postdoctoral researchers across multiple departments at
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute. This represents a major intellectual critical
mass for the field of in-situ experimentation. The instrumentation will also
enable major opportunities in the integration of research and education. It will
be integrated into a broad set of education and training activities at RPI
including high school materials camps, undergraduate research programs, and
undergraduate and graduate courses. These activities engage large numbers of
under-represented groups in science and engineering. Layman Summary: Many of the
frontiers of science and engineering require understanding and control of the
behavior of atoms at the surfaces and interfaces of materials. Such frontiers
include the development of improved catalysts for more energy efficient and
environmentally benign chemical processing, the development of new materials and
structures for advancing electronic device designs, understanding the atomic-
scale mechanisms of corrosion processes that degrade and endanger much of our
national infrastructure, and the development of new materials for controlled
storage and release of hydrogen that may contribute to the new ?hydrogen
economy?. These challenges will be addressed by acquiring and developing a set
of new capabilities for controlling the environment of samples of materials, and
monitoring how the atomic scale chemistry of those samples varies as the
environment (e.g. temperature, pressure of surrounding oxygen, growth of new
atomic layers on the surface) changes. In this way, it can be better understood
how the material changes at the atomic scale in response to its environment, and
therefore materials can be better designed to adapt to and optimize those
changes. This project will be performed by an interdisciplinary team of faculty,
students and researchers at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute. It will provide
state-of-the-art experimental training for both undergraduate and graduate
students. It will also provide exciting and visual material that will provide
compelling demonstrations of fundamental atomic processes in material systems
that will be integrated into the classroom and into outreach activities such as
materials camps for middle and high school students.