* 0923002
* MRI: Acquisition of Cyclic Simple Shear Apparatus for the Evaluation of the Effects of Load Path on Energy-Based Pore Pressure Models
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Carmine Polito, Valparaiso University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 07/31/2012
* USD 171,675.00

&lt;br/&gt;This award will fund the purchase of a SSH-100 Simple Shear System
manufactured by GCTS Testing Systems of Tempe, Arizona. It will be supplemented
and modified to allow it to perform cyclic triaxial testing and resonant column
testing of soils, as well as cyclic simple shear testing. The cyclic shear
apparatus will be the centerpiece of a research program to evaluate the effects
of load path on energy-based pore pressure generation models. Energy-based pore
pressure generation models can be used to help engineers predict how a soil mass
will respond during an earthquake. In order to apply an energy-based pore
pressure model to a specific soil, soil-specific parameters are determined by
testing a specimen in a lab test, most commonly a cyclic triaxial test. These
parameters allow the model to link the pore pressures generated in the specimen
during loading to the shear energy dissipated in the soil. The question facing
the users of energy-based models is whether the model developed is only valid
for the loading conditions used to develop it (i.e., the load path applied by
the test used), or if it is independent of loading conditions used and dependent
only on the amount of energy dissipated. The PI?s research will use the SSH-100
Simple Shear System to quantify and clarify the effects that load paths have
upon pore pressure generation in soils. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In addition to
the specific research described above, acquiring this instrumentation will
improve the PI?s ability to obtain both internal and external funding for
research projects and to continue to provide research opportunities for
undergraduate students. Acquisition of the cyclic simple shear device will put
the PI in a strong position to obtain funding through collaborative proposals
that make use of Valparaiso University?s increased research
capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;