* 0923403
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Nanoimprint Lithography System for Nanomanufacturing and Nano/Micro Fabrication
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Carol Barry, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2012
* USD 507,980.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to
utilize an innovative nanoimprint lithography (NIL) technique for research and
training in prototyping and fabrication of micro/nano sensors/actuators, nano
devices, nanostructures and nanoscale tooling for nanomanufacturing at UMass-
Lowell (UML). The NIL is a micro- and nanoscale replication process, which uses
a combination of mechanical pressing and heating or ultraviolet lighting to
generate uniform and high resolution features (below 10 nm) on a substrate at a
low cost and high throughput. The requested NIL system will significantly
enhance nanomanufacturing and nano/micro fabrication capabilities at UMass-
Lowell. Current research projects directly benefiting from the requested system
include: 1) three-dimensional nanofeatures fabrication for chemical and
biological sensing systems; 2) hybrid polymer-metal tooling development for
injection molding; 3) nanoscale lithography for nanowire based optical detection
systems and nanoelectronics; 4) nanostructure fabrication for photovoltaic
energy conversion systems; and 5) nanotemplate fabrication for
nanomanufacturing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NIL system is an essential
component of the nanofabrication process chain. The research projects enabled by
this nanofabrication capability include many broader-impact applications such
as: real time and in situ explosive detection for prevention of loss of human
life and damage to infrastructure, biomolecular sensing, high efficiency solar
cells for sustainable energy source, lead-free soldering for nanoelectronics
packaging, and high-rate, high-volume, and environmentally-safe manufacturing
processes. The requested instrumentation will be integrated into education and
outreach programs for K-12 teachers and students, undergraduate and graduate
students, and industry professionals through the Graduate Certificate in
Nanotechnology, capstone and senior projects, course demonstration and
laboratory experiments, summer research experience for undergraduates program
and ?Nanotech Will Travel? umbrella outreach program. These activities are part
of an extensive education and outreach infrastructure organized by the NSF
Center for High-rate Nanomanufacturing (CHN) and the state-funded
Nanomanufacturing Center of Excellence (NCOE) at UML. This project will also
involve students from underrepresented groups in research projects and course
work through CHN and NCOE recruiting programs. &lt;br/&gt;