* 0923620
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: The end Guadalupian (ca 260 Ma) biotic crisis: Research into timing, potential causes, and environmental proxies
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Jonathan Payne, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 08/31/2012
* USD 63,392.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative Research: The end
Guadalupian (ca 260 Ma) biotic crisis: Research into timing, potential causes,
and environmental proxies&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Roland Mundil and Paul Renne:
Berkeley Geochron Laboratory&lt;br/&gt;Johathan Payne: Stanford
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0923669 and
EAR-0923620&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;High-resolution
geochronology is instrumental in testing proposed causal links between
continental-scale, short-term volcanic events and environmental crises. This
collaborative research proposal is aimed at unraveling the timing of the end-
Guadalupian (ca 260 Ma) mass extinction and its temporal relation to the
Emeishan volcanic province in W China. Geochronological research will be
complemented with paleo-enviromental studies (delta13C stratigraphy) and
biostratigraphy.&lt;br/&gt;Currently existing geochronological and paleo-
environmental data suggest a causal link but are scarce and insufficient for
testing this hypothesis with confidence, because age data constraining the
Emeishan volcanism and the extinction event are imprecise and inaccurate (with
several Ma uncertainties), and delta13C studies are restricted to short profiles
from only a few sites. Therefore, fundamental questions remain unanswered. In
addition to testing the hypothesis of a causal link PIs intend to study (1) to
what extent the extinction event is diachronous among localities and
environments (2) the rate of the biotic recovery in the Late Permian (3) the
correlation of extrema in ocean chemistry (if present) with pulses of volcanism
and with rates and modes of recovery.&lt;br/&gt;In detail, PIs will analyze
minerals (zircon, sanidine) from ash-layers within marine and terrestrial
sections recording the end-Guadalupian event in China and Australia, applying a
zircon pre-treatment which is proven to dramatically improve the quality and
reliability of high-resolution TIMS U-Pb zircon data by eliminating the effects
of Pb loss. 40Ar/39Ar dating will be employed as a further constraint. In
addition to the sedimentary sections they will target Emeishan volcanic products
with both U-Pb and 40Ar/39Ar analyses applied to zircon and baddeleyite, and
plagioclase, respectively.&lt;br/&gt;Through careful integration of U-Pb and
40Ar/39Ar geochronology with chemo- and biostratigraphy, the time scale of the
Middle through Late Permian will be greatly improved and will lead to more
realistic evaluation of potential causes for the biotic crisis and its
aftermath.&lt;br/&gt;The research proposed herein is of fundamental importance
to understanding first-order processes in Earth History. In particular the
understanding of environmental anomalies has become a prime focus of research in
Earth Sciences and other areas. PIs will make their findings accessible to a
wider audience by collaborating with the University of California Museum of
Paleontology and their public outreach program.&lt;br/&gt;