* 0923340
* MRI:  Development of a High Energy, High-Repetition-Rate Laser Diagnostic System for Time-Resolved Investigations of Turbulent Combustion Processes
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Walter Lempert, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2012
* USD 299,658.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

0923340 Sutton

Funding is requested to develop a unique high-pulse-energy (~1 J/pulse) laser
system that will enable quantitative ultra-high-frame-rate ( > 20 kHz) Particle
Imaging Velocimetry (PIV), Planar Laser-Induced Fluorescence (PLIF) and Rayleigh
and Raman scattering diagnostics for temperature, velocity, and species
concentration measurements in multiple dimensions over substantial temporal
records (up to 1000 sequential images). The proposed laser system will be used
to temporally- and spatially-resolve the governing physical and chemical
processes occurring at the finest spatial and temporal scales in turbulent
combustion environments. Combustion processes are inherently time-dependent and
spatially-complex, thus a new era of high-speed imaging diagnostics are critical
for resolving the fluctuating velocity and scalar quantities that ultimately
control the flame stability, combustion efficiency, and chemical species
(pollutant) production. The scarcity of experiments detailing the temporally-
evolving nature of turbulent flames has been severely constrained by the lack of
available laser technology. A successful instrumentation development program
will result in a measurement capability that will facilitate a new fundamental
understanding of chemically reacting flows that cannot be duplicated anywhere in
the world. High-speed measurements of velocity, temperature, and species
concentrations will yield new information on the time-dependent coupling between
key chemical reactions and the highly intermittent turbulent flowfield that has
not been explored in detail previously. As examples, the local fuel/air/product
mixing and combustion stability will be examined in hierarchy of configurations
ranging from laboratory-scale flames to high-pressure, multi-phase flow engine
conditions. In addition, the proposed system will result in a new capability
that encourages the collaboration between experimentalists and theoreticians by
directly supporting the advancement of predictive, multi-scale, time-dependent
combustion modeling.