* 0923560
* MRI:  Development of Mees Spectropolarimeter for the Photosphere and the Chromosphere for Synoptic Observations of the 3-D Magnetic Field Structure of the Solar Atmosphere
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Jeffrey Kuhn, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Vladimir Papitashvili
* 09/30/2013
* USD 1,583,885.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposing team will develop a new
instrument called the Mees Spectropolarimeter for the Photosphere and
Chromosphere (MSPC). The MSPC will be integrated at the Mees Solar Observatory
(MSO) on Mount Haleakala on the island of Maui. The instrument will measure
solar infrared spectral lines and make possible long-term observational studies
of the magnetic and thermodynamic environment of the Sun's photosphere,
chromosphere, and corona. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MSPC will exploit new
technology that will allow, for the first time, imaging spectropolarimetry of an
entire solar active region with a dynamic cadence for observations, as well as
full-disk vector magnetic field studies in the infrared spectrum. When combined
with observations made by other instruments owned by MSO and by the National
Center for Atmospheric Research, data obtained from the MSPC will enable the
study of the full vertical extent of the solar atmosphere.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MSPC will utilize new polarization-maintaining (PM)
fiber-optic technology, as well as new techniques in the fabrication of large-
format PM coherent fiber-optic arrays, for astronomical spectropolarimetry
applications. The advanced instrument design of MSPC, and in particular, the
utilization of new PM fiber-optics, will enhance the throughput and stability of
the instrument, reduce polarization crosstalk, simplify calibration and
correction processes to enhance the accuracy of vector magnetic field
observations, and ultimately reduce the complexity and overall cost of the MSPC
system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MSPC project will not only extend and enhance
the MSO's long-term solar magnetic field observational program on Mount
Haleakala, it will also leverage efforts already funded by the University of
Hawaii and its collaborators to improve the infrastructure and technical
capabilities of the MSO. In addition, the MSPC project will provide a modern
instrument to support the ongoing research and training of future
instrumentalists and solar physicists at the University of Hawaii. This new
instrument will dramatically extend the synoptic observing capability of the US
ground-based solar physics community and complement the science capabilities of
the anticipated Advanced Technology Solar Telescope (ATST). The technologies and
experience acquired from the MSPC project will benefit instrument development
efforts at other solar observatories, and have a significant impact on night-
time spectropolarimetry techniques used in other fields (such as remote sensing
of the Earth from space and military surveillance).