* 0923510
* MRI:Acquisition of X-ray for Photoelectron Spectrometer
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Plamen Atanassov, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2012
* USD 322,000.00

0923510&lt;br/&gt;Fulghum&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal solicits funding to
obtain an X-ray Photoelectron Spectrometer (XPS) for a Surface Characterization
Facility associated with the Center for Emerging Energy Technologies (CEET) at
the University of New Mexico (UNM). X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) is
one of the only surface-specific spectroscopic techniques that provides readily
interpretable, quantitative chemical information. Advances in instrumentation in
the last decade mean that high spatial and energy resolution data can be
acquired for the analysis of heterogeneous samples, including biointerfaces,
complex composite materials, nanostructured materials, ceramics, and catalysts.
A spatial resolution of several microns is possible in XPS images, while angle-
resolved XPS (ARXPS) can be used for non-destructive depth profiling of the top
~ 8 nm of the sample. The applicants propose to replace the current XPS, a 12
year-old Kratos AXIS Ultra with a Kratos AXIS Ultra DLD. The current UNM Surface
Characterization facility is the only XPS facility at an educational institution
in the state of New Mexico, and is available to faculty throughout the state.
Replacing this instrument thus impacts a wide range of research projects. The PI
has over twenty years of experience with XPS and the development of methods for
the analysis of complex samples, and the current facility manager will be
supervising the establishment of the new Surface Characterization Facility.