* 0923668
* Collaborative Research:   Putative nitrate transporter regulates symbiotic nodule development
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Sherry Kitto, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 08/31/2015
* USD 457,105.00

When nitrogen is limited in soils most legume plants form nitrogen-fixing
nodules on their roots in symbiosis with soil bacteria called rhizobia.
Nodulated legumes utilize bioavailable nitrogen produced within the nodule,
reducing nitrogen fertilizer requirements, thereby lowering energy costs and
environmental pollution associated with crop production. Recently a gene called
NIP was found to be essential for the development of symbiotic nodules in the
model legume plant Medicago truncatula. This project seeks to determine the role
of NIP in nodule formation and root differentiation. Experiments will discern
NIP's developmental and temporal patterns of gene expression in nodules and
roots and test how NIP expression at artificially high levels affects
nodulation. Cellular approaches will determine where the NIP gene and encoded
protein are expressed. The biochemical function of the NIP protein, a predicted
transporter, will be assessed in a foreign host as well as directly in wild-type
plants and those with a genetic defect in the NIP gene. Physiological
experiments will discern whether the NIP transporter is acting as part of a
sensor system. The results from these experiments will yield information on the
biochemical function of the NIP protein and provide a context for understanding
NIP function in nodulation and other plant development pathways. The broader
impacts of this project include adding to the knowledge base of nodule
development, part of what makes legume plants valuable in agriculture as a
source of high-protein, high-fiber food for humans and animals. Training
opportunities for a post-doctoral fellow, graduate and undergraduate students in
the areas of molecular and cell biology, genetics and biochemistry will be
provided by this project.