* 0923450
* MRI:  Acquisition of an Analytical, Variable-pressure Scanning Electron Microscope for Geoscience Research and Education at Portland State University
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Kenneth Stedman, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 07/31/2011
* USD 238,943.00

0923450&lt;br/&gt;Hugo&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funds from this grant will support the acquisition
of a variable pressure cell equipped scanning electron microscope (VP-SEM) for
geoscience research and education at Portland State University (PSU). The
instrument will immediately impact the research programs of four faculty member
PIs and their students for investigations spanning the disciplines of
environmental mineralogy including hydrothermal microbial mineralization
processes, igneous petrology and materials research. The VP-SEM will serve
campus wide needs for high resolution microscopy of both biological and non-
biological materials through its incorporation into the PSU Center for Electron
Microscopy and Nanotechnology (CEMN). CEMN currently houses complementary
microscopy instrumentation including an electron microprobe, high vacuum field
emission gun source SEM, transmission electron microscopes and focused ion beam
milling, all of which are supported by full time technicians. The VP-SEM to be
acquired therefore fills an important analytical niche in the suite of
microscopy tools available to faculty and students at PSU. PSU is well
recognized for its strong undergraduate training programs. Microscopy is well
suited to student engagement. The student impact of this acquisition is likely
to be high and many students trained in state-of-the-art microscopy techniques
gain employment in a wide range of industries requiring high resolution
materials characterization (e.g., magnetic media, semiconductors
etc.).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;