* 0923391
* MRI: Development of Combined Holographic and Tomographic PIV Systems for Time Resolved, Multiscale, 3D Velocity Measurements Within Turbulent Shear Flows
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Joseph Katz, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2013
* USD 531,143.00

0923391&lt;br/&gt;Katz&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this proposal is to develop a
system that can perform multiscale, time resolved, 3D velocity measurements
within a finite sample volume of a fluid flow. This instrument integrates and
extends the capability of two state-of-the-art, 3D flow measurement techniques.
There is a wide range of problems that would greatly benefit from availability
of this unique instrument. The near-term objective is to focus on the flow
within high Reynolds number turbulent boundary layers over smooth and rough
walls, with DHM fully resolving the inner part and tomographic PIV covering the
entire boundary layer surrounding the holographic volume. Experiments will be
performed in the optically index-matched facility at JHU that enables
unobstructed near-wall measurements, even between roughness elements. The time-
resolved 3D measurements will provide unprecedented resolution and range of
scales spanning four orders of magnitude. Data will be used for addressing
several fundamental issues including: (i) Impact of outer layer structures on
buffer layer turbulence; (ii) Wall modeling issues related to LES, e.g.
relationships between inertial layer structures and wall stresses, and impact of
unsteadiness and instantaneous streamwise curvature on wall stress; (iii)
Required length scales for fully resolving the flow; and (iv) Relationships
among flow structures generated by roughness and turbulence above the roughness
sublayer. This system will also be used for investigating turbulent canopy
flows.&lt;br/&gt;