* 0923585
* MRI: Development of Enhanced Adaptive Optics System and Infrared Instrumentation for the Shane 3-meter Telescope
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2014
* Donald Gavel, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Knezek
* 07/31/2014
* USD 2,000,000.00

Telescopes on the ground must observe objects in deep space through the
interference of the earth's atmosphere. As light passes through the atmosphere
it gets spread out by turbulence due to wind shear and changes in temperature
and pressure within the atmospheric layers which effectively diminishes the
resolving power of earth-based telescopes. This difficulty can be overcome to a
large extent by relatively new techniques employing Laser Guide Stars (LGS) and
Adaptive Optics (AO) where a bright laser illuminates a patch of sky near the
target object. The laser's light is absorbed and then re-emitted by sodium atoms
in the upper atmosphere, above much of the interfering lower atmosphere. The
return signal can then be used to track the time-dependent atmospheric
distortion of the light. Adaptive Optics uses this information to rapidly adjust
optics in the telescope's instrumentation to restore the image to (nearly) what
would be seen from above the atmosphere. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of
California's Lick Observatory has been a leader in the development of adaptive
optics techniques for astronomy. They are now developing an improved system
using new micro-electrical mechanical systems (MEMS) technology to be installed
on the Lick Observatory's three-meter Shane Telescope. This new system will very
significantly improve the sharpness of the image delivered by the telescope to
its instruments. Dr. Donald Gavel of the University of California-Santa Cruz is
leading this effort. The new AO system is being funded by the National Science
Foundation through its Major Research Instrumentation Program.