* 0923038
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Mass Spectrometric System for Determination of Biogeochemical Fluxes Between the Atmospheric and Marine Environment
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Daniel Knopf, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 09/30/2012
* USD 623,118.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The PIs are requesting funds to acquire a scanning
mobility particle sizer, a Proton Transfer Time of Flight mass spectrometer
(PRToFMS), and an isotope ratio mass spectrometer. This suite of instrumentation
will allow the PIs to examine biogeochemical properties and reaction mechanisms,
and allow modeling of processes that govern the exchange of organic gaseous and
condensed matter between the marine and atmospheric environments. Research
efforts enabled by the proposed instrumentation include investigations into: the
organic fraction of primary marine aerosols; marine biogenically driven volatile
organic compound (VOC) emissions; compound-specific isotopic composition to
differentiate between marine and terrestrial emissions; isotopic composition of
carbon monoxide trapped in ice cores; chemical transformation of organic aerosol
particles; effect of chemical aging on ice nucleation; polychlorinated biphenyl
transformations on mineral surfaces; development of novel catalysts for
photocatalytic reduction of carbon dioxide into hydrocarbons; sedimentary
diagenetic processes and seabed fluxes; and reconstructing food web structure in
shallow enclosed bays. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed instrumentation will provide expanded analytical capability for the
School of Marine and Atmospheric Sciences, as well as across Stony Brook
University and Brookhaven National Laboratory. Additionally, the proposed
instrumentation will be incorporated into the existing REU program at the
institution, as well as into the Science and Technology Entry summer residential
program, providing hands-on training opportunities for both undergraduates and
secondary school students.&lt;br/&gt;