* 0923461
* MRI:  Acquisition of a High-Resolution Environmental Scanning Electron Microscope and Focused Ion-Beam Milling System
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Estelle Levetin, University of Tulsa
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 09/30/2012
* USD 1,012,724.00

0923461&lt;br/&gt;Teeters&lt;br/&gt;University of
Tulsa&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary: Modern scientific endeavors rely
heavily on the availability of cutting edge research instrumentation. We are
requesting an environmental scanning electron microscope/focused ion beam system
(ESEM/FIB) to address instrumentation needs for The University of Tulsa and
other colleges and universities across the state of Oklahoma The requested
instrument will impact all Departments in the College of Engineering and Natural
Sciences at the University of Tulsa. Specifically, the instrument will enable
research advances through the proposed projects in microelectronics, self-
healing materials, alternative energy sources, semiconductor physics, and
catalysis. Finally, the instrument will be utilized in wide variety of teaching
labs spanning all departments in the College of Engineering and Natural Sciences
at TU. This instrument will also make cutting edge scientific techniques
available to a variety of unique and underserved groups through an aggresive
outreach program. The program will include web-based operation of the microscope
and teacher training to allow integration with sites ranging from rural
elementary schools to small regional colleges, including locations with
minorities under-represented in science. In addition to the proposed research
projects and outreach, TU recently acquired the directorship of the Gilcrease
museum, which houses a large collection of Native American art and artifacts.
The ability to utilize this instrument for the scientific study and preservation
of cultural heritage is exciting and replicated in only a handful of
locations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Layman Summary: Environmental scanning electron
microscopes (ESEM) allow the direct inspection of micron and nanometer-sized
features on virtually any object; features ranging down to 1/50,000 of a human
hair in size. These sophisticated microscopes are the workhorses of modern
materials science and biology research. A focused ion beam system (FIB) is
basically a molecular-level machining tool that allows material to be either
removed or added on the scale of a few nanometers; enabling, for example, the
creation of microscopic current collectors for nanobatteries developed at The
University of Tulsa. The integration of these two instruments into a single
system allows for simultaneous imaging and ion beam operation and makes possible
a variety of advanced characterization techniques such as serial sectioning. In
this process, thin slices of material are removed with the FIB and the new
surface is imaged with the SEM. Repeating the procedure many times yields a
series of images that can be used to make a 3-D reconstruction of the internal
structure of advanced materials like the unique self- healing plastics or the
specialized strains of algae for biofuel production that are subjects of
investigation at the University of Tulsa. In addition to supporting the research
agenda of the university, the instrument will be an essential tool in many
classes and the focus of an aggressive outreach program. Remote operation
capabilities for the microscope will allow integration with sites ranging from
rural elementary schools to small regional colleges across the state of
Oklahoma. The instrument will also become a centerpiece in the development of
research and teaching programs associated with the Gilcrease museum, which
houses a world renowned collection of Native American art and artifacts.