* 0923335
* MRI: Acquisition of a State-of-Art X-Ray Diffraction System for Investigation of Nano/Micro/Bio-Materials and Devices
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2011
* Shaik Jeelani, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 09/30/2011
* USD 292,886.00

0923335&lt;br/&gt;Cheng&lt;br/&gt;Auburn U.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary: The research activities at Auburn University and Tuskegee University
have shifted toward nano-/micro-structured materials and devices, which requires
an instrument capable of characterizing the local structure, orientation and
residual stress in thin films and textured materials. The objective of this
proposal is to acquire a state-of-the-art X-ray diffracto-meter to fulfill the
diverse and urgent needs of researchers at both institutions. In particular, the
proposed system will generate an X-ray beam that can be focused into a sub-
millimeter spot to provide spatial resolution of crystal structure and
orientation. The system is equipped with a multiwire proportional chamber area
detector capability of detecting both strong and weak diffraction features. The
system software is capable of analyzing the 2-D diffraction patterns, phase
identification, pattern indexing, texture mapping/pole figure analysis and
strain/particle size analysis. The system is also equipped with a high
temperature stage capable to allow XRD experiments to be performed at
temperatures up to 900°C. The proposed instrument will impact a wide variety of
research projects with a total funding level of nearly $25M and involving more
than 80 faculty members and 250 stu-dents/postdocs. Some examples of projects
impacted by the new instrument include the development of micro/nano-
electromechanical system (MEMS/NEMS) devices for applica-tions such as energy
harvesting and memory devices. The project will also impact activities related
to the development of sensors for improving public safety in both the food and
transportation industries as well as clean energy conversion technology,
including the development of coating materials for extending the life of solid
oxide fuel cells (SOFC) and improved catalysts for proton exchange membrane
(PEM) fuel cells. In addition, x-ray diffraction is part of the laboratory
training at the undergraduate and graduate levels, so the instrument will also
enhance the educational programs at Auburn and Tuskegee
Universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Layman Summary: The research activities at
Auburn University and Tuskegee University have shifted toward nano-/micro-
structured materials and devices, which requires an instrument capable of
characterizing the local structure, orientation and residual stress in thin
films and textured materials. The objective of this proposal is to acquire a
state-of-the-art X-ray diffracto-meter to fulfill the diverse and urgent needs
of researchers at both institutions. The proposed instrument will impact a wide
variety of research projects with a total funding level of nearly $25M and
involving more than 80 faculty members and 250 students/postdocs. Some examples
of projects impacted by the new instrument include the development of
micro/nano-electromechanical system (MEMS/NEMS) devices for applications such as
energy harvesting and memory devices. The project will also impact activities
related to the development of sensors for improving public safety in both the
food (Auburn University Detection and Food Safety Center) and transportation
(FAA Center of Excellence in Cabin Environment Research) industries. The
instrument will support clean energy conversion technology, including the
development of coating materials for extending the life of solid oxide fuel
cells (SOFC) and improved catalysts for proton exchange membrane (PEM) fuel
cells. In addition, x-ray diffraction is part of the laboratory training at the
undergraduate and graduate levels, so the instrument will also enhance the
educational programs at Auburn and Tuskegee Universities.