* 0923861
* SBIR Phase II:   Active Device for Reliable Cleaning of Feeding Tubes
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2009,06/30/2014
* Roger Bagwell, Actuated Medical, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2014
* USD 1,370,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
Phase II project will continue development of the Tube-Clear(TM) device to clear
clogged and sluggish feeding tubes, satisfying a critical medical need and
reaching a viable commercial market. When compromised patients are unable to
swallow food or medication, feeding tubes are used to administer medication and
nutrition. A clog leaves the patient without medication or nutrition for hours,
or even days, and is extremely frustrating to both patient and caregiver.
Approximately 410,000 PEG (long-term) tubes and 5 million NG (short-term) tubes
are placed each year in the U.S. Each type of tube presents specific challenges
for feeding, clogging and cleaning. The Tube-Clear(TM) PEG prototype cleaned a
clog of food and ground medication, in less than one minute, that could not be
easily removed using any other available approach. Demonstration of the PEG
alpha-prototype at four focus groups, for over 20 nurses from a variety of
clinical settings, produced an overwhelmingly positive response toward the
device. Phase II (following on Phase IB) will further develop both the PEG tube
and NG tube cleaners to beta-prototypes, take the devices through clinical
trials, and establish manufacturing protocols, all under a Food and Drug
Administration compliant quality system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Tube-Clear
will ease the burden on nursing staff and patients dealing with the frustration
of clogged and sluggish feeding tubes. A structured financial and technical plan
has been put in place using a combination of funds from SBIR (Phase I, IB, II
and IIB), the State of Pennsylvania, Commercial Partners, and equity investment
to reach specific milestones over a 2.5 year period. The NSF Phase I project
kicked off this development effort with a highly successfully Alpha prototype
for PEG tubes, which was tested in a series of nursing focus groups, resulting
in extremely positive reviews. The Tube-Clear for PEG cleaning has an
anticipated market launch date in 2010, followed by a NG tube cleaning device
market launch in 2011. By 2013, Piezo Resonance Innovations (PRII) anticipates
revenue for the Tube-Clear (TM) of $25-50 Million. Three commercial partners,
with presence in the enteral feeding market, have indicated strong interest in
the device and would provide access to their paths to market, marketing staff,
and device development expertise. They have also expressed willingness to
contribute financially, potentially as Phase IIB partners. PRII staff will also
teach guest lectures on medical device design in the Penn State School of
Nursing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;