* 0923963
* SBIR Phase II:  Fiber-optic System for Fast Non-contact Measurements of Optical Structure of Human eye
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2009,04/30/2012
* Filipp Ignatovich, Lumetrics, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 04/30/2012
* USD 505,179.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project is aimed at
developing a high speed and high sensitivity system for measuring optical
dimensions of human eye, such as the total axial length, corneal thickness and
the location and thickness of the crystalline lens, in a non-contact manner
using infrared light, invisible to the eye. This task is accomplished by
improving the existing technique of time domain low-coherence interferometry. In
case of a live patient, who cannot be immobilized for steady measurements, speed
and sensitivity of the measurements are especially important to achieve high
accuracy and precision. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this
research are aimed at benefiting large part of the population that suffers from
cataract and other vision problems. The U.S. population of over 65 years old
expected to increase to over 70 million in 2030. Therefore, there is a dramatic
need for tools to treat the wave of eye diseases and problems inherent to such
population. Information on the structure of the eye is required in eye
surgeries, including those that deal with replacing the crystalline lenses
affected by cataract. The proposed research will result in an array of critical
tools aimed at mapping out the eye, for medical research and for treatment of
the diseases.