* 0923537
* MRI: Acquisition of High-Field NMR Instrumentation for the Colorado School of Mines with Outreach to the Denver Metro Region
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Steven Dec, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2012
* USD 551,296.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award from the Major Research
Instrumentation (MRI) program, Daniel M. Knauss and colleagues Stephen G. Boyes,
Steven F. Dec, Andrew M. Herring and Carolyn A. Koh from the Colorado School of
Mines (CSM) will acquire a 500 MHz NMR spectrometer for use with liquids, a
pulsed-field diffusion probe and a new console to upgrade a 400 MHz spectrometer
for solids. The suite of instruments will support research targeted towards
renewable/alternative energy and materials such as 1) hydrogen fuel cells, 2)
synthesis and characterization of organic compounds and polymers, 3) studies of
gas hydrates, 4) polymer modified nanostructures to use in electronic devices,
5) mechanistic pathways of chemical transport in membranes, and 6) preparation
of plastics from bio-components. It is noted that the instrumentation will be
available to faculty members in Chemistry and Chemical Engineering and that
there will be collaborative research and educational projects with higher
educational institutions and national laboratories in the Denver Metro Region,
including the University of Colorado at Denver, Red Rocks Community College,
Metropolitan State College of Denver, and the National Renewable Energy
Laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy
is one of the most powerful tools available to chemists for the elucidation of
the structure of molecules. It is used to identify unknown substances, to
characterize specific arrangements of atoms within molecules, and to study the
dynamics of interactions between molecules in solutions and in solids. Access to
state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential to chemists who are carrying out
frontier research. The results from these NMR studies will have an impact in
chemistry, materials research and renewable/alternative energy. These
instruments will be an integral part of teaching as well as research.