* 0923523
* MRI: Development of a Scalable Energy Efficient Datacenter (SEED)
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Amin Vahdat, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2012
* USD 1,399,999.00

Proposal #: CNS 09-23523 &lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Papen, George Fainman, Y.; Vahdat,
Amin M.&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of California - San Diego&lt;br/&gt;
La Jolla, CA 92093-0934&lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI/Dev.: Development of a Scalable
Energy Efficient Datacenter (SEED)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded
under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This project, building
a Scalable Energy Efficient Datacenter (SEED), develops an integrated solution
that encompasses physical layer hardware, protocols, and topologies that can
provide the expected size and performance scaling for future data centers while
minimizing the cost and energy per switched bit. The work creates the knowledge
base required for the development of next generation scalable, energy efficient
datacenters. Unique features of this instrument include novel statistical
multiplexing modules to reduce connection complexity, a circuit switched optical
interconnection fabric, and the ability to accommodate novel protocols,
components and subsystems in a realistic system environment. With a design based
entirely on commodity components and a non-blocking and scalable switch, the
baseline configuration of the SEED instrument will connect more than 250
servers, each operating at 10 Gb/s. The fully configured instrument is a hybrid
electrical packet/optically circuit-switched network designed to efficiently
route large data flows into a circuit-switched optical core utilizing an optical
switch from a previously funded MRI, Quartzite. The instrument supports several
newly established multidisciplinary projects including the ERC Center for
Integrated Access Networks (CIAN), the MRI GreenLight project, the Center of
Interdisciplinary Science for Art, Architecture, and Archaeology (CISA3), and
projects at the San Diego Supercomputer center. Specifically, SEED is expected
to create the technology base for an order of magnitude improvement in both the
cost and energy per switched bit. This will be accomplished by the development
of new protocols and topologies, measuring and optimizing application dependent
traffic patterns, providing critical system-driven specifications of a
technology roadmap for the development of novel photonic technologies, and
acting as a platform for training the next generation network engineers that are
equally versed in both optical and electrical networks. The following four
issues are associated with the SEED instrument.&lt;br/&gt;- Design of flow
scheduling techniques for fat trees that fit both electrical and hybrid
systems,&lt;br/&gt;- Algorithms for fault tolerance (components in large scale
communication switches fail),&lt;br/&gt;- Optimal Wavelength Division
Multiplexing (WDM) design (uses multiple lasers and transmits several
wavelengths of light (lambdas) simultaneously over a single optical
fiber)&lt;br/&gt;- Technology road map based on findings on performance metrics
pertaining to building, testing, and operating the initial optical aggregation,
transmission, and switching hardware to inform the Center for Integrated Access
Networks (CIAN) ERC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The engine of the
21st century economy, the creation of wealth through information processing,
utilizes data centers as its cornerstones. Hence, technologies that can enable
larger and more energy efficient information processing will affect many, if not
every, aspect of modern life. Access to efficient remote processing should
dramatically reduce the amount of physical transport and avoid the expense and
human costs of unnecessary commuting, minimize environmental impact from
infrastructure and pollution, substantially reduce our dependence on energy
imports, improve educational opportunities, enhance the distribution of medical
services, and increase overall national security. Thus, the infrastructure to
carry these services constitutes a precious national resource, perhaps as
precious as the air, rail, and road transportation. Indeed, it should enable
this country to better compete globally.