* 0923316
* MRI: Acquisition of Light Scattering Instruments for Nanoparticle Characterization
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Richard Weiss, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 09/30/2013
* USD 108,596.00

0923316&lt;br/&gt;Van Keuren&lt;br/&gt;Georgetown U.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This
award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public
Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary: Static and dynamic light
scattering provide real-time, noninvasive characterization of molecular masses
and/or particle sizes. They are powerful techniques for characterizing materials
such as polymer dispersion, pigments, colloids, etc. This proposal is for the
acquisition of a suite of light scattering instruments to be used by researchers
in the departments of Chemistry and Physics at Georgetown University. A large
amount of the research activities in these two departments involves
macromolecular and nanoparticles systems, including studies of macromolecular
gels, polymer colloids and molecular aggregation and self-assembly. The main
components of this instrument suite will be a multi-angle static light
scattering apparatus, a dynamic light scattering attachment, and a differential
refractometer, all from Wyatt Technology Corporation (Santa Barbara, CA). With
these, we will be able to measure particle sizes in the range of several
nanometers to several microns and more importantly, look at the time dependence
of the assembly of molecules to form gels, crystals or nanoparticles. The
instruments will be used primarily by five faculty members in the Physics and
Chemistry departments, as well as their students and other collaborators, on
projects ranging from studies of the crystallization of malaria pigment to the
formation of gels to crystallization related to kidney and bile stone formation.
The acquisition of these instruments will also have a significant effect on the
already considerable amount of interdisciplinary activities among the science
departments at Georgetown and provide an opportunity for undergraduate and
graduate students to develop expertise in this important analytical
method.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Layman Summary: When light strikes small particles,
part of it is scattered in other directions; this has many effects experienced
in daily life, from the ability to see dust particles in a beam of sunlight to
the color of the sky. How light is scattered can be used as a powerful
measurement technique for learning about the objects from which it scatters. In
particular, light scattering methods are useful for measuring sizes and shapes
of objects too small to observe with optical microscopes, such as nanoparticles.
A number of scientists at Georgetown University are involved in studying how
nanoparticles form and are developing new types of nanomaterials. This proposal
is for acquiring a set of state of the art light scattering instruments that
will enable these materials to be measured in real time and without disturbing
their syntheses. One instrument will be for static light scattering: measuring
the angular spread of light as it passes through a suspension of particles. The
other will be for dynamic light scattering, which uses the rapid fluctuations in
the intensity of the scattered light to determine particle sizes. The
instruments will be used primarily by five faculty members in the Physics and
Chemistry departments, as well as their students and other collaborators, on
projects ranging from studies of the crystallization of malaria pigment to the
formation of gels to crystallization related to kidney and bile stone formation.
The acquisition of these instruments will also have a significant effect on the
already considerable amount of interdisciplinary activities among the science
departments at Georgetown and provide an opportunity for undergraduate and
graduate students to develop expertise in this important analytical method.