* 0923874
* Vision and Change in Biology Undergraduate Education: A View for the 21st Century
* EHR,DUE
* 03/01/2009,12/31/2011
* Yolanda George, American Association for the Advancement of Science
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 12/31/2011
* USD 984,129.00

Biology has changed radically in the last few decades and so has what we know
about how people learn. It is time to reconsider how we approach biology
undergraduate education. To this end the American Association for the
Advancement of Science sponsored a series of conversations to enable a wide
spectrum of the biological sciences community to provide insight into the
changes that need to take place and how best to effect those changes. The report
from those conversations is being produced and will serve as the basis for this
project, a major meeting of faculty, students, administrators, professional
societies to address the need for change and exchange information concerning
effective efforts to upgrade undergraduate biology so that the biology taught to
undergraduates reflects the approaches and concepts current in the discipline
and takes advantage of new teaching technologies and findings. The published
proceedings and the meeting itself are designed to produce an informed biology
community and enhanced undergraduate education in the discipline, resulting in a
transformative activity that engages a broad spectrum of the science community.

Intellectual Merit: The intellectual merit of this project resides in the
opportunity to have a vigorous discussion and exchange of information on ways to
upgrade biology undergraduate education so that the content taught, the
experiences offered to students and the pedagogy used truly represents the needs
and resources of the 21st century. The proceedings will provide a resource for
those engaged in biology education but who could not attend the meeting itself.

Broader Impact: The broader impact of this project is in the diversity of the
people who attend the conference, the diversity of the subdisciplines within
biology and the institutions of higher education they represent, and the varied
skills and experiences they bring to changes in approach to undergraduate
education The dissemination plan includes both a printed and web based
publication and is flexible enough to encompass other methods developed at the
conference itself. In addition this meeting will include input from the three
major funding agencies currently supporting advances in undergraduate education,
the National Science Foundation, the National Institutes of Health and the
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, thus enlarging the scope of its influence.