* 0923495
* MRI Acquisition: An ICP-MS Facility at the University of Utah
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Michael Dorais, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2012
* USD 740,048.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The goal of this project is to create an inductively coupled
plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) facility with capabilities to study trace
elemental content and isotopic ratios for gaseous and liquid solutions,
colloids, minerals, fossils, gels and tissue. Research areas to be initially
addressed are: 1) carbonates as records of environmental and paleoenvironmental
change; 2) colloid transport and trace elements cycling in aquatic systems; 3)
dating of archeological and geological material; 4) earth transformations caused
by geological forces; 5) provenance studies of carbonates, hair and organic
materials; 6) elemental distribution in tissues and fossils; 7) origin and
evolution of magmas, igneous and metamorphic rocks and ore deposits; and 8)
correlations of volcanic ashes for the study of stratigraphic sequences. The
facility will have: 1) a multicollector ICP-MS; 2) a collision cell quadrupole
ICP-MS; 3) a laser ablation sampling system; 4) peripheral equipment for
introducing liquid/gas samples; and 5) clean lab space for wet chemistry and
sample handling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chemical elements move around the Earth
via geological, biological and anthropological processes. Even when the
concentration for some of these elements is tiny (a few parts per billion), they
can impact ecosystems and organisms in crucial ways as beneficial or damaging
components. In addition, the concentration changes of these trace elements
through sediments or rocks can be related to the geological, environmental and
climatic variations that occurred during their formation. In the case of
fossils, elemental variation can also reveal diet changes and in the case of
tissue, elucidate physiological mechanisms. Finally, those trace elements that
are radioactive can be used to obtain geological ages. When coupled with a
laser, ICP-MS can directly detect these minute amounts in solids, gels or tissue
without laborious chemical procedures. The research achieved using the facility
will contribute to solutions to regional and national technological problems,
specifically in the fields of environmental sustainability, forensics, energy
and mineral resources, and advanced materials.&lt;br/&gt;