* 0923893
* SBIR Phase II:   Dual-Wavelength Diffractive Optics for Absorbance-Modulation Optical Lithography
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2009,11/30/2012
* Henry Smith, LUMARRAY LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 11/30/2012
* USD 734,975.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase II project aims to develop an optical-maskless-lithography
technology that is capable of high resolution, high throughput, flexibility, low
cost, and extendibility. Current lithography technologies suffer from the
problems of high tool costs, high mask costs, and inflexibility (in the case of
optical-projection lithography), or high tool costs, very low throughputs, and
high complexity (in the case of scanning-electron-beam lithography). The
emerging Zone-Plate-Array-Lithography (ZPAL) technology and its optical
extension to sub-100 nanometers via absorbance-modulation optical lithography
(AMOL) will mitigate these issues, while providing unprecedented flexibility in
nanopatterning. The proposed project covers three major thrusts: firstly, the
manufacture of zone-plate arrays containing over 1000 zone plates, each with a
numerical-aperture (NA) greater than 0.85; second, the manufacture of dichromat
arrays containing over 1000 zone plates, each with a numerical-aperture (NA)
greater than 0.85; and lastly, the design of high-efficiency lenses to overcome
many of limitations of conventional zone plates and dichromats.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is
the creation of a fabrication tool which will enable a new paradigm in the
development and manufacture of nanostructures by sharply reducing the
development-cycle time and manufacturing costs. At present, the tools that are
available for the creation of such nanostructures are highly limited in
flexibility, resolution, cost and throughput. Being maskless, this technology
provides flexibility by enabling the designers of nanostructures to quickly
realize their designs in hardware for prototyping and even low-volume
manufacturing. This new tool could potentially benefit a wide spectrum of
industries including micro-electro-mechanical devices (MEMs), nano-electro-
mechanical devices (NEMs), nano-electronics, nano-magnetics, integrated optics,
photonics, biochips, and microfluidics.