* 0923005
* MRI:   Acquisition of a high resolution Accela-LTQ FT Ultra mass spectrometer system
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Basil Nikolau, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2012
* USD 821,504.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award funds the acquisition of a
Bruker-Daltonics SolariXHybrid FTMS Bundle mass spectrometer system at the Iowa
State University WM Keck Metabolomics Research Laboratory, and empowers
multidisciplinary research from a wide sweep of departments that integrate
disciplines of chemistry and biochemistry, biological sciences and engineering.
The new instrument system will provide researchers with unprecedented data
concerning biological molecules and thus enhance the research infrastructure of
the University and the State. The projects supported by the new instrument
system attempt to meet the challenge of deciphering functional understanding of
genome expression at the metabolic level, and are a mixture of hypothesis-driven
research on the structure and regulation of specific metabolic and gene
networks, and high-throughput global profiling projects that seek to generate
hypotheses concerning gene functionalities. The impact of these research
projects will be greatly enhanced the SolariXHybrid FTMS Bundle mass
spectrometer system because researchers will be able to more rigorously
determine the chemical identities of metabolites and hence generate and test
more robust hypotheses concerning the metabolic functionalities of gene products
and gene networks.

In addition, this instrument will provide faculty a vehicle for the multi-
disciplinary research-based training of students, who will gain insights into
how to conduct modern metabolic studies, integrating advances in chemistry and
genomics biology. Post-docs, graduate students, undergraduate students from Iowa
State University and neighboring colleges, and high-school students and teachers
from the State of Iowa will also participate in research. These latter outreach
activities will be coordinated through summer workshops, internship programs and
NSF-REU programs that are already in place through the Centers (e.g., CBiRC) and
projects (e.g., The Arabidopsis 2010 Metabolomics Consortium Project) that will
utilize the instrument. Therefore students will be broadly mentored and trained
to meet the emerging technological challenges of the 21st century. Results from
the research projects will be disseminated through student and faculty
presentations at regional or national meetings, and through publications in the
peer-reviewed literature.