* 0923217
* MRI: Acquisition of Instrumentation for an Integrated South Florida Cloud-Aerosol-Rain-OBserving System (CAROB)
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Joseph Prospero, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Bradley F. Smull
* 08/31/2013
* USD 822,473.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This effort supported through NSF's
Major Research Instrumentation program will procure, integrate and apply a suite
of instrumentation to enable a community of scientists at the University of
Miami and collaborating institutions to study aerosol-cloud interactions in the
atmosphere over South Florida and adjacent waters. This environment, with its
seasonally-shifting airflow regimes, experiences conditions ranging from
incursions of dust-laden airmasses originating over the Saharan desert during
the summer months, polluted airmasses surging southeastward over the North
American continent during winter, and marine aerosols during more quiescent
periods. This variable yet recurring aerosol climatology is coupled with
meteorological settings ranging from a Trade Wind regime (in summer) to
baroclinic frontal passages (in winter) to occasional hurricanes (late
summer/early fall), thus providing an excellent environment in which to examine
linkages among aerosols, atmospheric transmission/absorption of solar and
infrared radiation, and cloud processes. Requested equipment includes components
for a refurbished 94 GHz cloud radar and wind profiler, an aerosol detecting
lidar, microwave radiometer, cloud condensation nuclei counter, a pair of sun
photometers, and a ceilometer. This combination of new and revamped
instrumentation is further leveraged by existing equipment including a 9.4 GHz
(X-band) radar, 94 GHz radar components and a container/van allowing mobile
operations, in addition to existing research and technical expertise among
University of Miami staff. Synchronized observations by this assembled suite of
aerosol and remote cloud sensors will be used to provide frequent, routine and
long-term measurements of the sort needed to represent cloud-aerosol
interactions in a statistically meaningful way. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this effort centers upon efforts to better quantify
aerosol impacts on cloud microphysics and macrophysics ("cloud feedbacks")
within the climate system, and extend to improved understanding of processes
involved in modulating the strength and development of tropical cyclones and
other more commonly occurring storms. Broader impacts will be derived through
enhancement of the University's research infrastructure and use of these
datastreams in classroom and graduate research training, including development
of a class module on "The Florida Climate." Outreach and dissemination will
include display of data on both the Virginia Key and Coral Gables campuses of
the University of Miami as well as web-based distribution. The observing system
will serve as a focal point for campus tours by K-12 student groups, and
measurements will be contributed to existing global databases (including AERONET
and MPLNET) utilized by the larger scientific community.