* 0923661
* Molecular Regulation of Matrix Assembly Mechanics
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Lewis Romer, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 06/30/2013
* USD 579,192.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Intellectual Merit Essential aspects of cellular life include survival,
orientation, movement, growth, and maturation. Efforts to understand the
regulation of these processes has intrigued scientists for decades, and may
ultimately provide insights into how organisms develop and adapt to
environmental change. The microenvironment immediately surrounding cells makes
up the extracellular matrix, which itself is a complex mixture of proteins that
are produced and organized by the cells themselves. This matrix is a source of
chemical and mechanical signals that direct essential cellular functions. This
project will characterize the interactions between biochemical regulatory
pathways and mechanical events that occur during extracellular matrix assembly.
This research is motivated by new data generated with a quantitative assay that
simultaneously measures the assembly of individual matrix fibers and the pulling
force that cells exert at sites of contact with the matrix. This is accomplished
by plating cells on groups of silicon posts with defined mechanical properties.
Cells form individual attachment sites at the top of each post. Cells then pull
on the posts, and the directionality and quantity of pulling force that a cell
exerts at each attachment site is determined by measuring the resulting movement
of the post. Results from these studies identified two mechanical processes and
two chemical regulatory systems that drive the progress of matrix fiber
assembly: 1) The progressive movement of cell pulling force toward the cell
center; 2) the relaxation of compression in the periphery of the cell; 3) the
activation of an enzyme called Focal Adhesion Kinase; and 4) the deactivation of
protein called mDia1 that organizes the cell skeleton. This research program
will advance these findings, and provide insights that will resolve basic
questions regarding the molecular signaling processes that focus force and shape
strain in the cell during extracellular matrix assembly. The principal
investigator has produced novel tools, assembled a world-class multidisciplinary
team, and employed outstanding resources for cellular and molecular imaging and
force measurements that will enhance the scientific impact of the work.

Broader Impacts This project will further efforts to build a challenging and
supportive interdisciplinary environment in which students of diverse
backgrounds can build critical thinking and presentation skills, and develop new
tools that benefit the scientific community. Fruits of these efforts to date
include the following: the promotion and inclusion of a diverse group of
students and postdoctoral trainees including female and underrepresented
minority groups in hypothesis-driven and discovery science; the initiation of an
interactive joint lab meeting incorporating labs from Biochemistry, Biophysics,
Cell Biology, and Engineering at Johns Hopkins in order to provide opportunities
for building presentation and experimental design skills for students in a
collaborative forum with multiple scientific perspectives; research
collaborations including an NSF Instrumentation grant that has recently made a
new, state-of-the-art atomic force microscope available to the wider Hopkins
community; innovation in research ethics teaching; and the provision of new
image processing tools for free download for unrestricted use by the scientific
community that are now in use for investigators across the U.S. and in France,
India, and Australia. The current research project will advance these endeavors.
An opportunity to learn new techniques for the measurement of interactions
between signaling molecules will be created through a new collaboration with a
research team at the Van Andel Research Institute. Further interdisciplinary and
inter-institutional collaborations will be bolstered by this project through
interactions with a matrix and cell biology lab at Duke University, and with
biophysics and biology labs at Johns Hopkins. The breadth of expertise and
resources that are available in this group will optimize the success of the
research program, and ensure wide exposure of students to multiple disciplines.
The breadth and synergy of the program will forge new links between divergent
disciplines and provide other investigators with novel paradigms at the
interface between physics and biology.