* 0923835
* Small GTPase Regulators of Intraflagellar Transport (IFT)
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2010,02/29/2016
* Hongmin Qin, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 02/29/2016
* USD 629,175.00

Intellectual merit. As evolutionally conserved cellular appendages, cilia and
flagella are important in many aspects of cellular physiology and development.
They are assembled and maintained by a motility process called intraflagellar
transport (IFT), which is characterized as the rapid, bidirectional movement of
large protein particles between the flagellar base and the distal tip of the
flagellum. IFT machinery includes three key components: the IFT particle, the
anterograde motors and the retrograde motor. In the anterograde direction from
the flagellar base to the flagellar tip, IFT particles are transported by either
the heterotrimeric kinesin-II motor alone or kinesin-II together with the
homodimer OSM-3 motor. In the retrograde direction, IFT is powered by the motor
protein cytoplasmic dynein 1b. This project addresses how IFT motility is
regulated at the molecular level by using the model organism Chlamydomonas. The
research focuses on IFT27 and IFT25, two candidate regulatory subunits of the
IFT particle. IFT27 is a Rab-like small GTPase and essential for normal
flagellar assembly. IFT25 is a phosphoprotein and directly interacts with IFT27.
This project is aimed at identifying the key steps of IFT that are controlled by
IFT27 and IFT25, and the proteins that regulate the IFT27 conformational switch.
In addition, the functional significance of IFT25 phosphorylation on IFT
motility will be investigated. The results of the research should be of great
interest to the field of ciliogenesis in general, where detailed functional
analysis of IFT particle proteins in the regulation of IFT motility has rarely
been done. In addition, the results will potentially contribute to other fields
with the involvement of cilia, such as development and reproductive biology.

Broader impacts. The undergraduate and graduate students involved in this
project will receive training in cell biology, biochemistry, molecular biology
and genetics. These developing scientists will present their research findings
at conferences and publish their results in scientific journals. Moreover, this
project will also increase regional educational activities such as science fairs
to simulate the next generation to pursue science paths.