* 0923513
* MRI:  Acquisition of Solexa Genome Analyzer to enable collaborative molecular, environmental, and computational research
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Dennis Hedgecock, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2012
* USD 562,953.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New revolutionary technologies have
been developed enabling scientists with the ability to rapidly determine the
sequence of large amounts of DNA. This will allow scientists in nearly all
biological disciplines to rapidly move forward on projects that seek to
understand the molecular basis of disease and development, to understand how
differences at the DNA level leads to differences in individuals in a
population, and to understand at a molecular level the different organisms that
contribute both positively and negatively to the environment. This type of
knowledge will have profound impacts on our understanding of basic biology and
how variations in DNA sequence influence whether an individual gets a disease or
how differences in ecological niches results in changes to the environment. The
acquisition of a next-generation sequencing machine will allow a broad group of
scientists at University of Southern California to address all of these types of
questions with scientists that span the disciplines of Molecular and
Computational Biology, Marine Environmental Biology and Neurobiology. The
administration at University of Southern California has fostered an environment
of innovation and collaboration, which is critical for success in the use of
this next-generation platform, since the generation and analyses of this data
requires expertise in very disparate academic discipline.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, one of the primary goals of faculty at
University of Southern California is training the next generation of scientists
and the acquisition of the next-generation sequencing machine will ensure that
these students receive the most cutting-edge training. The purchase of the
sequencing machine will tie in with the Center for Excellence and Genomics at
University of Southern California that has a robust training program that
ensures that underrepresented minorities are trained in cutting edge biology
using genomic and computational approaches.