* 0923354
* MRI:  Acquisition of an Analytical Field-Emission Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) for Multipurpose Imaging, microanalysis, and education
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Jayma Moore, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 09/30/2012
* USD 566,997.00

0923354&lt;br/&gt;Katti&lt;br/&gt;North Dakota State U.
Fargo&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This award is funded under the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary &lt;br/&gt;This project from North Dakota State University aims for
acquisition of a remotely operable analytical field-emission scanning electron
microscope (FE-SEM) with energy-dispersive X-ray spectrometry, along with
specimen preparation equipment. These instruments for shared use will support
state-of-the-art imaging and microanalysis, as well as research training,
classroom education, and outreach. The NDSU Electron Microscopy Center is a
multidisciplinary multi-user facility. The current SEMs at the center are not FE
instruments and thus have limited application in several material systems. A FE
instrument will allow high resolution imaging at lower voltages suitable for
such material systems. Versatile high-resolution SEM imaging and microanalysis
are essential to support current research in areas including medicinal
chemistry, nanomaterials, nanocomposites, polymeric coatings, biomaterials,
tissue engineering, environmental engineering, and also biological materials
such as soft and hard tissues. Remote operation will benefit the largest
possible number of scientists and potential scientists. The proposed equipment
will also be a much-needed resource for NDSU's new PhD program in Materials and
Nanotechnology. The FE SEM will also support local and regional industries. The
FE SEM will provide hands-on experience to broaden opportunities for research,
training, and outreach for faculty, graduate students, and undergraduates from
NDSU and other area colleges, and K-12 teachers and students. The proposed
instrumentation will strengthen participation in North Dakota?s EPSCoR NATURE
(Nurturing American Tribal Undergraduate Research and Education) initiative, an
effort with the state?s five tribal colleges designed to increase interest in
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics among Native American high-
school students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Layman Summary&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
equipment for high-resolution field emission gun scanning electron microscopy
(FE-SEM) will promote growth and integration of education, research, and
technological industry in novel areas of materials and biological research. The
new FE-SEM will be a necessary addition to the suite of electron microscopes at
NDSU electron microscopy center. The current requested instrument will provide
high resolution at lower voltages and thus enhancing imaging and microanalysis
research in soft materials (polymers and polymeric nanocomposites) and
biological nanomaterials (soft tissues etc.) research with minimal beam damage
to the samples. Extensive educational impact will be realized with installation
of this equipment, at NDSU and the region, to researchers, students and remote
accessibility and operation to K-12 students, Native American college and school
students etc. Extensive integration and synergy with existing outreach and
educational programs at NDSU will be realized. These programs will benefit from
the remote accessibility and operation of this instrumentation.