* 0923245
* MRI: Acquisition of a Multifunctional Nanoprobe Microscope with a Tunable Ultrafast Laser Source for Interdisciplinary Research and Training
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2011
* Nader Engheta, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 09/30/2011
* USD 630,000.00

0923245&lt;br/&gt;Carpick&lt;br/&gt;U. of
Pennsylvania&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary: High impact nanomaterials
research requires the innovative combination of normally separate techniques
into multifunctional instruments that gather multiple forms of com-plementary
data. In particular, nanoscale spectromicroscopy - the combination of micro- and
nano-scale microscopy with powerful spectroscopy - is a lynchpin approach. We
propose the acquisition of an atomic force microscope (AFM), near-field scanning
optical microscope (NSOM) and confo-cal Raman microscope combined in a single,
multifunctional system. The light source will be not only a standard laser but
also a powerful turnkey tunable laser that enables a broad range of spec-
troscopy and femtosecond measurements of dynamic nanoscale phenomena. It will
function in seamless combination with the microscope for spectromicroscopy and
also serves as a stand-alone source for complementary spectroscopy work to
maximize its use and value. It will aid a broad range of research in nanoscale
phenomena, materials, and devices involving 18 identified users. The crucial
combination of microscopy and spectroscopy allows observed phenomena to be asso-
ciated with specific nanoscale features and entities, such as connecting optical
and structural prop-erties of semiconducting nanowires, studying optical
phenomena in nanocircuits, probing the nanostructure of the cell wall,
characterizing nanomechanical behavior, and studying polymer nanocomposites. It
will be installed and managed in the Probe Innovation Facility of Penn?s Nano
Bio Interface Center for widespread access. Vigorous associated outreach efforts
include graduate and undergraduate curricular development, and substantial high
school teacher and student en-gagement through established outreach programs
which emphasize connecting with students from underrepresented groups and
economically disadvantaged backgrounds in greater
Philadelphia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Layman Summary: Nanotechnology is the study
and development of new materials and devices that possess exciting and
unprecedented properties thanks to having their structures controlled at the
scale of a few atoms and molecules. It is extremely difficult to ?see?, ?feel?
and ?listen? to at-oms, molecules, and nano-scale structures, yet we must do
this to understand how they behave and make useful applications from them.
Recently, researchers have developed ways to do this at the nanoscale with new
techniques for microscopy (taking highly magnified images of the size and shape
of objects) and spectroscopy (measuring the energy absorbed and emitted by
objects). This funding will be used to purchase an instrument that combines both
microscopy and spectroscopy in a multi-tasking system that includes a powerful,
versatile laser. The laser illuminates the nanoscale objects being studied with
light, where the color of the light can be selected from a wide palette.
Simultaneously, the microscopy is used to determine where light is being
absorbed, re-emitted, or scattered by the nanoscale objects being studied. As
well, we can measure the size and shape of the objects, sense how stiff and
strong they are, measure how sticky and frictional they are, and meas-ure how
well they conduct electricity and heat. By making all of these measurements at
once, or at least one right after the other in the same instrument, we will be
able to quickly learn how the nanoscale objects behave. Researchers will use
this equipment to study nanoscale materials and structures for applications
including communicating information in new ways using light, develop-ing new
ways to understand the cell and to treat and diagnose diseases, and creating new
materials for strong, durable, lightweight structures and powerful, efficient
electronic circuits. The system will be installed in Penn?s Nano Bio Interface
Center, a leading national research center, for very open access. We will also
use this instrument in several courses at Penn, and will engage high school
teachers through programs in greater Philadelphia that connect with students
from eco-nomically disadvantaged backgrounds and underrepresented groups in
science and engineering.