* 0923026
* MRI: Acquisition of Experimental Flow Diagnostics Instrumentation to Serve as a Regional Facility for Cross-disciplinary Research and Education
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2011
* Karim Altaii, James Madison University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2011
* USD 495,815.00

0923026&lt;br/&gt;Pierrakos&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal requests funds to
purchase experimental flow diagnostics instrumentation for characterization of
complex flows. Such a facility would serve as a regional facility for research
and education at primarily undergraduate institutions. This core facility will
be located at James Madison University (JMU) and serve faculty and students
(undergraduate and graduate) at JMU and nearby institutions. The proposed
experimental flow diagnostics facility includes a suite of four instruments - a
3D (stereo) particle image velocimetry (PIV) system, a water channel, a wind
tunnel, and a heart simulator. The core instrumentation of this facility is the
3D time resolved PIV system, which with the accompanying components will enable
research varying from aerodynamics, biological flows, cardiovascular fluid
mechanics, and geological applications. Such a system and facility is often only
available at research universities and used at the graduate level. Not only is
such a facility unique at predominantly undergraduate institutions (PUIs), but
this state-of-the-art facility will be utilized for cross-disciplinary research
and education efforts spanning science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) disciplines and departments (ranging from engineering, biology,
geological sciences, physics, mathematics, integrated science and technology).
Access to such a facility would greatly impact the research efforts of at least
12 faculty at JMU and others at nearby institutions, including Sweet Briar
College (liberal arts women's college with an engineering program) and the
Virginia Military Institute.