* 0923053
* MRI:  Acquisition of an AFM/Raman Integrated System for Bio/Nano Functional Materials and Devices Research and Education
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Jun Hu, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Robert Carter
* 08/31/2011
* USD 252,166.00

&lt;br/&gt;This award will enable the University of Akron to acquire an
AFM/Raman (atomic force microscopy/Raman spectroscopy) integrated system which
is critically needed to support current research and education activities on
campus. The proposed interdisciplinary team shares a common vision for their
research programs in the molecular interface of the bio/nano materials research.
The AFM/Raman integrated system will directly advance the ongoing research
projects, including: 1) gecko-mimetic dry adhesives, 2) electrospinning-enabled
heterogeneous structures, 3) high-speed biomimetic microfluidic biosensors, 4)
multifunctional imaging probes, 5) bioimplants, tissue scaffolds and biosensors,
and 6) high-performance electrodes for fuel cells. Taking advantage of the
unique capabilities of the instrument, the team seeks to uncover the fundamental
principles of molecular interactions at the interfaces of the bio/nano
materials, and enhance undergraduate and graduate education missions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed activities cover a wide spectrum of programs
in engineering, chemistry, biology and medicine. The AFM/Raman integrated system
will create hands-on research training and education opportunities to graduate
and undergraduate students and high school students, and inspire them to pursue
careers in science and technology. The concept, theory, and results associated
with this instrument will be used in strengthening existing and new
undergraduate and graduate courses. The AFM/Raman system can benefit industrial
partners by sharing the usage of the workhorse instrument and will serve as a
catalytic and synergetic platform for the collaboration between the university
and industry. Research and education efforts will also be disseminated via
conference presentations to reach a broader audience.&lt;br/&gt;