* 0923010
* MRI:  Acquisiton of a Confocal Microscope
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Matthew Heintzelman, Bucknell University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2012
* USD 324,621.00

Researchers have used confocal microscopy for over two decades to obtain
information about where proteins are located and how they function within
organs, tissues and cells. Since proteins are responsible for performing almost
all of the tasks that enable a cell to function normally, information obtained
using confocal microscopy allows researchers to gain a better understanding of
how cells work as individual units as well as how they work together to form
functional organs and tissues. Faculty members from the Biology and Biomedical
Engineering Departments at Bucknell University have proposed projects to utilize
the latest confocal microscope technology to examine protein localization and
function in a variety of cell types and organisms. Dr. Julie Gates plans to
examine how cells undergo orchestrated changes in cell shape to build tissues
and organs as the fruit fly embryo develops into a mature, functioning organism.
Dr. Elizabeth Marin plans to investigate how the central nervous system of the
fruit fly is assembled. Dr. Leocadia Paliulus plans to analyze how chromosomes
are distributed into the two cells that result from division of a single cell as
sperm are generated in the greater wax moth. Dr. Marie Pizzorno plans to
evaluate how human cytomegalovirus, a member of the herpesvirus family,
replicates once it has infected a cell. Dr. Matthew Heintzelman plans to
investigate a form of single cell movement, referred to as gliding motility, in
a raphid diatom and a protozoan parasite of the mealworm. Advances in confocal
microscopy have also allowed for new applications of this technology to be
developed. The projects proposed by Dr. Mark Haussmann and Dr. Donna Ebenstein
are examples of such applications. Dr. Haussmann plans to use confocal
microscopy to measure DNA damage caused by reactive oxygen species, also known
as free radicals, in birds that have been reared in broods of varying sizes as a
measure of oxidative stress. Dr. Ebenstein plans to use confocal microscopy to
analyze the structural characteristics that make spider dragline silk such a
tough, light-weight fiber in an effort to design and test man-made silk fibers
that perform as well as the natural spider silk. The results of the proposed
experiments will be presented at a variety of local, regional and national
scientific conferences as well as published in various peer-reviewed scientific
journals. Additionally, short summaries of published results will be available
online through the Bucknell University Biology Department website
(http://www.bucknell.edu/Biology.xml). In addition to enabling research and
discovery, the new equipment will allow continued community outreach including
demonstrations for local elementary, middle and high school students with the
goal of exciting these students about science. Furthermore, the new system will
enhance the exposure of a broad number of undergraduate students, including
those from under-represented groups, to state-of-the-art microscopy through its
use in several upper-division laboratory courses, and independent research
projects. The new microscope will therefore enable the participation of
undergraduate and Master's students in meaningful research using state-of-the-
art microscopy techniques, thereby facilitating the training of the next
generation of scientists.