* 0923083
* MRI: Deveopment of an Apparatus for Deposition of Multi-component Thin Films with Lateral Composition Gradients
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* James Miller, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2012
* USD 634,599.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0923083&lt;br/&gt;Gellman&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High
throughput methodologies have the capacity to accelerate progress in the surface
science and materials science of multicomponent materials such as alloys. High
throughput methods couple the preparation of libraries of multicomponent
materials of many compositions with efficient analysis of the properties of the
entire library. Development is proposed of an ultra-high vacuum apparatus
housing a device for deposition of thin alloy films with lateral composition
gradients. These composition spread alloy films (CSAF) will contain all possible
binary or ternary alloys, The UHV apparatus deposition tool will be interfaced
with a commercial apparatus for high throughput surface analysis that is being
purchased independent of this proposed instrument development effort. It will
allow automated, point-by-point analysis of the sample surface using angle
resolved x-ray photoemission spectroscopy (XPS) and low energy ion scattering
(LIES). These methods will determine the composition of the near surface region,
the composition of the topmost atomic layer, and chemical state information of
the CSAFs; all resolved as functions of bulk composition or nanoparticle size.
The bulk structure of the CSAFs will be determined ex situ using an automated
orientation imaging microscope developed at Carnegie Mellon. These bulk and
surface analysis methods are sufficient to allow complete local characterization
of bulk and surface alloy properties with &lt;1% resolution in composition space
on a time scale equivalent to that for preparing a CSAF (~1 day).