* 0923047
* MRI: Acquisition of Analytical Microprobe Facilities for an Existing Scanning Electron Microscope
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2010
* Brent May, Lock Haven University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 09/30/2010
* USD 90,500.00

0923047&lt;br/&gt;Tzolov&lt;br/&gt;Lock Haven U of
Pennsylvania&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary: Elemental analysis is
widely used in a broad range of physical and life science disciplines.
Performing elemental analysis on a submicron scale widens the range of
applications and in many cases delivers qualitatively new information,
especially when combined with submicron imaging. This project will integrate in
one instrument the imaging capabilities of a Scanning Electron Microscope at
Lock Haven University of Pennsylvania with the analytical power of Energy
Dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy and Backscattered Electron Detection. No other
methods for direct elemental analysis are now available at the University; this
instrument will support a number of ongoing projects at the University including
fabrication and investigation of nanoparticles for electronic, optoelectronic,
and biomedical applications, synthesis of novel metal-carbon materials, study of
geological igneous processes, investigations of insect exoskeletons and fungi,
and investigations of aluminum alloys. It will promote interdisciplinary
research and break down traditional barriers to interdisciplinary cooperation in
applied research between faculty from biology, chemistry, geology, and physics.
The new facilities will enhance external collaborations with, inter alia, Penn
State University and Hershey Medical Center. New avenues for research will be
opened, e.g. measurement of the accumulation of heavy metals and other
contaminants in insects and fungi, information which will inform local
environmental policies. The compactness of the system allows wide use and
supports integration of education and research training of students at the
undergraduate level, class demonstrations, and as part of laboratory modules. It
will help create and support undergraduate research opportunities for new
cohorts of NSF funded Nanoscience Scholars.&lt;br/&gt;Layman Summary: Analyzing
the elements that make up various materials is essential to the study of
biological organisms and physical objects and processes. It is especially
valuable to be able to determine how composition varies on a scale smaller than
that accessible with an optical microscope but which is accessible by electron
microscopy. The electron beam in a Scanning Electron Microscope produces several
types of secondary emissions, each of them carrying specific information about
the surface structure and the composition of the sample. This project will
integrate two additional detectors with a Scanning Electron Microscope at Lock
Haven University of Pennsylvania. This will allow researchers to determine the
elements that compose a sample and to correlate composition with the images of
the object?s surface; all on a wide scale ranging from objects undetectable by
optical microscopy up to the size of regular bolts and nuts. This wide scale and
the inherent flexibility of the instrument create new opportunities for research
projects in all science disciplines at the University and for interdisciplinary
work across disciplines. These instruments will directly support ongoing
projects in novel electronic and optoelectronic devices (such as light emitting
devices and solar cells), fabrication of new materials and nanoparticle
synthesis, biosensors, studies of geological igneous processes, and insect and
fungi studies. Several of these projects involve ongoing collaborations with
Penn State University, Hershey Medical Center, and industry. New avenues for
research will be opened, such as. analyzing the accumulation of heavy metals and
other contaminants in insect exoskeletons and fungi, which can inform local
environmental policies. The compactness of the system allows wide use for
integrating education and research training of undergraduate students, class
demonstrations, and as part of laboratory teaching modules. It will help us
create and support undergraduate research opportunities for our new cohorts of
NSF funded Nanoscience Scholars.