* 0923671
* Predicting disease risk from community context and host phenotype:   A trait-based approach
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Charles Mitchell, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 08/31/2013
* USD 675,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will test
whether an individual's risk of acquiring an infectious disease is determined by
a handful of easily measured ecological traits of the host individual (i.e.,
host phenotype), and of other host species that are potential sources of
infection (community context). Experiments will be conducted using a model
system for multi-host vector-borne pathogens: barley yellow dwarf viruses, aphid
(insect) vectors that transmit them, and 20 wild grass host species. First,
greenhouse experiments will quantify the phenotypes of these grass species at
low and high nitrogen (nutrient) availability. Phenotypes will be quantified
based on a suite of physiological traits including rate of photosynthesis,
concentration of nutrients in leaves, leaf growth rate, and leaf lifespan. Hosts
with high nutrient concentrations are expected to also have high metabolic rates
(comprising quick-return or QR phenotypes) while hosts with low nutrient
concentrations will have low metabolic rates (slow-return or SR phenotypes).
Greenhouse experiments will also test whether QR phenotypes are more heavily fed
upon by aphids, are more susceptible to infection by feeding aphids, and are
better able to withstand the negative impacts of infection than SR phenotypes.
Field experiments will test whether QR phenotypes experience greater risk than
SR phenotypes of disease transmission from other host species, and whether that
risk depends on community context. The field experiments will test whether
increased nutrient availability, a major result of human activities, alters
disease risk. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Predicting risk of disease is a critical
ecological, agricultural, and public health goal. Of particular concern are
vector-borne diseases that infect multiple host species. For example, West Nile
virus is transmitted to humans (hosts) chiefly by mosquitoes (vectors) that fed
on infected birds (hosts). Similarly, most pathogens of crops also infect wild
plant host species. Understanding sources of risk will improve management of
diseases in wild and domestic plants and animals, as well as humans. This
project will involve both undergraduate and graduate students, and results will
be communicated to citizens ranging from local high school students to public
health professionals.