* 0923806
* The Effect of the Microbiome on the Rice Transcriptome
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Venkatesan Sundaresan, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 08/31/2014
* USD 1,938,281.00

PI: Harsh P. Bais (University of Delaware)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CoPIs:
Venkatesan Sundaresan and Jonathan A. Eisen (University of California -
Davis)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborators: Venu Kalavacharla (Delaware State
University) and Gurdev Khush (University of California -
Davis)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plants grow in close association with large
communities of microbes collectively called the microbiome. Comparatively little
is known about the diversity of microbes that associate with plants and their
interactions and effects on performance and crop yields. Specific microbes have
been extensively documented to provide beneficial effects to plants, such as
those involving well-known symbiotic associations in legumes. Previous studies
utilizing a single beneficial bacterial species in the model plant Arabidopsis
thaliana demonstrate how plants actively recruit beneficial bacteria under
biotic stress regimes. While valuable insights can be gained from studies with
single microbial species, preliminary studies show a wide diversity of bacterial
species associated with field grown rice (Oryza sativa) plants, whose biological
significance is completely unknown. This project will utilize a combination of
genomic and metagenomic approaches to dissect the impact of microbial
associations on rice. Specifically, a controlled experimental system will be
established, in which microbial populations will be characterized by metagenomic
rRNA profiling, and plant responses by transcriptomic profiling. The expression
profiles for localized and whole plant responses will be analyzed for global
changes in gene expression, as well as for changes in the expression of specific
functional classes of genes that would reflect changes in nutrient availability,
or establishment of plant immunity. The proposed research will provide the
foundations for future investigations into the impact of the microbiome on plant
performance. All sequence and mapping data generated in this project will be
accessible through a genome browser that will be developed specifically for this
project. Allsequence data will be deposited for long-term dissemination in
GenBank, GreenGenes (http://greengenes.lbl.gov), the Gene Expression Omnibus
(GEO) database (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/), and NCBI's Short Read Archive (SRA;
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Traces/home/). &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of this project stem, in part, from the interdisciplinary nature of the
research. Training for students and postdoctoral associates will integrate
quantitative approaches with applications to experimental biology. The project
will also have broader impacts in the professional development and educational
arenas. Professionally, the students and postdoctoral researcher involved in
this project will benefit from experimental design training, the acquisition of
technical expertise and interdisciplinary communication. In addition, the
project will conduct a robust internship program for outstanding students from
Delaware State University (DSU), an 1890 Historically Black University, and
Delaware Technical &amp; Community College (DTCC), a two-year institution with
substantial numbers of first-generation college and minority students. The
"Field to Lab" program will involve training in agricultural sampling, gene
expression, metabolic profiling studies and bioinformatics.