* 0923282
* MRI/Acq: Proposal for support for the Consortium for Research Computing for the Sciences, Engineering and Technology - CRCSET
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,02/28/2013
* Ram Mohan, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 02/28/2013
* USD 384,330.00

Proposal #: MRI 09-23282&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Flurchick, Kenneth&lt;br/&gt; Li,
Yaohang; Mohan, Ram; Tang, Guoqing&lt;br/&gt;Institution: North Carolina
Agricultural &amp; Technical State University &lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI/Acq.:
Support for Consortium for Research Computing for Sciences, Engineering, and
Technology - CRCSET&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This project,
acquiring, deploying, and maintaining a distributed High Performance Computing
(HPC) system, aims to provide appropriate processing speed and power to pursue
the needs required by various departments, programs, and research groups that
have joined the institutional Consortium for Research Computing for the
Sciences, Engineering, and Technology (CRCSET). These groups try to advance
their respective research via the computational study of physical chemical
properties and simulation of chemical/physical processes in molecules, nano-
materials and broad based bulk materials, physics based modeling in engineering
disciplines, and other areas such as computational biology, finance, business,
etc. Combined with advanced research training in computational science and
engineering, the acquisition supports core projects and ancillary research
projects, including:&lt;br/&gt;- Computational Science and Engineering Program
(core program recently approved for a PhD)&lt;br/&gt;- All Electron Studies of
Organic Molecular Crystals (OMCs) under Pressure&lt;br/&gt;- Polymer Composite
Fabrication Process Modeling and Simulations&lt;br/&gt;- Ancillary Research
Projects and Tools:&lt;br/&gt; .Modeling C60 Reorientation of Various
Solvents&lt;br/&gt; .Modeling Material Deformation at Nano-Length
Scales&lt;br/&gt; .Computational Modeling and Simulation of Bio-Inspired
Adaptive and Reconfigurable Systems&lt;br/&gt; .New Research Tools for
Collaborative Grid Computing and Visualization&lt;br/&gt;- Research and
Education Support&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;This work fosters
research and research and education training for underrepresented groups at a
historically black college and/or university (HBCU) and additionally provides
computational resources to other HBCUs. Moreover, it aims to gain a better
description at the atomic scale of the OMCs and to improve the understanding of
the manufacturing processes for advanced composites.