* 0923975
* Development of a Gene-Based Ecophysiology Model
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2010,06/30/2015
* James Jones, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 06/30/2015
* USD 2,385,950.00

PI: C. Eduardo Vallejos (University of Florida)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CoPIs:
James W. Jones, Kenneth J. Boote, and Melanie J. Correll (University of
Florida), Arthur Berg and Rongling Wu (Pennsylvania State University), and Juan
Osorno (North Dakota State University)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Key Collaborators:
William Farmerie and Fahong Yu (University of Florida), Steve Beebe and
Idupulapati Rao [International Center for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT),
Colombia], and James S. Beaver and Elvin Roman (University of Puerto
Rico)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two systems biology approaches have been implemented
to solve the genotype to phenotype problem: the bottom-up approach, which uses
molecular level knowledge to simulate biochemical pathways, cells, organs, and
embryos, and top-down approaches embodied by ecophysiology-crop simulation
models which use environment and physiological knowledge to predict the
phenotype of specific cultivars. The objective of this project is to generate a
gene-based ecophysiology-crop model capable of using the genetic makeup of a
plant to predict the phenotype under a range of environments. This goal will be
accomplished via genetic analysis of a recombinant inbred (RI) family of
Phaseolus vulgaris. This family was generated from a cross between parents with
contrasting physiological and morphological characteristic, as well as DNA
sequences. The family comprises 200 lines, each containing a unique combination
of the parental versions of the genes, which will be determined using the latest
genotyping technology. The growth and developmental phenotypes of the RI lines
will be measured under five different environments. The genetic makeup of these
lines along with their phenotypes will be analyzed by functional mapping to
identify, locate, and quantify the effect of genes that control the dynamic
traits that shape the phenotype throughout growth and development. Finally,
genotypic and phenotypic data will be used to develop computer programs that can
effectively predict the dynamic daily behavior and final yield of crops under a
range of environments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is framed in the
spirit of the NSF-funded iPlant Collaborative project which promotes the use of
"computational thinking" to address biological questions. The expected outcome
of this project is a gene-based model which can have a wide range of
applications in plant biology including genetics, functional genomics, ecology,
and plant breeding. The modular nature of the model will make it possible to
interconnect with bottom-up modeling approaches. In addition, this project will
provide a platform for the education and training of students at the
undergraduate, graduate and post-graduate levels through summer internships for
undergraduate students and high school teachers as well as through two hands-on
workshops that will deal with training in both crop modeling and genotyping
technologies. All data generated in this project can be accessed through project
websites (to be determined) and through long-term repositories that include
GenBank and the Phaseolus Genomics Resource
(http://phaseolus.genomics.purdue.edu/). Germplasm will be made available
through the University of Florida, the University of Puerto Rico and CIAT.
Software and statistical and analytical tools can be accessed through the
project websites and eventually through the iPlant Collaborative
(http://www.iplantcollaborative.org/).