* 0923115
* MRI: Development of a Scanning Probe Microscopy Tool to Study Nanoscale Photoactivated Processes
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* David Galipeau, South Dakota State University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 09/30/2013
* USD 451,353.00

0923115&lt;br/&gt;Bommisetty&lt;br/&gt;South Dakota State
U.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This award is funded under the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary: Fundamental understanding of relationship between nanoscale structure
and optoelectronic properties of photovoltaic materials is important to improve
the efficiency of solar cells. Several experimental tools can measure the
nanoscale topography and optoelectronic properties independently. The proposed
effort aims to develop a scanning probe microscopy tool that can measure both
topographical and optoelectronic properties simultaneously, thereby providing
critical information needed to connect these two quantities. The proposed tool
measures the topography, surface potential, surface photovoltage (SPV) and SPV
spectroscopy with nanometer spatial resolution. These measurements help
estimating the minority carrier diffusion length and carrier life time with high
spatial resolution in nanostructured photovoltaic materials that is critical to
understand charge transport processes in Gen-2 and Gen-3 solar cells. This tool
will strengthen the proposing group?s collaboration with industrial partners,
whose needs are focused on improvement in solar cells, thereby facilitating
regional economic growth. The proposed tool will provide strong
interdisciplinary training to several graduate and undergraduate students from
SDSU and other research universities in the state, providing highly skilled
manpower in the region. The proposed collaborative effort with the SPM division
of Agilent Inc has strong potential to develop into a commercial product that
will have much broader benefits to the research community. Proposed effort will
also strengthen the PI?s support for attracting under-represented groups (Native
Americans and women) into higher education, specifically in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Layman Summary: Development of low cost solar
cells technologies that can efficiently convert sun light into energy is
important for national energy independence and environmental protection. Current
solar cells are based on high quality crystalline silicon and are expensive.
Significant reduction in the cost of solar energy conversion can be achieved by
developing new technologies that can efficiently convert the sunlight into
energy. Development of low cost photovoltaic technologies, such as organic solar
cells, dye-sensitized solar cells, thin film solar cells, require significant
improvement in the fundamental understanding of nanoscale optoelectronic
properties and associated charge transport processes. Proposed scanning probe
microscope tool measures topography and optoelectronic properties with nanoscale
resolution. This data will help several research groups within the state of
South Dakota to develop novel solar cells. Proposed tool will help accelerating
the development of new photovoltaic materials and strengthens the PhD program in
electrical engineering at SDSU and introduces a new multidisciplinary course.
Proposed effort includes several outreach programs to broaden the participation
of Native Americans and women in higher education at SDSU.