* 0923704
* SBIR Phase II:   Predicting Behavior in Electronic Commerce Environments
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2009,01/31/2013
* Ronnie Garmon, VueLogic LLC
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 01/31/2013
* USD 734,026.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project involves the
examination of consumer consumption behavior across multiple on-line domains to
predict those items to be most likely consumed in the next interchange and the
terms under which they will be consumed. The proposed innovation utilizes a
persistent key technology to examine multiple attributes of identity to
establish a unified identity that links individuals across multiple domains.
Once linked the unified identity serves as the basis for the aggregation of
consumption behavior (purchases, content, ads clicked through, invitations
extended, etc.). The aggregated data establishes the consumer?s digital
footprint and serves as the basis for creating highly-predictive models. The
models analyze the actual consumption behavior to establish consumption
propensity and terms of consumption on an industry segment level. The results of
the propensity models will be returned to the client at the time of interaction
to make up sell / cross sell offers that are most likely to result in action by
the consumer. The result for the client is increased revenue for the transaction
and the result for the consumer is increased satisfaction through the relevance
of the offer.

The broader impact of the proposed innovation involves three aspects:
Accelerating economic expansion, identifying potential domestic terror threats
and identifying potential on-line predatory activity. The ability for a retail
or social network to identify the consumption preferences of their customers and
offer those items during an interaction increases the likelihood that a customer
will purchase the offered item due to its relevance. Such expansion of customer
spending will assist organizations in increasing inventory turnover, improving
sales and overall economic health. Identification of potential domestic terror
threats through the examination of cross domain purchasing behavior of linked
identities. Intelligence Services could establish purchase combinations that
when combined could result in a potential treat and take appropriate early
intervention action. Identification of potential on-line predators through the
use of persistent key technology to highlight those individuals whose
established identity on other domains is materially different from a current
registration. This permits the organization to establish higher authentication
requirements for those individuals and in so doing protecting itself and in the
case of Social Media its members (specifically minors).

