* 0923588
* The neural and hormonal substrates of communication in a social environment:   Signaler and bystander effects
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Russell Fernald, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 07/31/2012
* USD 406,518.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Animal behavior ultimately determines
survival and reproduction of individuals. In social species, behavior occurs
within groups where the choices made by an individual is influenced by and
influences others. Animals in groups communicate sophisticated information about
group affiliation, reproductive status and internal state so that bystanders, or
eavesdroppers, get valuable information simply from observation. However, it is
not known how social information is communicated to and processed by the brain.
The experiments in this project ask: How does being watched influence the
behavior and physiology of an individual? How does receiving social information
alter the brain? To answer the first question, the research team will measure
how fighting males change their levels of brain gene expression and sex hormones
in relation to being watched by audiences that vary both in sex and dominance
status relative to those males. To answer the second question, females will be
exposed to social information about a preferred mate and then circulating
hormone levels as well as immediate early gene expression in the brain will be
quantified. These experiments will allow discovery of how the brain responds to
communication of information in a complex social environment. The project will
include the training of a wide diversity of undergraduates, graduate students
and postdoctoral scholars, a majority of whom will be members of groups
underrepresented in science.