* 0923745
* Homophily and Peer Influence in Developmental Processes that Support Learning
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Brett Laursen, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 08/31/2012
* USD 249,374.00

Affiliates tend to be similar on key attributes. This phenomenon, known as
homophily, is of particular interest during adolescence because of concerns that
friends and romantic partners promote maladaptive behaviors and interfere with
academic achievement at a time when youth are especially susceptible to peer
influence. Such claims have been sharply criticized, however, for overstating
peer socialization effects and ignoring the fact that youth tend to select peers
who resemble themselves as friends and romantic partners. Progress reconciling
these dissonant views has been slowed by the significant methodological
challenges posed by the nonindependent data characteristic of participants in
close relationships (i.e., mutual influence between partners that makes them
more similar to one another than to random others but that also biases
statistical analyses). As a result, scientific understanding of similarity
between close peers is incomplete and there is almost no empirical evidence
describing which individuals are most apt to change to increase their similarity
with friends and romantic partners. The project utilizes archival data from two
longitudinal projects: (a) the 10 to 18 Project, a 5-year community study of all
students enrolled in the 4th through the 12th grade in a small city in central
Sweden; and (b) Project STAR, a 5-year study of friend and romantic
relationships in Denver youth ages 14 to 19. These studies contain complementary
information about homophily that encompasses a variety of educational outcomes
and factors known to constrain educational achievement. The project has two
objectives: (a) specify selection and socialization effects in domains that
reflect learning and in contexts that constrain learning, and (b) identify
characteristics of youth who are susceptible to influence from friends and
romantic partners. To meet these objectives, new analytic techniques that
measure homophily will be devised and refined. Analytic strategies designed for
nonindependent data will estimate selection and socialization over time,
disentangling partner influence from individual stability.

The project will have a profound impact on the scientific study of peer
relationships and, more generally, on assumptions about the influence of peers
over academic achievement and adjustment. In terms of impact on the scientific
community, the dyadic data analytic techniques devised to assess homophily will
set a new methodological standard for research on the topic, rendering obsolete
past empirical practices and revising the conventional wisdom about peer
influence over development. In terms of impact on adolescent learning and
contexts that constrain it, the project will lay the groundwork for advances in
education and public health. Current efforts to promote academic achievement and
curb deviant peer influences assume a model in which relationship participants
are mutually influential. School curricula, instructional activities, and peer
interventions will be more effective if influence agents are distinguished from
influence recipients, with programs specifically crafted for each.