* 0923577
* MRI: Acquisition of a Dual-Beam Focused Ion Beam Instrument for Materials Characterization, Nanoarchitectures, and Physics of Nanodevices
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* David Johnson, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 09/30/2012
* USD 750,000.00

0923577 Johnson U. Oregon Eugene

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

Technical Summary: A DB-FIB combines an electron beam that can be used for
scanning-electron microscopy as well as for electron-beam lithography, a focused
ion beam that can be used for milling and cutting, nanomanipulation tools to
arrange and orient objects, and deposition chemistries that deposit a variety of
materials near the immediate region of the electron and/or ion beam. This
combination of features provides an extremely powerful tool that is
indispensable in nanofabrication and materials research. The requested DB-FIB is
a critical enabling tool for the eight research projects described in this
proposal that span materials science, physics, chemistry, geology and
anthropology at the University of Oregon and at Oregon State University. The DB-
FIB will be used as a nanofabrication tool (e.g. to prepare photonic devices,
cavity QED systems, samples of magnetic materials for soft x-ray
characterization, and oriented nanolaminated thermoelectric materials), to aid
in TEM and SEM characterization by creating cross-sections of doped polymer
materials and unique carbon spheres that occur in large quantities within
sediments dating to 13,000 years ago, and to modifying fractal arrays of
nanoparticles. The instrument will be housed in the exceptionally vibration- and
electromagnetic interference-free environment of the newly constructed Lorry I.
Lokey Laboratories at the University of Oregon. Professional staff members of
the Center for Advanced Materials Characterization in Oregon (CAMCOR) will
provide technical support and assist users across the Northwest. The requested
instrument will provide training opportunities across a broad spectrum of
research and educational environments and for an exceedingly diverse collection
of students, faculty, and industrial partners. Examples of the educational
programs that attract diverse participants to the facility and instruments are:
a graduate-level instrumentation courses, analytical laboratory modules in our
Graduate Internship Program, undergraduate research including two NSF REU
programs and an NSF STEP funded summer internship program for community college
students, and advanced instrumentation workshops for faculty, students, and
industrial collaborators. The remote access (UO NanoNet) option extends the
impact of CAMCOR facilities beyond the campus including use by the Technician
Training Program within the Advanced Manufacturing and Technology Institute at
Chemeketa Community College and as web-based ?field trips? for middle and high
school classes across Oregon. Layman Summary: A DB-FIB combines nanoscale
imaging, machining, deposition and sample manipulation in single instrument that
is indispensable in nanofabrication and material characterization. This powerful
combination of abilities enables a broad range of research projects and will be
used by Oregon materials science, physics, chemistry, geology and anthropology
researchers on projects as diverse as isolating, concentrating and analyzing
unique carbon spheres that occur in large quantities within sediments in North
America 13,000 years ago from a potential meteor impact to milling orientated
nanolaminated thermoelectric monoliths to test a unique energy harvesting from
waste heat prediction. The proposed instrument will be housed in the University
of Oregon?s Lokey laboratory that provides an exceptionally stable operating
environment (vibrational amplitudes below NIST-A standards by a factor of ten
and temperature stability of 0.1K per month.) Professional staff members of the
Center for Advanced Materials Characterization in Oregon (CAMCOR), the State of
Oregon?s ?high tech? extension service will provide technical expertise to users
at Oregon and across the northwest. Remote access via the UO NanoNet extends the
impact of the DB-FIB to users across the region and enhances outreach programs
to assure the maximum opportunity for training and research by a diverse
population of students.