* 0923077
* MRI: Acquisition of a Transmission Electron Microscope for Multidisciplinary Research
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Eric Borguet, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2012
* USD 431,480.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award from the Major Research
Instrumentation (MRI) program, the Department of Chemistry at Temple University
will acquire a Transmission Electron Microscope (TEM) for use in
interdisciplinary nanomaterials research. Specific examples of research
activities that will benefit from this acquisition include the study of phase
transformation of nanoparticulate in soil and aquatic systems; nanostructures
that make up polymer electrolyte membrane (PEM) fuel cells; functionalized
nanoparticles for optical applications; functionalized paramagnetic
nanoparticles for hyperthermia treatment of tumors; and morphological changes of
biological tissues and cells that result from elevated levels of
homocysteine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Transmission electron microscopy is a widely
used technique that provides an image of a thin sample formed from the
interaction of a beam of electrons transmitted through the specimen. A TEM
provides higher resolution than optical microscopes. It is used in materials
research and biological fields among others to examine the structure and
properties of these materials under high resolution. The TEM acquisition will
benefit research and the training of undergraduate and graduate students in the
Departments of Chemistry, Biology, Earth and Environmental Science, Physics,
Mechanical, Civil and Environmental Engineering, Radiology, and Pharmacology in
Medicine.