* 0923084
* MRI: Acquisition of a High Resolution X-Ray Diffraction System for Materials Research at The City College of New York
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2011
* Glen Kowach, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Sean Jones
* 09/30/2011
* USD 475,000.00

0923084&lt;br/&gt;Tamargo&lt;br/&gt;CUNY City
College&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY: This proposal aims to establish
a comprehensive X-ray diffraction analysis facility at The City College of New
York (CCNY) that enables a wide range of materials research programs and
educational programs in areas spanning molecular beam epitaxy, nanotechnology,
materials synthesis, crystal growth and environmental science. CCNY has
identified Materials Research as a strategic area of growth. This instrument
will be essential to accomplish that goal. We propose to acquire a High
Resolution X-ray diffraction apparatus for Materials Research that is especially
suitable for thin film applications such as rocking curve analysis, reciprocal
space mapping, reflectometry, thin film phase analysis, residual stress and
texture analysis, and nanoparticle structure analysis. In addition to four-
bounce high resolution optics, the system will incorporate micro-diffraction,
glancing angle X-ray diffraction, X-ray reflectometry and a Nano-accessory kit.
Important advances in nanoscience and nanotechnology, environmental science,
energy systems and materials science are anticipated outcomes. There are eleven
participating faculty from CCNY whose research will benefit immediately from
this instrument acquisition. Participants from other CUNY Colleges and
neighboring institutions, as well as industrial partners will also be users.
CCNY is a minority institution with an exceedingly diverse student population at
both the graduate and undergraduate levels. Having the proposed instrumentation
in-house will expose our students to state-of-the-art techniques in materials
science, will attract more students to research, and will increase the
involvement of underrepresented minority students in these vital scientific
areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;LAYMAN SUMMARY: X-ray diffraction is a fundamental
analytical tool that allows the investigation of the atomic arrangement of
materials, and many structural properties, such as the presence and nature of
defects, or special atomic ordering in materials. Materials are used in many
critical applications, including electronic and photonic semiconductor devices,
solar cells, etc. The knowledge of the precise atomic arrangements of materials
is essential in order to improve their properties, design new materials, and
understand the fundamental physics that govern their behavior. At the City
College of New York (CCNY), we have identified Materials Research as a top
priority in which to focus our efforts, due to the potential impact of this
discipline in our nation?s economic and technological development. A High
Resolution X-ray diffraction apparatus is essential to perform the state-of-the-
art research in materials that our faculty are trained to do. This instrument is
multifaceted and versatile. In addition to offering the high resolution options
needed for the investigation of highly ordered crystalline structures, it allows
the incorporation of accessories that facilitate other studies carried out by
our faculty. Important advances in nanoscience and nanotechnology, environmental
science, energy systems and materials science are anticipated. CCNY has an
exceedingly diverse student population, with large fractions of students from
underrepresented minority groups. This instrument will expose a large number of
students to state-of-the-art techniques in materials science, will attract more
students to research, and will increase the involvement of underrepresented
minority students in these vital scientific areas.