* 0923166
* MRI: Development of a High Pressure Laser Heating System
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2015
* Jerzy Wrobel, University of Missouri-Kansas City
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 09/30/2015
* USD 413,580.00

0923166&lt;br/&gt;Wrobel&lt;br/&gt;U. of Missouri-Kansas
City&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary: The simultaneous application of
high pressures and temperatures to materials is being explored for technological
reasons, and for basic research in physics, materials science, geophysics and
chemistry. A laser heated diamond anvil cell is one way to achieve these extreme
conditions in the laboratory. Current laser heating technology uses CW infrared
lasers to irradiate samples that are pressurized inside of a diamond anvil cell.
This technology is limited to temperatures of ~ 7,000 K; the limitation being
imposed by the power of the lasers. We propose to develop a UV pulsed laser
heating system to pursue laser heating of samples that are under high pressures
while in a diamond anvil cell. The proposed system will allow for samples to be
subjected to high pressures, and temperatures of greater than 20,000 K. The
substantially higher temperature that will be reached with the UV laser is due
to the combination of greater power available in a pulsed system, and that most
materials have higher absorption coefficients in the UV than in the infrared.
Sample temperatures and the temperature evolution will be determined by using a
gated CCD to measure the emitted blackbody radiation. Initially the laser
heating system will be used for synthesis of new nitride compounds which are
expected to have unique properties, such as high hardness for the cases of WN2
and ?Ã’-C3N4. The proposed system, with its three-fold increase in accessible
temperatures over current technology will also allow unprecedented advances in
melting studies, phase diagrams, and equations of state. This will impact the
fields of physics, materials science, chemistry and geoscience. Construction of,
and research with, the proposed instrument will train graduate and undergraduate
students in advanced instrumentation, scientific research, and will have broad
societal impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Layman Summary: The
simultaneous application of high pressures and high temperatures, has been shown
to impact the properties of many materials. One of the best known examples of
this is the conversion of graphite to diamond. This occurs inside the earth,
producing natural diamonds, and beginning in 1955 researchers have been able to
produce diamond from graphite by creating the necessary high pressure-high
temperature conditions in the lab. In addition to advantageous structural
changes (such as graphite to diamond), it has been shown that high pressures and
high temperatures also change the chemistry of materials. For example, elements
that do not normally bond can be made to combine, resulting in novel and
potentially useful compounds. The proposed instrument will make it possible to
study materials placed under pressures of up to one million atmospheres while at
temperatures three times greater than has been achieved with conventional
methods. The main innovation that will allow for such high temperatures is the
use of short laser pulses of ultraviolet light which will be absorbed by the
compressed materials and heat them. Upon completion of the proposed instrument,
the initial experiments will be to synthesize new, useful compounds. The
proposed technology will be used more broadly to determine how a variety of
materials change under extreme conditions, which will advance the fields of
physics, materials science, chemistry and geoscience. Construction of, and
research with, the proposed instrument will train graduate and undergraduate
students in advanced instrumentation, scientific research and will have broad
societal impact.