* 0923273
* MRI:  Acquisition of Instrumentation for Enhancement of Undergraduate Research and Pedagogy in Molecular Bioengineering
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Lauren Sefcik, Lafayette College
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 07/31/2012
* USD 357,106.00

0923273&lt;br/&gt;Ferri&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This MRI requests a Cell-Scale Biotester 5000
biaxial materials testing system, Applied Biosystems (ABI) real-time polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR) analysis suite, and a Nikon Ti-E inverted C1 confocal
laser scanning microscope. The Cell-Scale Biotester 5000 will be used to measure
mechanical properties of synthetic and natural soft nanomembranes, the ABI RT-
PCR system will be used to measure gene expression in response to engineering
strain, and the Nikon Ti-E C1 will be used to image cellular adhesion proteins
as a function of mechanical properties of the substrate and applied load and
molecular transport in engineered nanocomposite tissue scaffolds. The feedback
of local matrix stiffness on cellular functions has important implications for
development, differentiation, disease, and regeneration. This research will have
a significant impact in the emerging technologies in biomedicine and the
relationships between mechanical response, biochemical signaling (specifically
gene expression), and cell microstructure. The PIs propose an integrative
research and education program at Lafayette College, an undergraduate
institution, which will continue to expand the participation of undergraduates
in molecular biomechanics while building infrastructure for the
Bioengineering/Biotechnology program at Lafayette. Support for this MRI will
also strengthen the early career development of a faculty member from an
underrepresented group (specifically women) previously identified through the
NSF-GRFP as a young researcher with outstanding potential, thereby enhancing the
continued recruitment and retention of women in engineering at Lafayette.