* 0923571
* MRI Acquisition: Detecting and monitoring changes in the arctic using stable isotope techniques
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Jeffrey Welker, University of Alaska Anchorage Campus
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2012
* USD 588,056.00

0923571: MRI Acquisition: Detecting and monitoring changes in the arctic using
stable isotope techniques

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The University of Alaska at Anchorage has been awarded a grant to purchase two
stable isotope mass spectrometers plus a tunable diode laser system to quantify
the processes of change in high latitudes. The instruments will be used to
measure the natural abundance of isotopes of carbon, nitrogen, hydrogen and
oxygen (C-13, N-15, H-2 (deuterium), O-18), in studies involving plants, soils,
water, and animals. The instruments are also capable of measuring samples that
have been enriched with these isotopes, in labeling experiments designed to
study plant water sources and field metabolic rates of small mammals. The
intellectual merit and the scientific motivation for acquiring this
instrumentation package derives from the fact that the Arctic is changing
rapidly, and there is a great need for using tools that are integrative in time
and space, and tools that can unravel the complexity of linkages between the
biosphere-atmosphere and aquatic systems and the intricate nature of food webs.
The instruments will facilitate quantification of the consequences of vegetation
change, of shifting patterns in the field metabolic rates of small mammals, of
the water sources of vegetation as permafrost melts, quantification of
precipitation geochemistry at local to regional scales, and food web ecology of
marine mammals. In addition to the impact on the research productivity of
numerous scientists in Alaska, the new instruments will support the emerging
needs of NEON (National Ecological Observatory Network) in Alaska, the
International Polar Year, and citizen science with the Anchorage Waterways
Council. This award will also allow the enhanced educational preparation of
students in state-of-the-art instrumentation, including the training of
undergraduates, graduate students, and Alaska Native students in the Alaska
Natives Science and Engineering Program (ANSEP). Information on the study can be
obtain in this website http://www.uaa.alaska.edu/enri/usnip/index.cfm