* 0923290
* MRI: Acquisition of a 193nm Laser Ablation Sampling System to Expand Interdisciplinary Uses of an Element2 ICP-MS
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Dillip Mohanty, Central Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2012
* USD 219,312.00

0923290&lt;br/&gt;Student &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this proposal submitted to
the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program, the PIs request ~$219K to
acquire a 193nm Laser Ablation (LA) system to be used with an existing Element2
ICP-MS analyzer. The instrument will be used for trace element analyses in
isotopic ratio profiling, geothermometry, compositional studies, fluid and melt
inclusion chemistry, and precision spot analysis on diverse materials. The LA
system will support faculty research projects spanning the range from petrology
and geochemistry to biology, environmental chemistry and materials
characterization. Several projects are outlined by the PIs. The PI will use the
LA system to determine magmatic rock evolution from the midcontinental rift
system. Melt inclusions will be assayed in order to understand midcontinental
rift system evolution. The LA system will be used to better understand pegmatite
crystallization and compositional evolution. Li, Cs, Ta, W, Sn and other
elements can be assayed to infer melt cooling characteristics and histories. The
LA-ICP-MS system will be used to better define the White-Inyo batholyth's
petrologic evolution. Trace element concentrations will help infer pressure and
temperature characteristics in plutonic minerals. In a human-impact context, the
LA-ICP-MS system will be used to assay mercury absorption by polymeric materials
in power-plant gaseous effluents. Additional polymer matrices will assayed for
effectiveness in removing metals from aqueous waste streams. The system will
also be used to titanium and other metals content in epoxidation catalysts
developed at Central Michigan. Collaborative ecological studies will focus on
assaying metals contamination and natural variability in mollusk shell
carbonates and fish otoliths and scales. The instrument will incorporated with a
newly-funded Thermo Element2 ICP-MS and will be housed in the CMU Geology
Department. The site has been prepared for the Element2 and will accommodate
necessary power, ventilation, gas cylinder storage, and videoconferencing
equipment. The PI team has hands-on experience with LA-ICP-MS systems from other
laboratories and will be responsible for administering the instrument and
training. Trained users will be allowed to operate the system. The PIs will be
responsible for maintenance, repairs and calibration. The Geology, Chemistry and
Biology departments will contribute to annual operating costs and service
contract funds. The instrumentation will serve a regional and community need.
Within the University, multiple departments will directly benefit from this
instrument enhancement. It will be incorporated into current undergraduate and
graduate programs - and into the newly created Science of Advanced Materials PhD
program. The system will enhance local environmental projects with direct human-
impact relevance. The system will be connected to classroom instruction through
videoconferencing systems and students will gain hands-on experience with state-
of-the-art modern instrumentation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***