* 0923203
* MRI: Acquisition of Mobile, Distributed Instrumentation for Response Research (RESPOND-R)
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Aaron Ames, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,400,000.00

Proposal #: CNS 09-23203 &lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Murphy, Robin R.; Ames, Aaron D.;
Gutierrez-Osuna, Ricardo; Song, Dezhen; Stoleru, Radu&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
Texas A &amp; M&lt;br/&gt; College Station, TX 77843-3000&lt;br/&gt;Title:
MRI/Acq.: Mobile, Distributed Instrumentation for Response Research
(RESPOND-R)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This project,
acquiring equipment to create a mobile, modular, distributed instrument called
RESPOND-R, aims to develop an integrated, interoperable research instrument
suitable for a comprehensive use of Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) technologies
for various types of incidents: urban building and bridge collapse (earthquakes,
hurricanes, explosives), radiological or chemical spills, and terrorism. CPS
explores new technologies such as robots, wireless networks, miniature sensors,
sensor networks, and other types for emergency preparedness, prevention,
response, and recovery. The instrument services projects in multidisciplinary
research in Emergency Informatics for disaster response. Emergency Informatics
consists of a real-time collection, processing, distribution, and visualization
of information for emergency preservation, preparedness, response, and recovery.
RESPOND-R addresses the lack of an Integrated Emergency Informatics Instrument
that can be configured to support scenario-based experimentation and transported
to exercises and responses. To capture the interaction of devices, the physical
worlds, and human decision making, the project will use the Disaster City
facility at the institution. CPS components in core areas (unmanned systems,
imaging/chemical and radiological sensors, wireless communication networks,
nodes and motes, and human performance) will be acquired. Addressing testing
within real-world conditions and scenarios, RESPOND-R is expected to advance
knowledge in the emerging, multidisciplinary fields of Emergency Informatics and
CPS by providing access to a complete, large scale system that is located in a
fidelity disaster testbed or can be transported to homeland security exercises
or actual incidents. RESPOND-R will be open to researchers outside the
institution, with a projection that 22 universities will participate over 3
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Used by 18 faculty in 8 departments
and 2 colleges (Engineering and Architecture), the instrument contributes to
educate 10-20 graduate students each year through field components of courses
and dissertation work. Leveraging initiatives for underrepresented group,
RESPOND-R will also be utilized for the training of 1000 responders and policy
makers. In keeping with instruments used by ?storm chasers,? the instrument will
be deployable for exercises and disasters where CPS components can reduce
negative outcomes of events while gathering extremely valuable data and/or save
lives.&lt;br/&gt;