* 0923068
* MRI:   Acquisition of Cell Population Analysis Tools for Oceanography and Biotechnology
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Brian Palenik, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2013
* USD 753,708.00

This project utilizes three instruments, 1) a Becton Dickinson FACsAria II
sorting flow cytometer, 2) an Amnis ImageStream multispectral cytometer with
imaging capability, and 3) a Beckmann Coulter Multisizer 4 Coulter Counter, to
provide a state-of-the-art suite of analysis tools for microbial oceanography
and biotechnology. These instruments will enable population-scale evaluation of
individual microbial cells for applications in 1) population analysis of ocean
microbes and their ecophysiology, 2) metagenomics, 3) algal physiology, 4) algal
biofuels, and 5) biotechnology. Microbes in the ocean ranging from bacteria to
unicellular phytoplankton do not exist in isolation, but rather interact in
populations on both the large and small scale. Understanding factors involved in
ocean productivity involves monitoring the dynamics of changes in population
over time, and in response to environmental changes. These instruments will
enable the study of ocean microbe population dynamics in unprecedented detail.
Technological applications of microalgae are of great scientific and societal
interest, and flow cytometric analyses will aid in the development of renewable
fuels, discovery and production of pharmaceuticals, and nanotechnology. These
instruments will provide a state-of-the-art foundation for marine microbial and
biotechnological research in the ocean and environmental sciences. This will
enhance the ability to provide students and researchers with the training and
modern tools to do cutting edge research in these areas. Broader impacts will be
achieved through the operation of a shared research platform and strategic
community-building activities. Perhaps the three most pressing science issues
relating to society today are climate change, renewable fuels, and
nanotechnology. Research resulting from the use of the proposed instruments will
advance knowledge in all three areas.