* 0923746
* Control of Pre-mRNA Metabolism in Drosophila
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Lillie Searles, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 08/31/2012
* USD 812,867.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Eukaryotic protein-
coding genes are expressed through a multi-step process that involves
transcription of the DNA sequences of genes into precursor mRNAs (pre-mRNAs)
that are processed to a mature form (mRNAs) before being exported from the
nucleus to the cytoplasm for translation into proteins. To ensure the efficient
synthesis of functional proteins and, thus, that cells are able to function
normally, RNA quality is monitored at each stage of gene expression by RNA
surveillance components, whose role is to detect defective or otherwise
problematic RNAs and stimulate their rapid degradation. Most of the research on
nuclear RNA surveillance to date has been performed using yeast, a single-celled
eukaryote, and relatively little is known about this process in more complex
organisms. The goal of this project is to investigate this process in the fruit
fly Drosophila melanogaster, a popular animal model system. Recent evidence from
this lab indicates that Su(s), an RNA-binding protein in Drosophila, is a
nuclear RNA quality control cofactor that stimulates the degradation of aberrant
nuclear pre-mRNA and noncoding RNA derived from transposable DNA elements. This
research will further explore the mechanism involved. Since several different
RNA quality control systems operate in eukaryotic cells, it is important to
determine the specific pathway and stage of gene expression where Su(s) protein
acts. The first aim will address this point by identifying the other proteins
that function in conjunction with Su(s). Two different approaches will be used
to do this. First, Su(s) will be immunoaffinity-purified, and the polypeptides
in the Su(s) complex will be identified by mass spectroscopy analysis. In
addition, an RNA interference (RNAi)-based screen will be performed in cultured
Drosophila cells. This screen is based on the expectation that RNAi-mediated
depletion of proteins that function in the same cellular process as Su(s) will
lead to increased accumulation of RNAs that are normally targeted for
degradation by Su(s), and this will be evaluated experimentally. The second aim
of this project is to define the RNA sequences that are bound by Su(s) in living
cells. Two approaches, both involving cultured cells, will be employed to
accomplish this aim. An established reporter gene assay will be used for precise
mapping of a Su(s) target site in a heat-shock induced RNA. In addition, a large
number of new Su(s) target sites will be identified by UV crosslinking and
immunoaffinity-purification of Su(s)-RNA complexes followed by high-throughput
sequencing of the bound RNAs. Subsequently, computational analysis will be
performed to define the consensus sequences and to determine if Su(s) binding
sites are enriched in a particular region of RNAs, e.g. coding versus noncoding
sequences. The results of this research will provide new insights into nuclear
RNA quality control mechanisms in multicellular organisms and help to clarify
how defective RNAs are identified by the nuclear surveillance machinery. The
presence of multiple RNA quality control systems and the high degree of
similarity in the general components of these systems indicate that this is a
vitally important process for most, if not all, eukaryotic
organisms.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: In addition to advancing the understanding
of RNA quality control mechanisms in higher organisms, this research is making a
significant contribution to the development of human resources in science. This
ongoing project has supported the training of numerous graduate and
undergraduate students. In addition, throughout her career the PI has been
active in efforts at multiple levels, within the university and beyond, to
promote the academic success of undergraduate science majors and their
participation in undergraduate research. The PI is also committed to activities
that enhance the participation and success of underrepresented groups in
scientific research and academia.