* 0923897
* Student Panel at IEEE Virtual Reality 2009
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2010
* Robert Lindeman, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 03/31/2010
* USD 6,149.00

This is funding to support attendance by approximately 4 senior graduate
students and recent PhDs from VR research groups in academia, industry, the
military, and government, at the IEEE Virtual Reality 2009 conference, so that
they can participate as panelists on a student panel. IEEE VR is the premier
international conference and exhibition in virtual reality. It provides a unique
forum for interaction among leading experts in VR and closely-related fields
such as augmented reality, mixed reality, and 3D user interfaces, who come
together to share their work and in turn to be exposed to the latest work from a
worldwide contingent of researchers, as well as to renew friendships and make
new ones. The IEEE Virtual Reality 2009 conference will be held in Lafayette,
Louisiana, on March 14-18, 2009. Virtual Reality is reaching a crossroads,
moving from hype-fueled field to one of serious application, evaluation, and
study. And those who will transform the field are the senior graduate students
and recent graduates in VR research groups and companies across the world. These
"next-gen" VR pioneers need a stronger voice in the field, and the "current-gen"
VR researchers and developers need to hear that voice. IEEE VR has a long
tradition of strong student participation, with an extensive student volunteer
program, fair student conference rates, and strong student interest. However,
aside from presenting papers students have had few opportunities to play an
active role in the conference. The student panel, which has been accepted for
inclusion in the 2009 conference program, will provide a platform for students
to participate in forming longer-term visions. This panel will be the third of
its kind, following in the footsteps of very successful and well attended
predecessors in 2007 and 2008. This year's discussion will focus on two main
topics: building a career in VR, and evolving the IEEE VR conference. A
moderator will lead the discussion with a focus on involvement by students, but
while preference will be given to questions from students in the audience senior
researchers will also be encouraged to contribute advice. The PI has committed
to being proactive in order to ensure diversity among the panelists, including
members of traditionally under-represented groups and women.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The IEEE VR 2009 student panel will
provide a unique vehicle for broadening participation by under-represented
groups in the conference, while also affording an opportunity for young
researchers to network, cultivate ideas, and create a sense of community
ownership. The ideas of the future pioneers of the VR field will be of
significant interest to all conference attendees. The establishment of this
annual series of student panels at the IEEE VR conferences will serve as a model
to other conference organizing committees.