* 0923066
* MRI: Acquisition of an Atomic Force Microscope (AFM) for Visualization, Assembly, and Analysis of Materials at the Nanometer and Molecular Scale
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Richard Vinci, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 09/30/2012
* USD 249,467.00

0923066&lt;br/&gt;Vinci&lt;br/&gt;Lehigh U.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This award is
funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;A flexible Atomic
Force Microscope (AFM), integrated with an inverted light microscope, enables
advanced nanometer scale imaging, spectroscopy, lithography, and manipulation.
Acquisition of this instrument will: (i) significantly improve the capability at
Lehigh University to characterize surfaces and interfaces, as well as new
nanometer-scale materials; (ii) promote fundamental studies of intermolecular
interactions, self-assembly, and nanofabrication; (iii) help develop new
analytical techniques; (iv) allow the current, old, shared AFM/nanoindenter to
be dedicated to full-time nanoindentation, and (v) enhance collaborations
developing on campus among academic units such as Physics, Chemistry, Materials
Science, and Chemical Engineering. Fundamental research that will be carried out
with a new state-of-the-art AFM will advance understanding of molecular and
nanometer scale mechanics and biomolecular interactions, self-assembly and
organization at the nanoscale, as well as synthesis, manipulation, and
properties of new, complex nanostructures (such as macroions, calix[6]arene
Langmuir-Blodgett films, and carbon nanotube-DNA hybrids). It will also enable
increased campus-wide use of nanoindentation, thereby supporting ongoing work in
nano- and micro-mechanics of metals, ceramics, and composites. The diverse
nature of studies that can be carried out using a modern AFM will contribute
greatly to the interdisciplinary effort required to train students and post-
doctoral researchers to work at the interfaces between chemistry, physics,
biology, and engineering, and will improve collaborations with external
academic, business and industrial partners. Outreach to students at the
professional, undergraduate, and K-12 levels will be enhanced by the
instrument?s ease of use and remote operation
capability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;An Atomic
Force Microscope (AFM) coupled to an optical microscope can be used to
visualize, measure, and manipulate surfaces at the nanometer scale. This
capability is crucial for understanding and modifying the phenomena that
underlie processes such as catalysis for chemical production, adhesion of cells
for development of new biomaterials, and growth of nanostructures for advanced
lighting devices. With an AFM it is possible to analyze a wide variety of
materials ? from soft to hard, organic to inorganic, wet to dry ? with atomic
resolution. Furthermore, the ability to actually manipulate matter at the
nanoscale creates new possibilities for the creation and testing of unique
materials, including complex molecules and carbon nanotube-DNA hybrids, that
could solve problems in diverse areas such as energy production, space
exploration, and disease treatment. With accessories that establish the
conditions necessary for the examination of biological materials, the instrument
will enable new directions in nanotechnology research at Lehigh University in
Bioengineering, Physics, Chemistry, Materials Science, and Chemical Engineering.
The new capability will also enable increased use of an old, existing AFM as a
dedicated nanomechanical test instrument for understanding the failure
resistance of novel nanomaterials. The new instrument will be much easier to use
than those of previous generations, so it will be more accessible to
undergraduate students and industry collaborators. It can also be operated over
the Web, and can be used at a distance to engage children at the K-12 levels by
allowing them to ?see? at the nanoscale without leaving their classrooms.