* 0923402
* MRI: Acquisition of a Confocal Laser Scanning Microscope with Multifluorescence Detection Capability
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Debra Moriarity, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2014
* USD 415,000.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award funds the acquisition of an
Olympus laser confocal microscope FV1000 with multifluorescence detection at the
University of Alabama in Huntsville (UAH) that will be integrated into both
research and training programs in the Departments of Biological Sciences,
Chemistry and Material Sciences, Chemical and Mechanical Engineering. This will
be the only operational confocal microscopy resource in the North Alabama
region. The acquisition of the confocal microscope will provide a critical link
between researchers and will be used to support unique training opportunities to
exceptional students from all area institutions. The confocal microscope and the
establishment of Confocal Fluorescence Microscopy (CFM) facility will allow
researchers and students to perform live cell imaging as well as study the
histochemistry, morphology and physiology of cells, cellular processes and
materials, images which are not sufficiently resolved using conventional
microscopes. The CFM facility will also be an integral part of a variety of
training programs. As an immediate impact, it will serve as a training tool for
students of advanced microscopy theory and practice while being an important
tool for graduate research projects. All students, including women and
underrepresented minorities, will be able to participate in training workshops
on microscopy techniques to be offered jointly by the primary investigators of
this award and the HudsonAlpha education program staff. As a long-term impact,
an enhanced microscopy facility on the University of Alabama Huntsville campus
will be a nucleation facility for integrated research between science and
engineering faculty and students. The facility will have a positive impact on
the community by promoting networking opportunities for students. Results from
the research projects will be disseminated through peer-reviewed journal
articles, and through student at faculty presentations at regional and national
meetings.