* 0923313
* MRI: Acquisition of an RFID Testbed Using Renewable Energy for Object Identification and Habitat Monitoring
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Wayne Burleson, Five Colleges Inc
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 09/30/2013
* USD 450,010.00

Proposal #: CNS 09-23313 &lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Fu, Kevin; &lt;br/&gt; Burleson,
Wayne P.; Diao, Yanlei; Ganesan, Deepak K.; Ross, Charles&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
Five Colleges: Amherst, Hampshire, Mount Holyoke, Smith, U Mass&lt;br/&gt;
Amhers, MA 01002-2324&lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI/Acq.: RFID Testbed Using Renewable
Energy for Object &lt;br/&gt; Identification and Habitat
Monitoring&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project
Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This project, acquiring a Radio Frequency IDentification
(RFID) testbed, aims to enable fundamental cross-disciplinary cross-layered
research into design, implementation, and deployment of the next generation RFID
technologies and applications. The equipment support research in the following
topics:&lt;br/&gt;- Design of novel next generation Computational RFID (CRFID
hardware that can harvest energy from alternative sources (WiFi and solar), and
can operate with extremely limited energy,&lt;br/&gt;- Design of a CRFID
operating system that can tolerate frequesnt interruptions pf power through
lightweight checkpointing and predictive management,&lt;br/&gt;- Development of
data cleaning and probabilistic interference techniques for processing streams
of noisy and incomplete RFID data,&lt;br/&gt;- Design of accurate locationing
techniques using re-targetable mobile RFID readers on robots,&lt;br/&gt;-
Deployment of an RFID-based biological monitoring application involving crickets
with small implanted tags that brings together the above research thrusts,
and&lt;br/&gt;- Enhanced RFID security mechanisms and analysis of security
vulnerabilities.&lt;br/&gt;The effort integrates research and education in RFID
systems, computer systems, data management, security, energy-aware computing,
and biology to advance knowledge and understanding of zero-power pervasive
devices. The project addresses the critical challenge of RFID reader placement
by designing computational RFIDs that can harvest from alternative sources other
readers, designs an operating system tailored to the needs of such computational
RFID devices, and designs services to localize RFIDs and manage noisy and
missing data. Moreover the security characteristics of RFIDs at different layers
are analyzed and cryptographic solutions for highly constrained devices are
developed Expected results include hardware designs, operating systems,
algorithms, protocols, and models for designing such systems. The experimental
and prototyping efforts should provide new insights into system design issues.
Design of novel next generation Computational RFID
(CRFID&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The research directly impacts the
design, development, and deployment of the next-generation RFID applications and
businesses including medical, environmental, energy, military, homeland
security, and transportation areas. The equipment has direct impact on
undergraduate research and student diversity. The RFID testbed will be
integrated within the curriculum across Computer Science, Evolutionary Biology,
and Electrical Engineering leading to a better understanding of the technology
and its impact on the environment and energy.