* 0923149
* MRI:  Acquisition of Laser Capture Microdissection Instrumentation for Michigan State University
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Yair Shachar-Hill, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2012
* USD 211,758.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study of plant biology has advanced
our understanding in areas not only related to agriculture and food quality, but
also in the areas of human biology. Recent advances in technologies in the area
of biochemistry, cell biology and genetics have enabled plant scientists to
address biological questions previously unattainable. This award provides
support for the acquisition of a laser capture microdissection (LCM) system and
ancillary equipment for advanced histologic analysis of plant materials at
Michigan State University. LCM is an advanced method for analyzing single cells
in living multicellular organisms. Using this technique, cells from a target
microscopic region can be selected, isolated, and analyzed. In short, this
yields precise cellular snapshots of cell diversity and the mechanisms
controlling processes as varied as development, stress, metabolism,
pathogenesis, and senescence. As a world leader in the experimental plant
sciences, MSU is extremely well placed to use and disseminate this powerful
technology, and the addition of LCM will leverage existing technological
strengths at MSU to catalyze breakthroughs in plant biology. In addition,
through hands-on training and education, post-graduate, graduate, undergraduate
and even high school students will receive specialized training using LCM, as
well as downstream genomic and proteomic techniques at MSU.