* 0923229
* US Egypt Cooperative Research: Advanced Underwater Archaeological Survey of the North West Coast of Egypt
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2011
* Brendan Foley, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 12/31/2011
* USD 59,588.00

This collaborative research project is being undertaken by Dr. Brendan Foley,
Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution (WHOI), and Dr. Emad Khalil, Alexandria
University of Egypt in order to conduct the first systematic underwater
archaeological survey along the Egyptian Western Desert/Mediterranean Sea
coastline utilizing advanced WHOI Autonomous Underwater Vehicle (AUV)
technologies and in situ sensors in combination with SCUBA divers. Drs. Foley
and Khalil will seek to discover fundamentally important shipwreck sites that
will allow new interpretations of the human maritime activities in different
periods and hence the interconnections between cultures. They will document a
Roman-era shipwreck discovered east of Marsa Matrouh and will then survey
fifteen square nautical miles of unexplored sea floor, documenting any shipwreck
sites detected by the AUV. Of particular interest to the research team is the
sea floor off Marsa Matruh and the Bronze Age fortress temple of Zawiyet Umm el-
Rakham, built by pharaoh Ramesses II approximately 1280 B.C. Shipwreck
discoveries dating to that period would be among the oldest sea-going vessels
ever located and would deliver new understanding of different aspects of ancient
civilization. Any ceramic artifacts recovered from the wrecks will be analyzed
for ancient DNA to identify original cargo components. SCUBA divers will
investigate any shipwreck discovered in 40 m of water or
less.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This technically project presents an innovative
approach to coastal marine archaeological survey and has the potential to yield
significant results. Further, the incorporation of DNA analysis into
archaeological interpretation is interesting component of the research plan. The
international partnership is integral to the success and accomplishment of the
research and will serve as a platform for the first academic program in maritime
archaeology in the Middle East region. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is
funded under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides grants to
scientists and engineers in both countries to undertake cooperative
research.&lt;br/&gt;