* 0923723
* Regulation of DELLA Activity by Post-Translational Modifications and Complex Formation in Arabidopsis
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2009,09/30/2013
* Tai-ping Sun, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 09/30/2013
* USD 600,000.00

Gibberellin (GA) is an important plant growth hormone, which promotes seed
germination, leaf expansion, stem elongation and flower development in higher
plants. The dwarf cultivars of wheat and rice developed during the Green
Revolution in the 60s remarkably increased the grain yields. Recent studies
revealed that these cultivars are modified in their GA production or responses
to GA, illustrating the important role of this hormone in regulating plant
development and in agriculture. GA-promoted growth and development is modulated
by DELLA proteins, which are major negative regulators (repressors) of GA
responses. Recent work in the PI's laboratory (funded by NSF) has made
transforming findings that the GA receptor directly targets DELLA for
degradation. There is also evidence suggesting multiple layers of regulation on
the DELLA protein activity. DELLA is a master growth repressor, which integrates
not only the GA signal, but also other hormone signals as well as biotic and
abiotic signals (such as light conditions, pathogens, cold and drought
stresses). Although DELLA plays such a pivotal role in regulating plant growth,
very little is known about how DELLA activity is regulated. Preliminary data
support that protein modifications play important roles in modulating DELLA
function. Future research in this project will elucidate the molecular
mechanisms involved. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;DELLA
proteins are functionally highly conserved in Arabidopsis and in many crop
plants. For example, the semi-dwarf wheat cultivars, an essential component of
the Green Revolution, contain mutations in the Rht loci that encode DELLA
proteins. This study will likely to have a broader impact in improving quality
of agricultural crops. In addition, a postdoctoral fellow and four undergraduate
students will gain research experience in this project. The findings of this
study will be incorporated into three undergraduate courses at Duke University.
Students will learn to appreciate how the information gained from studies in a
model plant system can be used to improve agriculture practice and benefit
society.