* 0923030
* MRI: Acquisition of an Inverted Confocal Microscope for Florida Gulf Coast University
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Scott Michael, Florida Gulf Coast University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 07/31/2012
* USD 449,313.00

0923030&lt;br/&gt;Geiger&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Investigators at Florida Gulf Coast University
(FGCU) are requesting funding from the National Science Foundation to purchase
an inverted confocal microscope to be housed in Holmes Hall, the new home of the
recently-formed (2005) U.A. Whitaker School of Engineering (WSOE). This
microscope will consist of an Olympus FluoView 1000 confocal system configured
around an inverted Olympus IX81 microscope. The Olympus system was selected
because its zero-drift technology and laser intensity feedback system will allow
for superior time-lapse imaging for extended duration experiments that are
crucial for particle tracking and determining intracellular particle fate. In
addition, the IX81 will be configured for independent standard epifluorescence
microscopy, including deconvolution microscopy. Overall, this microscope will
provide a significant improvement to the facilities currently available and will
make it possible for researchers at FGCU and neighboring institutions to expand
their research to include cellular and sub-cellular imaging. The main use of
this system will revolve around three primary investigators, one (Geiger) within
the WSOE and two (Isern and Michael) within the College of Arts and Sciences
(CAS). All three are affiliated with FGCU's Whitaker Center for Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) Education at various levels,
including serving as interim co-director (Ise.0rn) and acting as undergraduate
research mentors within the center (all). The CAS has a research requirement for
their science undergraduates, and the CAS investigators with the aid of an
established postdoctoral training program have a proven track record for not
only training undergraduate researchers, but also for publishing their research
in leading journals and for placing their undergraduate researchers in top-tier
graduate programs, medical schools, high-wage positions in the bioscience
sector, and K-12 science education.