* 0923506
* MRI: Development of a Complex Topography Photolithography Tool for Micro-Patterning on Non-Flat Substrates.
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Dan Tamir, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 09/30/2013
* USD 99,263.00

0923506 Geerts Texas State University-San Marcos

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

Technical Summary: There is an emerging need to create meso-, micro-, and nano-
scale structures on samples with arbitrary topography. This capability would
enable the realization of new devices such as: sensors for vector quantities,
CCD cameras without blind spots for military or surveillance applications, and
integration of passive tracking electronics on insects and other small animals
for surveillance, pest control, and population studies. Moreover, Diffractive
Optical Element (DOE) systems, Photonic Band Gap materials, Meta material
systems, and micromechanical systems (MEMS) all create non-planar structures.
Hence, integrating these technologies in a smart device necessitates access to a
non-planar lithography tool. This project aims to develop a unique 3D
lithography tool. An existing laser beam writer will be modified; the
substrate?s local topography, including height, slope, and curvature will be
determined in real time from the contrast distribution of substrate images taken
with a high speed camera. The photoresist thickness and the substrate?s local
optical properties will be estimated from real time spectroscopic measurement
data. A novel high speed liquid crystal spatial modulator will be applied to
shape, resize, and orient the focused laser beam in order to correct for
topography, photoresist film thickness and substrate?s optical properties
variations, and facilitate a constant exposure dose. Computer imaging and
computer graphics techniques, such as multiple exposures, exposures with
variable intensity, dithering, and equalization will be applied to the beam in
order to generate almost perfect pixels. The proposed instrument will be
developed by faculty and students from the physics, electrical engineering, and
computer science departments of Texas State University. It will serve as a tool
and resource for researchers and students in five different departments.
Techniques developed from this research will be shared with lithography and
imaging research/engineering communities. The developed prototype instrument
will be used for teaching lithography by integrating it into relevant
undergraduate and graduate courses. Layman Summary: Over the last 30 years,
semiconductor manufacturing has seen a 30% annual increase in productivity.
Improvements in lithography, the optical photographic process that is used to
create integrated circuits, contribute for approximately half of this gain. In
2009, a top of the line industrial lithographic tool prints structures down to
45 nm (1000 times thinner than a human hair) with a speed of one billion Mega-
pixels per second. Currently available instruments, however, only work on flat
substrates making them unsuitable for many interesting applications. This
project aims to develop a lithography tool that can be used to create small
structures on not flat samples with arbitrary topography, such as shirt buttons,
grains of sand, or the wings of an insect. The proposed instrument will make use
of an existing laser beam writer which includes a laser that is focused through
an optical microscope on the sample. Small structures are written directly on a
photo-sensitive layer on top of the sample, by moving the sample under the
focused laser beam. Corrections will be made to the shape and size of the
focused laser beam using a novel high speed liquid crystal to adjust for the
local properties of the sample. Computer graphics and optical techniques will be
used to determine those local properties. The proposed tool will facilitate
novel projects in integrated electronics, optics, mechanics, and magnetics, and
enable the realization of novel new devices such as CCD cameras without blind
spots, passive tracking electronics on insects for surveillance and pest
control, medical operation tools with integrated optical and electronic sensors,
and wearable computers (smart electronic gourmets). Commercialization is a
distinct possibility. The major goal of this research is to collaborate with
academia and industry on the development of the research findings and its
dissemination. The proposed project will engage undergraduates and will seek out
minorities and women to participate in the research.