* 0923636
* SBIR Phase II:  An Accurate, Low Cost In-Situ Multi-Spectral Absorption Meter
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2011
* Sang Hoang, Turner Designs
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 07/31/2011
* USD 500,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will investigate
the feasibility of an accurate low cost in-situ multi-spectral absorption meter
for measurement of water properties. Current commercially available instruments
are limited in their accuracy in real world conditions due to their design. They
are also expensive due to the use of costly components such as lamps, filter
wheels, spectrometers, etc. This project will explore the use of a novel
patented construction method in combination with light sources, optics, and
photodiodes to give scientists an accurate yet low cost research tool to measure
absorption in-situ over a variety of wavelengths. Compared to currently
available instruments, this instrument will be more sensitive, have a broader
dynamic range, will be insensitive to interfering parameters (e.g. scattering)
and will be able to measure in the ultraviolet
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful the proposed product will
help the scientific and general public communities better understand water
quality in the natural world but also it could be of considerable benefit in
broader kinds of chemical processing. Current commercially available in-situ
absorbance instruments lack accuracy in field conditions and are relatively
expensive. Hence they have not been widely adopted in the scientific community.
A more accurate in-situ absorption meter dramatically improves the quality of
the data that scientists can generate and reduces the amount of time they spend
correcting for interfering parameters. The proposed instrument will address
significant needs of organizations measuring water to understand natural
processes as well as to determine water quality. A number of applications to
measurements of other turbid liquids will be possible.