* 0924479
* Integration of Spatial and Social Network Analysis in Vaccine Trials
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Michael Emch, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 09/30/2013
* USD 301,183.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 1985, a community-based
individually-randomized oral cholera vaccine trial was conducted in Matlab,
Bangladesh. Existing methods for measuring the effectiveness of this vaccine
trial to the transmission of the disease are not robust. New methods for spatial
analysis and social network analysis are needed to better understand the impact
of vaccine trials and disease transmission. This project builds on earlier work
that developed theory and methods for incorporating neighborhood-level variables
into "ecological vaccine trials". &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Michael Emch at the
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill will reanalyze the cholera vaccine
trial data from the previous study using new measures of social and
environmental connectivity developed with social network analysis software, a
geographic information system (GIS), and satellite remote sensing technologies.
These new measures will help determine: (1) how placebo incidence and protective
efficacy (PE) vary within social networks; (2) how placebo incidence and PE vary
spatially by different environmental contexts; and (3) how spatial,
environmental, and social network information can be used simultaneously to
assess the effectiveness of vaccines and disease risk. Four data sets, already
collected by the investigators, will be used for in this study. These datasets
include: (1) a large cholera vaccine trial database, (2) a comprehensive
longitudinal demographic database from which the vaccine trial participants were
selected, (3) an accurate household-level GIS database, and (4) high resolution
Quickbird satellite imagery. Kinship ties between all households will be
measured using a complete network design as well as environmental connectivity
using satellite imagery and GIS techniques. These GIS and satellite databases,
in conjunction with the demographic, social network, and vaccine datasets, will
facilitate adding integrated spatial, environmental, and social components to
this vaccine evaluation study. Reanalyzing the Matlab oral cholera vaccine trial
using a spatial analytical framework and social and environmental connectivity
measures can give new insight into vaccine effectiveness evaluation and disease
transmission modeling. As a result, the theoretical and methodological issues
addressed in this project will have important implications for future vaccine
trials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will reanalyze an existing cholera
vaccine trial database using new measures of social and environmental
connectivity developed with social network analysis software, a geographic
information system (GIS), and satellite remote sensing technologies. These
methods will help determine: (1) how placebo incidence and efficacy vary within
social networks; (2) how placebo incidence and efficacy vary spatially by
different environmental contexts; and (3) how spatial, environmental, and social
network information can be used simultaneously to assess the effectiveness of
vaccines.