* 0924597
* International Collaboration in Chemistry: Enhancing Direct Photoelectrochemical Conversion of Carbon Dioxide
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Michael Hoffmann, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2012
* USD 555,000.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Michael R. Hoffmann of
California Institute of Technology is supported by the Analytical and Surface
Chemistry Program in the Division of Chemistry to conduct research in an
international collaboration with Professor John T. Irvine of St. Andrews
University and Professor Peter K.J. Robertson of the Robert Gordon University of
Aberdeen. The aim of the project is to investigate the photoelectrochemical
catalysis of multicomponent systems comprising CO2, as an electron acceptor, and
organic electron donors. Initial studies will be performed utilizing both narrow
and wide band gap metal sulfides as semiconductor photoelectrochemical catalysts
and organic amines as electron donors. Alternate oxide semiconductor catalysts
and simulated waste streams will also be explored in parallel. The ultimate goal
of this research is to develop efficient catalytic transformations that are
potentially useful for conversion of CO2 to useful alternative fuel and chemical
feedstock, and for the remediation of petroleum and bio wastes. This project
will expose students to an international research experience and will provide
them with opportunities to network with researchers in the United
Kingdom.&lt;br/&gt; The project is supported jointly by the NSF and the
Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council of the United Kingdom
(EPSRC).