* 0924054
* Flight Technology Experiments and the Public in Pre - Revolutionary France.
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Mi Gyung Kim, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2012
* USD 161,080.00

The balloon mania that engulfed the public just a few years before the French
Revolution, long viewed as the crucible of modernity, makes it a particularly
suitable subject to explore the relationship between science, Enlightenment
ideology, the French Revolution, and modernity. In this project, Dr. Kim seeks
to place the first balloon ascensions in the midst of revolutionary historical
processes to understand how they helped shape a new political landscape by
mobilizing the existing resources and institutions. To this end, she will
examine the material, social, and literary technologies ? production of luxury
consumer items, expansion of the press and the postal system, different genres
and modes of literature, administrative channels of communication, circulation
of the news, etc.?that served to create a mass public. She intends to utilize
new types of sources (e.g. imaginary voyages and underground pamphlets) and
comparative perspectives (e.g. France vs. England, Germany; Montgolfiers vs.
Blanchard) to dismantle the standard, euphoric narrative on ballooning.

The ideological, utilitarian, and cultural uses of science have shaped Western
civilization; in particular, science has been deeply implicated in the
construction of European modernity. It provided an alternative ideology of the
state that eclipsed the traditional, religious justification of kingship,
offered useful gadgets that shaped its military and urban environment, and
generated a cultural milieu of rational entertainment that catered to the
bourgeois taste and habits of consumption. This study will result in a more
sophisticated, comparative understanding of the different cultures of invention.
It will reveal institutional, social, cultural and political advantages and
barriers that affected the development of science during the French Revolution.
Proceeding in this way will serve to contribute to envisioning a global
community/culture of technoscience.