* 0924905
* A Cognitive Study of Bilingual Proficiency and Memory on the U.S.-Mexico Border
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Wendy Francis, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2013
* USD 290,000.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Supporting the academic success of
students who need to learn and use a second language is a widely recognized
educational challenge in the U.S. The challenge may be met in part by developing
a better understanding of how limited second language proficiency affects memory
processes essential for content learning. This project will investigate memory
performance in monolingual speakers of Spanish and English and in Spanish-
English bilinguals using their more fluent and less fluent languages. Working in
a less fluent language requires greater attention and the words are less
familiar. The importance of these two factors is assessed with respect to two
main questions. First, what components of memory, if any, are affected by
language proficiency? Second, does language proficiency alter the strategies
that individuals use to remember information? Experiments will be conducted with
students at the University of Texas at El Paso (UTEP) and neighboring
Universidad Autónoma de Ciudad Juárez (UACJ) in Mexico. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
The research should increase understanding of fundamental memory processes in
bilinguals and monolinguals. It may have profound educational implications for
study techniques for students and teaching practices for educators. The research
activities will increase diversity in research training and participation
through inclusion of primarily Mexican-American and Mexican national research
assistants and participants.