* 0924049
* "The Sword of Our Science": The Professional Life and Political Times of Otmar von Verschuer
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2011
* Sheila Weiss, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Kelly Moore
* 08/31/2011
* USD 277,114.00

This project--supported through the Biology &amp; Society initiative of the
Science, Technology &amp; Society (STS) Program and the BIO Directorate at NSF--
investigates the life of German human geneticist Otmar Freiherr von Verschuer
(1896-1969). von Verschuer is infamous for the ethically reprehensible research
he undertook together with his former doctoral student, Josef Mengele. Although
the details of von Verschuer's connection to medical crimes at Auschwitz are
well-documented, the conjunction of circumstances accounting for his descent
into the moral abyss has not been adequately explored. This project is the first
to examine von Verschuer's post-War career trajectory at the University of
MÃ¼nster during the early years of the Federal Republic of Germany. von
Verschuer's life and professional career provides a vehicle to point out the
moral pitfalls inherent in making unethical accommodations in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a wide variety of heretofore unexamined
archival sources, the biography weaves together the particulars that helped
forge the life of this world-renowned scientist, a man who remained a devout
Protestant and eugenicist throughout his professional life. More specifically,
it examines how von Verschuer used "the sword of science" to negotiate the
political contours of four historical eras in the interest of advancing his
research agenda. Informed by the STS literature on science and politics as
mutually beneficial resources, the investigation emphasizes the symbiotic
relationship between von Verschuer's science and German politics throughout the
formative years of genetics disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interplay of
politics and professionalism that shaped von Verschuer's long and checkered
career raises important ethical questions about biomedical science in our own
age of genomic medicine. The research project will result in a book that seeks
to prepare students in the biomedical sciences for the potential moral dangers
facing them as professionals, and to engage general readers in thinking about
contemporary debates on genetic technologies. The PI will be involved in the
development of a new PhD program in Biology at Clarkson University that will
feature history of biology in interdepartmental courses on politics and ethics
in biology.