* 0924527
* Computation in the Brain: Towards a Mechanistic Theory of Cognition
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Gualtiero Piccinini, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2011
* USD 123,495.00

As cognitive neuroscience continues its remarkable progress, data about the
nervous system accumulate. There is increasing desire, opportunity, and need to
integrate neuroscientific data with those of cognitive psychology, to reach a
more sophisticated mechanistic understanding of cognition. Computation is
perhaps the most fundamental notion employed in theories of cognition. Most
cognitive scientists believe that cognition is computation of some sort. Their
view is known as computationalism. It is important to notice that
computationalists strongly disagree on how to think of cognition
computationally. There are also those who reject computationalism. Anti-
computationalists generally recognize the dominance of computationalism in
cognitive science and construct their theories in explicit opposition to
computational ones. This project outlines a strategy for taking the debate over
the nature of cognition and its neural implementation to a higher level of
sophistication by investigating the notion of computation and how it applies to
the nervous system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The strategy adopted in the project is
based on the following four working assumptions, which have been defended in the
PI's previous work. First, there is not one notion of computation; rather, there
are many and investigators need to be explicit as to which notion they are
using. Second, there is little clarity on how notions of computation ought to be
characterized and applied, and many authors whether they are in the
computationalist camp or in the opposition employ the term 'computation'
differently without explaining what they mean and without referring to any clear
account of it; some regimentation is needed. Third, whether cognition is
computation, and what kind of computation it is, is an empirical matter; but,
this empirical matter cannot be resolved without first achieving clarity on how
notions of computation are to be applied to concrete physical systems. Finally,
since cognition is implemented by neural processes, neuroscience is the ultimate
arbiter of whether cognition is any kind of computation and what kind of
computation it is. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project uses the working
assumptions above to motivate the development of a general and clear account of
(different notions of) computation and how computation applies to concrete
systems such as the nervous system. Specifically, That will involve isolating
relevant notions of computation, characterizing them explicitly, and showing how
they can be applied within the kind of mechanistic explanation practiced in
neuroscience. Such an account can then be used to assess theories of cognition
on empirical grounds.&lt;br/&gt;