* 0924764
* Collaborative Research: Experimental Studies on Group Decision Making in Strategic Environments
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* John Kagel, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Donald Hantula
* 06/30/2013
* USD 330,609.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of
2009&lt;br/&gt;(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is widely believed
that decisions arrived at by groups of decision makers are superior to those
made by individuals, hence the common aphorism that "two heads are better than
one." In prior research the Principal Investigators found that this is the case
when the decisions involve strategic interactions with other groups or
individuals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Another type of situation where one might
anticipate that groups would do better than individuals is in problems where
once one member of the group gains the essential insight needed to solve the
problem they can easily explain the answer to others (so called "eureka" type
problems). In these situations, it would seem that the group should reach the
same insight as fast as its best member would acting alone, or faster due to
positive synergies (an "assembly bonus") among group members. However, research
in the psychology literature shows that this is typically not the case. (Kerr
and Tindale, 2004). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research tests several
hypotheses as to why two heads appear better than one in strategic
economic/business environments but not in the problem-solving domain. It also
further explores the origins of group performance advantage and details the
decision making processes used in strategic settings. To pursue these
objectives, behavior of individuals and groups will be examined in several new,
important, classes of problems (e.g., bidding in auctions and bargaining between
groups of individuals). &lt;br/&gt;