* 0924376
* Case Studies for a General Account of Biological Kinds
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2011
* Matthew Slater, Bucknell University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2011
* USD 178,900.00

Biologists of various stripes are united in approaching explanation and
prediction in their respective fields via a rich stock of categories and
groupings. That some animal is a panda explains why it eats bamboo, and their
particular dietary preferences serves to facilitate the prediction that they
will decline as bamboo forests are destroyed. Another example is the way in
which mammals' ventilation lungs of serves to explain human physiology through
the study of animal models. Philosophers have called such explanatorily and
predictively rich categories "natural kinds". That concept is the locus of
recent philosophical debates.

Within the physical sciences, natural kinds are often approached via the
underlying structure of the objects categorized. Something is gold, for example,
in virtue of having a particular atomic structure. By contrast, categories from
the biological sciences have largely resisted this kind of structural treatment.
There simply does not seem to be an "underlying structure" common to all pandas.
Within the philosophy of biology, the lion's share of attention has gone to
charismatic categories like species and how to account for their objectivity.
The aim of this project will be to examine three ranges of case studies:
cell/tissue types, organ types, and microbial ecologies. These cases have
largely escaped philosophical attention. The aim of focusing on them is to
construct a more general and flexible account of biological kinds. It is
expected that a close inspection of a wider range of biological practice will
lead to a better understanding of biological classification and its contribution
to the different explanatory and predictive projects that are important to us.

The PI will employ two undergraduate student research assistants from biology
and philosophy who will assist with gathering material for the case studies and
who will pursue parallel research projects according to their specific talents
and interests and thereby gain a valuable research learning experience.