* 0924965
* Professional Development Fellowship on socio-technical factors that enable institutions to anticipate, recognize, and respond to failures in stewardship of contaminated sites
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Seth Tuler, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Linda Layne
* 08/31/2012
* USD 86,299.00

This Professional Development Fellowship--supported by the Science, Technology
&amp; Society Program at NSF--develops a training and research project for an
informed institutional analysis of stewardship of contaminated sites.
Contamination by chemicals and radionuclides is being cleaned up at hundreds of
sites around the US. While Federal, state, and local agencies, as well as
various NGOs and private parties, are moving ahead with clean-ups of many sites,
oftentimes, cleanup does not mean that all contaminants have been removed. When
residual contamination remains, mechanisms must be established for longterm
institutional management (also called longterm stewardship) of the remaining
contaminants and of the systems put in place to contain them. The mechanisms may
involve a combination of engineering controls, such as physical barriers
intended to prevent contaminant migration or intrusion, and institutional
controls, such as restriction of development or public access to contain or
prevent exposures to residual contamination. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The need for
longterm stewardship (LTS) of sites is widespread. Analytic frameworks for
designing and sustaining LTS systems are lacking, however, and efforts must draw
on models and frameworks from other contexts. This Professional Development
Fellowship promotes development of knowledge to support improvements in
practical applications of LTS systems. Research conducted as part of the
Fellowship will explore in 2-3 case studies perspectives about: a) LTS system
requirements for anticipating, recognizing, and responding to failures of
engineering and institutional controls, and b) the role of public participation
to achieve these functions. The research compares how these perspectives reflect
analytical propositions about creating and sustaining resource and hazard
management institutions over long periods of time. The four streams of research
used to identify propositions for creating and sustaining LTS systems focus on:
high reliability organizations, adaptive management, risk governance, and
common-pool resources. The intellectual merit of this work is to build
conceptual understandings and theory of LTS and of public participation in LTS.
The Fellowship provides broader impacts by informing practice in a pressing
social challenge: the protection of health and the environment from sites that
will remain contaminated for very long periods of time.