* 0924296
* A Computational Survey of Excitable Competence Circuits in Bacillus subtilis
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2009,05/31/2010
* Marc Turcotte, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
* Continuing grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 05/31/2010
* USD 150,262.00

This project is a theoretical investigation focused on the phenomenon of
competence in Bacillus subtilis. Competence is the state during which this
bacterium can accept and incorporate, into its own genome, DNA from the
environment. The competent state is adopted at random times and for random
durations and is thought to be an evolutionary strategy to facilitate adaptation
to changing environmental stress. In this project computational and simulation
approaches will be used 1) to develop hypotheses for plausible theoretical gene
regulation topologies that underlie competence, and 2) to compute, numerically,
their observable phenotypes. The approach consists of systematically simulating
the stochastic behavior of the hypothetical gene regulatory circuit topologies.
The work includes deriving, analytically, the continuous limit of each model; it
involves connecting the discrete and continuous models, and performing phase
plane analyses. Parameter continuation will be used to map the dynamical regimes
of these systems. Comparisons with the stochastic behavior will be made and
differences leading to potentially interesting biological phenotypes will be
identified. The project is expected to suggest new gene regulation circuits to
"reengineer" in the bacterium and test in the laboratory. Key issues that are
addressed in this project concern the redistribution of noise in gene regulatory
networks as a function of circuit topology; whether general principles of noise
conservation (or trade off) exist; and the extent to which such principles might
inform our understanding of evolutionary processes.

Broader Impacts: This project will provide training at the interface of
mathematics, computer simulation and biology for undergraduate and graduate
students, and for a postdoctoral fellow who is interested in using mathematics
and computational simulations in the study of biology. The STARS program
(Science Teacher Access to Resources at Southwestern) will provide opportunities
for high-school teachers and their students to become engaged in this project.
New educational programs at the interface of mathematics and biology will be
developed, together with new portable simulation-oriented teaching material for
direct use in the classroom. STARS will facilitate interactions with the Dallas
Independent School District (DISD) schools and provide access to this project
for traditionally underrepresented groups.