* 0924241
* Flame Retardant Chemicals: Their Social Discovery as a Case Study for Emerging Contaminants
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Phil Brown, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 09/30/2013
* USD 432,676.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
Public Law 111-5). Flame retardant chemicals, such as polybrominated diphenyl
ethers (PBDEs), are ubiquitous in daily life, and biological and environmental
accumulation will persist for years to come. High levels have been found in
breast milk, household furniture, smoke inhaled by firefighters, and household
dust. Although research has clearly identified that these chemicals are
associated with neurological, reproductive, developmental, and other health
problems, these chemicals are widely used in household products. This project
examines the social discovery of these chemicals, looking at research and action
of all the parties who have contributed to knowledge and action about flame
retardant chemicals, including individuals and groups in health social
movements, scientists, labor unions, flame retardant manufacturers,
manufacturers faced with using flame retardants, fire protection organizations,
and government agencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on four
primary research areas: the discovery of the dangers of these chemicals; why
these chemicals continue to be used, in spite of their known dangers and a lack
of evidence that they effectively reduce fire danger; the successes and failures
of advocates for banning or regulation of flame retardant chemicals; and how
flame retardant chemicals serve as a case study for how scientists and citizens
respond to emerging contaminants. The project includes a detailed content
analysis of the scientific literature; analysis of regulatory documents and
public testimony; a field analysis that identifies the relationships between
individuals, organizations, and agencies active in the flame retardant debate;
observation of scientific projects, community meetings, and public hearings; and
interviews with scientists, physicians, firefighters and other high-exposure
occupations, activists, corporations that produce flame retardants and others
that use those flame retardants in consumer products, participants in household
exposure studies, and government officials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
merit: This study of flame retardant chemicals is intellectually important
because it provides an ideal case study of how citizens, scientists,
corporations, and the government respond to emerging contaminants. This project
contributes to a sociological understanding of how people interact with a
contaminated environment, and to the sociology of risk, providing new insights
into risk assessment, risk communication, and applications of the precautionary
principle. It provides important new information about how chemical
manufacturing and regulatory decisions are made. It also expands research on
social movements to include collaborations between citizens and scientists, as
well as between labor and environmental activists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts: This project will have a direct benefit on the communities being
studied, because presentations will disseminate research findings to a variety
of scientific, advocacy, governmental, and occupational groups. This project has
policy implications at global, national, and local levels. State and national
governments base their regulatory decisions on science and public input, and
this project highlights how science and activism are working to reshape
regulatory science and policy to move towards a more precautionary approach to
chemical regulation. At the most local and personal level, citizens and
scientists struggle with the presence of contaminants in their daily lives. This
research helps firefighters, their unions, and other labor unions to balance
chemical exposures with occupational concerns, and may highlight the need for
chemical manufacturers to move toward safer chemicals.