* 0924435
* International Collaboration in Chemistry: Block Copolymers with Photocleavable Junctions
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Edward Coughlin, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 08/31/2013
* USD 369,994.00

This ICC proposal by Professor Edward Bryan Coughlin of the University of
Massachusetts, Amherst, will be supported by the Dynamics group within the
Organic and Macromolecular Program in the Chemistry Division of MPS. The German
collborators are Dr. Patrick Theato, Institute for Organic Chemistry, and
Professor Jochen S. Guttmann, Instutute for Physical Chemistry, Johannes
Gutenberg University, Mainz. They will be supported by the Deutsche Forschungs
Gesellshaft (DFG). Block copolymers, two chemically different polymers joined
together at one end, separate into arrays of domains comparable to the
dimensions of the polymer chains (approximately on the 10 nanometer length
scale). The generation of nanoporous materials from ordered block copolymers
relies on a selective removal of one block without compromising the integrity of
the matrix material. By use of a photocleavable unit at the junction point of a
block copolymer, the removal of one of the components will not depend on the
chemical nature of the minor component and thus will be applicable to a much
larger variety of block copolymers. Cleavage of the junction point upon
photolysis, followed by removal of the minor components via selective solvent
extraction, is thus a promising strategy for preparation of the next generation
of nanoporous structures from block copolymers. In this proposal the PIs will
develop synthetic methodologies to incorporate o-nitrobenzyl esters or phenacyl
esters as photocleavable junctions in block copolymers. These materials will be
prepared using a combination of organic synthesis and then controlled radical
polymerizations. The PIs will systematically explore photolysis conditions that
will lead to rapid, clean and efficient photocleavage in the solution state.
With this knowledge base they will then study cylindrically or perforated
lamellar microphase separated morphologies in thin films and in the bulk.
Photocleavage and removal of the minor component by selective solvent extraction
will thus yield novel nanoporous templates. The knowledge gained in how to
generate nanoporous templates or scaffolds will have future applications in a
number of different scientific fields. The development of a range of novel block
copolymers will also allow them to probe a broad scope of fundamental polymer
physical chemistry investigations involving polymer chain diffusion dynamics
from rapidly created meta-stable states. This will provide the possibility to
investigate the transformation from a defined micro-phase separated block
copolymer morphology to a macroscopic separation of two immiscible homopolymers
depending on the previously inscribed morphology. This International
Collaboration in Chemistry proposal will allow United States graduate students
to perform critical portions of their doctoral research in Germany. The research
collaboration coupled with the international exchange of students will create a
future US workforce of scientists and engineers that are globally-engaged,
scientifically as well as culturally and socially.