* 0924821
* Interactions between Word and Speech Sound Categorization in Language Acquisition
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,09/30/2011
* James Morgan, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 09/30/2011
* USD 136,671.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

What do babies learn first -- sounds or words? The standard view is that
infants learn sounds first. In order to represent words most efficiently, they
must have acquired an appropriate set of speech sound categories. However,
infants appear to be able to recognize words in fluent speech well before speech
sound category learning is complete. Speech sound categories often display
considerable overlap, so that focusing solely on distributions of speech sound
characteristics may lead learners to posit supercategories that conflate
differences used to distinguish among words. This research investigates how
infants might learn multiple layers of linguistic structure simultaneously
rather than sequentially, learning to categorize both speech sounds and words
from unlabeled input. A combination of empirical and computational techniques
will be used to investigate whether infants can combine these learning processes
in artificial language learning tasks and how such interaction might actually
make the learning problem easier.

This research will directly contribute to our understanding of normal language
development. The research is highly interdisciplinary, involving ideas from
psychology, linguistics, statistics and computer science, and its outcome has
the potential to inform future research on disordered acquisition and the
development of computer systems that can learn speech sound categories from
unlabeled data.