* 0924456
* International Collaboration in Chemistry: Disentangling deactivation pathways in DNA bases &amp; model systems using time-resolved photoelectron spectroscopy &amp; three pulse tech
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2009,02/28/2014
* Susanne Ullrich, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 02/28/2014
* USD 478,671.00

In this project funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program and the
Office of International Science and Engineering, Professor Susanne Ullrich of
the University of Georgia and her research group will employ time-resolved
photoelectron spectroscopy (TRPES) to study the relaxation pathways of
photoexcited biologically relevant molecules. The Ullrich group will collaborate
with Professor Vasilios Stavros of Warwick University in Coventry, UK, who is a
specialist in a technique called time-resolved velocity map imaging (TRVMI). The
combination of these two ultrafast techniques is expected to reveal the order
underlying the many overlapping electronic states typical of polyatomic
molecules and how these states interact with one-another. Initial experiments
will focus on 1H-Pyrrole, 1H-Pyrazole, and 1H-imidazole species, followed by
research on the DNA base species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of
this research will have broad implications in photochemistry, photobiology, and
even nanotechnology. In addition, this US - UK collaborative effort will involve
the exchange of professors and students between the two laboratories. Students
involved in the research will therefore benefit from a highly interdisciplinary
(chemistry, physics, biology) and international experience as
well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;