* 0924210
* Resource management in developing countries: Improving decisions by uncovering hidden objectives and confronting difficult tradeoffs
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Robin Gregory, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 07/31/2012
* USD 394,753.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The presence of social, economic, and
environmental considerations in decision making for international development
point to the inevitability of some difficult tradeoffs; the need to give up
something valued in order to gain something else that is also valued but for
different reasons. This research seeks to better understand and improve the
effectiveness of two approaches that may be applied in sequence to address
environment-development tradeoffs. These are (1) stated choice approaches to
inform the design and implementation of (2) payment for environmental service
(PES) programs. In considering stated choice approaches and PES programs
together, our research is focused primarily on decisions that must be made and,
hence, tradeoffs that must be addressed on three levels. First, policy makers
must confront tradeoffs to establish whether an ecosystem should be protected or
developed, and if PES programs should be applied. Second, policy makers must
elicit information from stakeholders, using stated choice or related approaches,
regarding acceptable tradeoffs across environmental and development objectives.
Finally, service providers must confront tradeoffs when deciding if they will
accept or reject the terms of the PES contract that is offered to
them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When we consider this sequence of methods and
decisions, three separate challenges must be addressed. First, policy makers
must ensure that the required tradeoffs are sensible and relevant to those being
asked to consider them. Second, policy makers must work to ensure that the costs
and benefits that might result from management decisions are characterized
completely and distributed equitably. And third, appropriate and timely decision
support must be designed and delivered to help people deal with judgmental
inconsistencies when they are asked to consider complex and
demanding?emotionally and cognitively?tradeoffs. Whereas research has been
carried out in industrialized nations on how best to elicit, characterize, and
structure stakeholder objectives and then use these objectives to develop and
evaluate management alternatives, little work has been done in developing
countries where an established tradition of deliberative and participatory
decision making is largely absent. The fundamental objective of this research
is, therefore, to better understand and improve the quality of decision-making
processes in international development settings that increasingly must account
for multiple stakeholders, conflicting objectives, and tradeoffs across
development and environmental objectives. The work involves cases studies and
experiments with stated-choice surveys, enhanced by immersion methods, for PES
in Costa Rica.