* 0924463
* International Collaboration in Chemistry: Origins of the anomalous thermodynamics and dynamics of metastable liquid water
* MPS,CHE
* 11/15/2009,10/31/2013
* Abraham Stroock, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 10/31/2013
* USD 376,000.00

In this project, supported by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program,
Professor Abraham Stroock of Cornell University and his research group will
address two outstanding questions related to supercooled water and water at
negative pressures: 1) What are the mechanisms of cavitation of water at
negative pressures, and 2) What are the origins of observed thermodynamic and
dynamic anomalies in supercooled water? Supercooled water exhibits a number of
thermodynamic anomalies that have been extensively studied for the last decades:
the temperature dependence of many parameters (e.g., compressibility, expansion
coefficient, and transport coefficients) suggests a power-law divergence, at a
temperature around -45°C at atmospheric pressure. A number of competing theories
of this phenomenon have emerged, but the lack of experimental data has left the
question unresolved. This project will entail the first measurements in the
supercooled regime of viscosity away from ambient pressure (both positive and
negative) and of diffusivity under tension. The tools utilized by the Stroock
laboratory include Metastable Vapor Liquid Equilibrium (MVLE), Raman scattering,
nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), and microfluidic device technology. Professor
Stroock's work will be complemented by Brillouin scattering, acoustically
generated tension and optics-based density studies performed in the laboratory
of Professor Frederic Caupin of the Laboratoire de Physique de l'Ecole Normale
Superieure. The NSF proposal leading to this award was submitted in response to
solicitation NSF 08-602: International Collaboration in Chemistry between US
Investigators and their Counterparts Abroad (ICC).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Water is
among the most important and most studied substances on earth, yet, the origins
of its anomalous thermodynamic, dynamic, and structural properties have eluded
complete understanding. Scientific studies and technical developments related to
the metastable states of liquid water could have broad impact on research and
technology in a number of fields, from plant physiology to molecular modeling to
manufacturing. The research conducted in this project may provide not only a
fundamental foundation for new applications, but also the experimental tools
that can facilitate the broader scientific and technical impacts of that
knowledge. The richness of technical components (microfabrication, spectroscopy,
environmental controls) and fundamental components (thermodynamics, dynamics,
molecular structure) inherent in this project will provide an unusually broad
training for students and post-docs involved in this research. Furthermore, the
exchange of junior members of the US and French teams will allow these students
to engage in the full breadth of the research and gain valuable exposure to a
foreign scientific and national culture. Both PIs have a strong track record of
involving undergraduates in research projects in their labs, and will actively
recruit students to participate in this program. Stroock and his junior team
member will also engage in K-12 educational activities such as giving lectures
(e.g., How trees drink: the Nature of metastable liquids) at local science
museums, home-school events, and teaching programs run by the Cornell NSF-MRSEC.