* 0924610
* SBIR Phase II:   Fault Isolation of Open Circuits in Semiconductor Products using Magnetic Current Imaging
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2011
* Antonio Orozco, NEOCERA, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 08/31/2011
* USD 456,379.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II research project will
enable detection of open circuit failures in semiconductor packages and
integrated circuits with an accuracy of 10 microns by extending capabilities of
magnetic current imaging. This has been one of the most difficult problems
encountered by the industry today due to increasing complexity and shrinking of
leading edge designs. The only technique available today is time domain
reflectometry with practical resolution of 1-2 mm and time consuming layer-by-
layer deprocessing. There is a critical need for a faster, non-destructive and
more reliable technique capable of locating opens at a level commensurate with
package level wiring approaching 10 microns pitch. It is proposed to use
magnetic current imaging with a Superconducting Quantum Interference
Device&lt;br/&gt;(SQUID) to solve this critical need by analyzing high frequency
signals effects at the defect location. It is expected that this approach will
be able to detect opens with a resolution of about 10
microns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this research
are: it will enable semiconductor companies to bring product to market faster
and with greater reliability by rapidly finding and eliminating sources of open
defects; it will benefit the nation by accelerating the introduction of advanced
electronics that continuously improve quality of life for consumers, and bring
opportunity gains that enhance the competitiveness of American industry.