* 0924876
* Investigation of the Aerosol Indirect Effect on Ice Clouds and its Climate Impact Using A-Train Satellite Data and a GCM (General Circulation Model)
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Kuo-Nan Liou, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Anjuli Bamzai
* 08/31/2013
* USD 549,082.00

The objective of this study is to improve our understanding of the aerosol
indirect effect with a focus on ice clouds and its impact on climate modeling
and simulation through the interactions among aerosols, clouds, radiation, and
dynamical processes, using a general circulation model (GCM) and satellite data.
The approach of this research will involve both observational analysis and
climate modeling. Cloud and aerosol data retrieved from A-Train satellite
observations will be analyzed and employed in climate modeling simulations. The
new endeavor will include parameterization of the aerosol first indirect effect
on ice crystal effective size for use in climate models based on the A-Train
satellite data corresponding to 'clean' and 'polluted' clouds. The UCLA
atmospheric GCM (AGCM) will be employed to investigate the response of the
atmosphere system to the radiative forcings of the aerosol first indirect
effect. This study represents one of the first attempts to quantify the climate
impact of the aerosol indirect effect using a GCM in connection with A-train
satellite data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In particular, the project will: (1)
develop a parameterization of the aerosol first indirect effect on ice crystal
effective size for application to GCMs; (2) quantify the radiative forcing of
the aerosol first indirect effect in a climate model; (3) identify the relative
importance of the aerosol indirect effect with the presence of aerosol direct
radiative forcing; (4) investigate the impact of polluted clouds on global and
regional climate change associated with the aerosol direct and indirect effects;
and (5) examine the existing aerosol indirect effect parameterization on ice
clouds that has been developed on the basis of simplified ice microphysics and
explore the satellite data to assist in this type of parameterization.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this research include an advanced
understanding of climatic effects of aerosols and potentially improved climate
simulations and projection by reducing aerosol related uncertainties in GCMs. A
graduate student will be trained and supported.