* 0924285
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  "Simulating Terror: A Study of Bioterrorism Preparedness Scenarios as Staged by Scientists, Citizens, and the Security State"
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Armstrong Melanie, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Gorman
* 08/31/2010
* USD 10,000.00

As part of a multibillion dollar biosecurity industry emerging in the 21st
century, the National Level Exercise (NLE) program uses large-scale simulations
to assess how people might respond to a bioterrorist attack. By examining the
work of scientists, policymakers, emergency responders, and local residents in
staging NLE scenarios, this research analyzes how biosecurity practices give
tenacity to bioterrorism threats and reshape American communities. This
dissertation funded by the Science, Technology & Society Program examines the
production of a modern bioterror crisis, asking how bioterrorism has become a
credible risk and what outcomes biosecurity practices have in the lives of
citizens.

To explore how science knowledge is created and implemented by the political
state, the researcher conducts a multi-sited study of the 2009 NLE events.
Ethnographic interviews investigate how various actors plan the "event," while
discussions with government officials reveal how these scenarios inform
biosecurity policy and practice. Critical observation and citizen interviews
consider what gives these scenarios credibility and to what extent they stand in
for bioterrorist events in the public imagination. This research also analyzes
the history of preparedness drills and civil defense, asking how rituals of
rehearsal and simulation function within the security state.

Although the new genomic biology and War on Terror seem to emerge separately,
these movements are deeply infused, raising questions about the role of biology
in a post-9/11 world. To address the critical question of how the state engages
its citizens in a national biosecurity project, the researcher examines the
practices that bind science to politics through the everyday making of spaces
and identities. In a time when biosecurity involves stockpiling vaccines and
scanning liquids at airports, the goal of protecting the national body touches
everyone's life. By showing how biosecurity rituals produce the bioterror
crisis, this research impacts the public's ability to conceive of different
possibilities, building alternative biologies and less fearful futures.