* 0924454
* Assessment of Water Reuse as an Approach for Meeting Future Water Supply Needs
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2009,03/31/2011
* Stephen Parker, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Karn
* 03/31/2011
* USD 25,000.00

0924454&lt;br/&gt;Parker &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Water Science and
Technology Board of the National Research Council (NRC) will undertake a
comprehensive study of the potential for water reclamation and reuse of
municipal wastewater to expand and enhance the nation's available water supply
alternatives. This broad study will consider a wide range of uses, including
drinking water, non-potable urban uses, irrigation, industrial process water,
groundwater recharge, and water for environmental purposes. The study will
consider technical, economic, institutional, and social challenges to increased
adoption of water reuse, and it will provide guidance to decision makers
evaluating their water supply alternatives. The NRC study will be carried out by
a committee of approximately 14 volunteer experts, with support from NRC staff.
The committee will hold approximately five meetings to receive briefings, gather
information, deliberate critical issues, and write its report.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As water demands and environmental needs grow, options for
expanding traditional sources of water are diminishing. Conservation, water
trading, desalination, and potable and non-potable water reuse are all being
closely examined by communities facing water supply shortages. An improved
understanding of the costs, environmental and human health risks, and benefits
of various forms of water reuse are essential to water supply planning. The
recent advances in technology and the past decade of research deserve a thorough
review in the context of evaluating the human health risks, particularly for
indirect potable water reuse, and the energy requirements relative to other
alternatives. The study will also identify technical barriers and research
needs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of the committee's work will be a
published report that will consider technical, economic, institutional, and
social challenges to increased adoption of water reuse and will provide
practical guidance to decision makers evaluating their water supply
alternatives. A short (~8 page) color brochure will also be produced based on
the final report for broad dissemination of the report's findings. A broad
assessment of water reuse options, available technologies and their performance,
associated costs, and their acceptance by the public would provide useful
information for utilities that are considering future water supply alternatives.
Parts of most meetings of the committee will be held in open session with
utilities, non-governmental organizations, relevant federal, state, and local
agencies, and other experts, and other interested parties in order to engage a
broad group of individuals from the water management and policy community.