* 0924138
* Mississippianization, Religious Conversion and Identity Formation in Pre-Columbian Wisconsin
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Timothy Pauketat, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2013
* USD 181,898.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

With the support of the National Science Foundation, Dr. Timothy Pauketat,
Robert Boszhardt, and Danielle Benden will lead a team of specialists and
students in a three-year archaeological investigation of a 950-year-old cultural
complex in the upper Mississippi valley near LaCrosse, Wisconsin. The team
includes archaeologists, geophysical and geomorphological scientists, a
zooarchaeologist, a paleoethnobotanist, and Native and non-native American
graduate and undergraduate students. The project goal is to explain an episode
of ancient colonization, peace-making, and religious proselytization associated
with the founding American Indian city of Cahokia (in southern Illinois).
Already established are these baseline facts: at or just before the year AD
1050, Cahokians or some related group of expatriots/converts established
missions or colonial outposts in various northern locales. In the project area,
the colonial intrusion appears to have transformed the identities, religious
beliefs, and daily practices of many people, some of whom may have fallen in
line with the southerners. In such ways, the mission/outpost settlements seem
foundational to the establishment of a century-and-a-half "peace" in the
Mississippi valley.

Measures of the timing, identity, character, and consequences of this phenomenon
will be generated based on investigations of three known sites and, using those
measures, project personnel will infer the degree of peaceful cohabitation or
religious conversion of the "Effigy Mound Culture" locals vis-Ã -vis the
intrusive southerners. The project will determine (1) who the newcomers really
were, (2) how they negotiated their way into the northlands (religion, politics,
or violence?), and (3) how such relations might have been connected to the end
of the Effigy Mound Culture in the north and to Cahokia's rapid rise to power in
the south. Geophysical surveys (using magnetic and electrical resistivity
ground-penetrating devices) will identify the remains of ancient houses,
domestic facilities, religious temples, and ritual debris beneath the ground at
the Fisher, Trempealeau, and 47-TR-6 sites. Targeted excavations will follow,
using artifact assemblages and architectural remains to generate the measures
noted above.

At the regional level, the project's intellectual merits include determining the
cause or consequence of the pervasive cultural changes in the eleventh century
midcontinent. Long-held explanations of both the ancient city of Cahokia and the
northern Effigy Mound Culture may be overturned. At a global scale, the research
will provide a new starting point from which to examine peace-making, religious
proselytization, and the expansion of civilizations around the world. Knowing
how and why this happened - which is to say determining if and how the local and
nonlocal groups engaged each other through religion, alliance, or violence -
will elucidate the general relationships of politics and religion to cultural
change, central to any geopolitical understanding of either the ancient or
modern worlds. The broader impacts of the project include refining geophysical-
technology applications and expanding the collaborative network of social
scientists and public stakeholders. A new generation of indigenous and non-
native American archaeologists will be trained, in collaboration with the
American Indian Studies program at UW-Madison. Public outreach efforts will be
expanded, partly through an interactive web site that will serve as a gateway
for students, journalists, and laypersons alike.