* 0924802
* CEDAR Postdoc:  Numerical Modeling of Mesospheric Bores, Nonlinear Ducted Waves, and Interpretation of Observations in the Middle Atmosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Brian Laughman, NorthWest Research Associates, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Anja Stromme
* 08/31/2012
* USD 173,283.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on modeling studies
of mesospheric bores. These wave features occur in the upper mesosphere and
lower thermosphere and are identified as a sharp wave front with a large
horizontal extent (on the order of 500 km) followed by a train of wave crests.
Mesospheric bores were first observed in 1993. Since then, there have been many
additional observations but limited detailed understanding. This project will
quantitatively assess the dynamics and characteristics of mesospheric bores,
including the environments that support them, the forcings that give rise to
them, and their impacts on the atmosphere. The effort has two main components:
(1) extend a current numerical model already developed to encompass more
complicated forcings and environments typical of the mesosphere and lower
thermosphere; (2) model observed airglow data for which concurrent lidar and
radar measurements describe the thermal and wind environments. For task 1, the
proposed model extensions will simulate more realistic background conditions for
the bores along with the responses of various types of bore structures to these
conditions. The second task will use airglow, radar, and lidar observations to
provide information on the background thermal structure of the atmosphere and on
how bores propagate through it. The numerical studies will improve quantitative
understanding of bore dynamics and determine how the existing theories might be
expanded or amended to apply in realistic environments. Applications to
observations will also define how observations can best quantify the bore
dynamics as well as related ducting phenomena. The broader impacts of the
project concern the implications for better understanding and quantification of
energy and momentum transport and deposition in the mesosphere and lower
thermosphere, which impacts the mean flow and global circulation models. An
improved understanding of the nonlinear dynamics of mesospheric bores is also
relevant to other dynamically similar phenomena, both in the lower atmosphere
and in various engineering applications. The project will support a new
researcher in his first research effort after completion of the Ph.D.&lt;br/&gt;