* 0924124
* Antimicrobial Plant Defensins:Structure-Activity Relationships and Modes of Action
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2009,01/31/2014
* Howard Berg, Donald Danforth Plant Science Center
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 01/31/2014
* USD 599,999.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt; Plants constantly encounter pathogen attacks,
especially from pathogenic fungi. As part of various defense strategies to
protect themselves against fungal attack, plants produce small antifungal
proteins known as defensins. Defensins are produced during the normal growth and
development of plants and also in response to fungal attack. Some of these
proteins are potent inhibitors of fungal pathogens. The PI and his research team
have isolated two plant defensins, MsDef1 and MtDef4, from Medicago spp. that
inhibit the growth of Fusarium graminearum, a fungal pathogen which causes
devastating head blight disease in wheat and barley. The constitutive expression
of these proteins in transgenic plants affords strong protection from fungal
attack. A critical issue that needs to be addressed for effective use of these
proteins in transgenic crops is understanding their structure-activity
relationships, modes of action and the mechanisms by which fungal resistance to
these proteins might emerge. Preliminary data suggest that MsDef1 and MtDef4
have different modes of antifungal action and act independently on F.
graminearum. The planned research will identify the structural features and
active sites that are essential for the unique antifungal activity of these
proteins. In addition, the fungal toxicity pathway utilized by each protein will
be elucidated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The planned
research will shed light on the molecular mechanisms by which antifungal plant
defensins inhibit the growth of fungi. This knowledge will enable an effective
long-term use of these proteins for biological control of fungal pathogens in
transgenic crops. The research will also help establish the foundation for crop
and mammalian safety, thus providing a greater sense of security about the use
of these proteins in transgenic crops. Moreover, knowledge gained from the
planned studies will facilitate future discovery of environmentally safe
fungicides. In addition, this project provides a training opportunity for a
postdoc as well as minority undergraduates and high school students. The PIs
will continue to coordinate with and provide research opportunities through
existing programs for students at the Danforth Center. Participants will learn
not only protein biochemistry and engineering, but also cutting-edge fungal
genomics and proteomics technologies. To enhance the wider scientific impact,
presentations at professional meetings and publications in peer-reviewed
journals are planned.