* 0924009
* Effects of Simulated Climate Change on Soil Microbial Diversity and Plant-Microbe Association in Lake Superior Provincial Park, Canada
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,02/28/2014
* Melissa Lenczewski, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2014
* USD 48,436.00

Sugar maple, an ecologically and economically important species in the deciduous
forests of North America, is likely to be affected by altered climates near its
northen limit. During past warming and cooling espisodes associated with
glaciation, the forests of North America have tracked climate by the trees
shifting their ranges north and south across the continent. However, projections
of human-induced climate change over the next several hundred years suggest that
warming may be much faster than tree species have experienced in the past 18,000
years---in fact, probably faster than over the last two million years. This
rapid rate of climate change may negatively impact many species' ability to
reproduce and persist in regions where they are currently found. In the case of
sugar maple, climate effects may include altered growth rates, changes in
survivorship, and changes in the plant/soil community dynamics including long
term associations with soil microbial partners. This project will evaluate the
impact of climate change on soil microbial communities associated with sugar
maple seedlings under an artificial temperature and precipitation manipulation
experiment. It is designed to complement an ongoing project by the same
investigators that is examining growth of sugar maple seedlings in response to
temperature and precipitation change in the boreal-deciduous forest boundary
located in Lake Superior Provincial Park, Canada. Experimental plots, outfitted
with rain-exclusion structures and infrared heat lamps, were established in May
2008. The investigators will be addressing two broad questions in habitats
undergoing experimental climate change: 1) how will climate change alter soil
microbial diversity and soil microbe community structure?, and 2) what role does
the soil microbe community play in the feedback between climate change and soil
respiration where sugar maple is dominant? Microbial diversity will be evaluated
in a three-fold manner: 1) via polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based product
analysis, 2) via cultivation of microbes, and 3) via phospholipid fatty acid
(PLFA) analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Soil microbial communities play a key
role in geochemical processes including nutrient mineralization and soil organic
matter transformation, but feedbacks between soil microorganisms and plant
community composition/diversity are largely unknown. There is no doubt that over
long periods of time plant and microbial species respond to climate changes by
range shifts, but using analogs from past climate change may not be appropriate
if forest ecologists wish to model biotic (both above- and below-ground)
response to climate change over the next century. Thus, field experiments that
simulate the more pronounced and rapid temperature changes can provide
constructive results identifying specific responses to alterations in
temperature and atmospheric concentrations mimicking anthropogenic impacts.
Fully understanding and quantifying aspects of the carbon cycle in the plant-
soil-atmosphere continuum will be critical in determining whether forest soils
will become net sinks or sources of atmospheric carbon. A detailed understanding
of the largely unstudied impact of climate change on soil microbes may prove to
be a vital component in the expanding field of ecological impacts of global
climate change. Further, the investigators expect that their results will
provide information on whether ecological thresholds exist beyond which sugar
maple and their associated microorganisms may not survive, so that forest
managers, soil scientists, modelers, and policy makers can begin to monitor the
environment for indications that those changes are imminent. Because sugar maple
is a dominant species in these forests it may drive much of the ecological
change under modified climates. This project will provide both research and
educational opportunities in approaches from forest ecology and microbiology
that allow for the investigation of the impact of climate change on natural
ecosystems.