* 0924674
* Beyond the Mirror: An Integrated Computational Framework for the Study of Action &amp; Language
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Michael Arbib, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2013
* USD 600,000.00

Humans are unique in that they can learn and use language. However, we share
many brain mechanisms for perception and action with our primate cousins, the
monkeys and apes. The proposed research will chart how these shared brain
mechanisms provide the basis for the uniquely human brain mechanisms that
support the learning, perception, and production of language. The key idea is
based on the mirror system, a system for controlling both the execution and
observation of action, found for grasping in moneys. This idea was extended
"beyond the mirror" in humans to encompass mechanisms for language. The approach
to the research is computational: to develop computer programs that make
explicit the implications of ape and monkey data and human data for analysis of
the human language-ready brain. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study of language
within a more general understanding of action and perception may ground new
approaches to language education and the treatment of language disorders. In
particular, linguists have long debated what it is about language that is innate
and what reflects the child's social learning. The assumptions of different
schools of thought clearly influence approaches to language education. By laying
bare underlying brain mechanisms that include an account of neural plasticity,
the proposed research has the potential to transform the innateness debate in
ways that can inform educators. To support this, the research will also develop
a new information infrastructure, the Brain Operation Database, which will
provide a repository of summaries of the empirical data used to test and develop
models, descriptions of the models themselves together with summarized
simulation results, and tools for comparing the success of different models in
explaining known data and supporting predictions for new empirical
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work is co-funded by SBE/BCS and
CISE/IIS/RI.