* 0924193
* Erice 2009: International School on High-pressure Crystallography - unique educational experience for young  American scientists in geophysics and mineral physics
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2010
* Stephen Sutton, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 04/30/2010
* USD 8,000.00

proposal seeks funds to support participation of eight young scientists
(undergraduate, graduate students and postdoctoral researchers) in the
International School on High-pressureCrystallography, which will take place in
Erice, Italy, between June 4 and 14, 2009.International Schools of
Crystallography (ISC) have been held at the Ettore Majorana Centrein Erice since
1974 each year and have dealt with a broad variety of crystallographic
topics.ISC have long been recognized by the international scientific community
as a premiere educationalopportunity in advanced crystallography. The title of
the 2009 School will be: "High-pressure Crystallography: From Novel Experimental
Approaches to Applications in Cutting-Edge Technologies".The topics covered at
the 2009 school will be of great importance to the new generation of geophysics
and mineral physics scientists. New, groundbreaking experimental techniques, as
well as advanced computational approaches used to study structure, properties
and transformations of minerals in Earth and planetary interiors, as well as the
theoretical background necessary to understand these phenomena will be covered.
Additional multidisciplinary topics such as synthetic chemistry aspects, or
behavior of biomolecules and microorganisms at high pressure will create a
unique blend of subjects that will equip the participants with a very broad
overview and understanding of high-pressure science.Erice Schools have a program
of about 10 days of intensive training and interaction, and are attended by
approximately 30 lecturers and 100 students. All lecturers are very accomplished
scientists with international reputation. The school has a unique format, truly
focused on education, which emphasizes direct hands-on exercises and stimulates
active interaction between the instructors and the students in a fashion similar
to the Gordon Research Conferences.Another very important and unique feature of
the Erice schools is the availability of the whole course though web
broadcasting system, which has been successfully conducted since 2003,and
extended the access to the course lectures and materials to a much broader,
international student body. As determined by the organizers of previous schools,
at peak hours, as many as seven hundred scientists around the world were
remotely participating in the Erice lectures.It is also worth noting that the
remote participation allows interaction with the lecturers via chat-room
service.The general policy for producing course teaching materials consists of
requesting each invited lecturer to write a 5-10 page summary of his/her
contribution, including a comprehensive list of references. The collected
lecture notes are distributed to participants on their arrival. The lecture
notes are published in a mongraph book form by international printing companies.
The funds requested in this proposal are to cover partial cost of accommodation
and subsistence of eight young participants from US institutions ($1000 per
student). Supplemental support has been provided by COnsortium for Materials
Research in Earth Sciences (COMPRES).