* 0924750
* Neural Basis of the Perception of Sound Location
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2009,06/30/2015
* Jennifer Groh, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Alumit Ishai
* 06/30/2015
* USD 659,405.00

In our daily lives, we are confronted with many sounds. Distinguishing among
them--identifying them, and determining where they are coming from--is essential
to many aspects of our existence from carrying on a conversation in a room full
of people to avoiding cars when crossing the street. With funding from the
National Science Foundation, Dr. Jennifer Groh and colleagues at Duke University
are investigating how the locations of sounds are represented in the brain.
Unlike the visual system, the auditory system does not appear to use maps for
encoding stimulus location. Rather, emerging evidence suggests that at least the
horizontal dimension of auditory space is encoded via populations of neurons
that respond with monotonically increasing or decreasing responses the farther a
sound is located to the right or left. In theory, neurons with this kind of
response pattern encode sound location via their firing rates, which exhibit a
roughly one-to-one correspondence with a particular sound location. A critical
limitation of this kind of coding scheme, however, is that the representation of
multiple simultaneous sound locations would appear to be impossible because
neurons cannot discharge at more than one firing rate at a time. And yet, humans
can perceive multiple sound locations. So how does this happen? This project
tests several competing hypotheses for how neurons might respond when more than
one sound is present. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The answers to these questions will
yield important new insights into how the neural representation of sound
location subserves this critical component of auditory perception. The findings
generated by this research will be informative not only in the auditory domain,
but will also help clarify the kinds of computational strategies the brain may
employ more generally to compress information in the face of limited neural
resources. The funding from this project will be used to support a research
group at Duke, providing training opportunities for undergraduate, graduate, and
post-doctoral trainees in cognitive and computational neuroscience.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;