* 0924692
* SBIR Phase II:  Method of Integrated Web-Based Tools to Enable a Collaborative Community of Professional Creatives
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Elizabeth Messina, Artbox LLC
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 08/31/2012
* USD 630,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project provides an
integrated suite of Web-based applications to an online network of professionals
in the creative industries. These professionals include Creatives such as
writers, photographers, illustrators, filmmakers, animators, product designers,
programmers and producers. The products of their creative activities include
both commercial and fine-arts applications in the realms of music, literature,
imagery, audio-visuals, communications and product design. The end users of
these products range from the personal consumer to global industry, education
and government. This innovation builds on the software-as-a-service tools
developed through Phase I efforts and brings them to their next evolutionary
level. Tools to enable collaboration and commerce among subscribers to the site
will be developed and released. With these tools and its network of cultural
entrepreneurs, Artbox.com establishes a 21st-century internet agora, in which
talented, accomplished thinkers-and-makers assemble to trade their ideas and
inventions.

Independent Creatives, the driving force behind the growing Creative Industries,
have demonstrated a need and desire for the kind of solutions that this
innovation intends to provide. The Internet has changed the economic realities
of almost every business, and the American economy is at a turning point. Old
models based on manufacturing and information technology have been greatly
affected by the availability of cheap labor overseas. Observers of these trends
have identified that "innovation," "imagination" and "collective intelligence"
form the new basis for competitive advantage in the global marketplace. In an
innovation economy, creators of original content, concepts and products are also
the creators of value. If successful, Artbox.com will build a powerful network
and efficient talent-sourcing tool for businesses and individuals alike.

