* 0924445
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Comparative Analysis of Scientific Communication Cultures in Chemistry
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Carl Lagoze, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2012
* USD 11,673.00

This dissertation project funded by the Science, Technology & Society Program
investigates communication practices of multiple subfields within chemistry and
across the boundary with physics. The rise of the World Wide Web has provided
new opportunities to innovate scientific communication. Recent research seeks to
understand how and why research fields differ in the manner in which they take
up these opportunities. This dissertation project focuses on chemistry, a
discipline that has received little attention from researchers. It investigates
how various levels of social organization within the chemistry community and at
its intersection with the physics community link to research cultures and how
they interact in the shaping of scientific communication practices.

To study communication patterns and collective forms of research practice, this
study combines qualitative (ethnographic) methods and quantitative (network
analytic) methods. It explores notions of community and practices of scientific
communication through observations and interviews of chemists and physicists at
research labs. It uses these qualitative results to ground the interpretation of
publication networks. How do publication networks represent patterns of
collective interaction and communication? Can network analysis be used to scale-
up from a local ethnographic level of study to a description and comparison of
collective phenomena?

The intellectual merit of this project is twofold. First, it develops an
approach for comparisons of variations in scientific communication cultures
within the shared context of a discipline. So far most studies have looked at
and compared communicative cultures of unrelated research fields. Second, it
explores the value of combining qualitative and quantitative approaches to study
and compare scientific communication cultures. In particular, it critically
investigates the meaning of quantitative constructs from new approaches to
publication network analysis in the context of actual social practices.

Results of this study are expected to impact development efforts in e-science
and open access based scholarly communication services by contributing to a
better understanding of the role of research cultures and community structures
in shaping scientific communication. The study is expected to be further
relevant to network science and to a wider audience of scientists,
administrators, and policy makers because of its critical appraisal of the power
and limitations of a purely quantitative approach to the study of scientific
collectives.