* 0924122
* STTR Phase II:  Ultra-High Efficiency Biodiesel Manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2009,05/31/2013
* John Massingill, Advanced Materials and Processes
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 05/31/2013
* USD 554,143.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase II project will change the
paradigm that two-phase chemical reactions must use mechanical mixing to be
commercially effective. The innovative Fiber Reactor (TM) offers two orders of
magnitude change in efficiency for chemical and biochemical manufacturing. This
project will focus on biodiesel transesterification reactions. Biodiesel plants
convert fats/oils to biodiesel with multiple reactor stages and centrifuge
stages. Complexity is due to poor mass transfer, poor reaction conversion, and
poor phase separations due to by-product soap. Improving mass transfer and
eliminating soap dispersions will reduce the cost of manufacturing biodiesel. In
Phase I experiments, the Fiber Reactor was 3-100 times faster than commercial
biodiesel processes with superior conversion. Advanced Materials and Processes
has found an unconventional way to improve mass transfer and simultaneously
solve phase separation problems in biodiesel processes. Use of a Fiber Reactor
will reduce complexity, size, capital, energy consumption, and water pollution
by dramatically improving mass transfer and eliminating dispersions. Phase I
proved feasibility of energy savings and process intensification in biodiesel
manufacturing. Phase II will use Phase I models and CHEMCAD models to design and
operate a pilot reactor using the high throughput continuous static Fiber
Reactor and wash processes.

Biodiesel capacity could increase 10 times by 2015 and improve U.S. energy
security. Two hurdles remain - produce the triglyceride needed and match
petroleum economics. A new industry and networks are being developed to supply
enough algae oil. Fiber Reactors will reduce capital and operating cost for
producing biodiesel by 50% and use low cost crude oils/fats. Phase I developed
basic transesterification chemistry for Fiber Reactors. Phase II will develop
chemistry/engineering data for scale up. Fiber technology will apply to
pharmaceutical and specialty chemical manufacturing with similar benefits. This
project will integrate research and education by training students in organic
chemistry, fibers, materials, processes, pilot operations, fractionation,
analysis, organic synthesis, and quality control. Students use wet chemistry,
GPC, HPLC and LC/MS for identification/quantification of raw materials and
reaction products. Texas State University graduated 46 chemistry/biochemistry
majors in 2008. Enrollment in 2009 included 329 chemistry/biochemistry majors.
The 37 graduate students were 35% minority and 48% women. IEIS has provided
research assistantships/employment to over 100 students of whom 62% were women
or minorities. This project will have a positive impact on the research
capabilities of academic departments and IEIS; and help women and minorities to
improve their training in industrial chemistry.

