* 0924021
* Collaborative Research: Population Response to Quaternary Environmental Change: Great Basin Lagomorphs as a Case Study
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Elizabeth Hadly, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Boush
* 08/31/2012
* USD 308,378.00

COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH&lt;br/&gt;POPULATION RESPONSE TO QUATERNARY ENVIRONMENTAL
CHANGE: GREAT BASIN LAGOMORPHS AS A CASE STUDY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Elizabeth A.
Hadly, Department of Biology, Stanford University&lt;br/&gt;Donald Grayson,
Department of Anthropology, University of Washington&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;______
__________________________________&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This award is funded
under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).
Increase in global mean temperatures will amount to 1.1-6.4?aC by the end of
this century, with US western regional changes even greater. Beyond shifting
ranges, impacts to our native biota are only now beginning to be investigated.
It is critical that we take on the goal of determining reliable indicators of
population persistence and overall species extinction risk. One of the best ways
of assessing the myriad effects of rapid environmental change on our extant
fauna is to study how these same species responded to climatic events of the
recent past. Recent advances in molecular genetics, stable isotope research,
archaeology, paleontology, morphometrics and climatic modeling can now be
combined to reveal the thresholds behind population loss from the fossils
themselves, an endeavor that has not yet been attempted. Here we propose to
assemble a diverse team of established and beginning investigators to ascertain
factors underlying population persistence, expansion and loss from the fossil
record. Within our exemplar study system, the Great Basin, we propose to use a
diverse model mammalian order, the Lagomorpha, to ask whether the fossil record
can help us to identify survival thresholds in potentially endangered
populations of mammals. In particular, we propose to investigate the expansion
and extirpation dynamics of lagomorphs over the last 15,000 years against the
backdrop of changing landscapes, climates, and human populations in the region.
We will use a combination of fossil occurrence and relative abundance data,
archaeology, morphometrics, isotopic data, analysis of both modern and ancient
genetic diversity (phylochronology), population size and connectivity to
ascertain the factors associated with population dynamics of this group. By
focusing across this broad and varied landscape through some 15,000 years of
dramatic environmental change, we will provide a conceptual and empirical
package that will allow more precise predictions of the fate of extant mammals
worldwide in the face of ongoing human-caused environmental
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;