* 0924387
* Understanding the Effects of Self-Affirmation
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2015
* John Levine, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Tamera Schneider
* 09/30/2015
* USD 400,000.00

People often react defensively when they are faced with personal feedback and
messages that challenge positive beliefs about themselves. To illustrate,
smokers endorse a variety of myths that allow them to rationalize their smoking
behavior, and people receiving negative feedback about their performance use
many strategies to reduce the credibility or personal relevance of the feedback.
However, people are less likely to show such defensiveness when they have an
opportunity to reflect on their personal values in advance, an act of self-
affirmation. The purpose of this grant is to explore a set of physiological,
cognitive, and motivational processes that can account for the beneficial
effects of self-affirmation. The first two experiments examine effects of self-
affirmation on adaptive physiological responses to threat such as reduced heart
rate and cortisol response. Five additional experiments explore cognitive
effects such as unconscious attention to threatening stimuli, the ability to
extract the "gist" of a threatening message, the determination to allocate
attention to threat when competing demands are present, and the tendency to
generate and test more even-handed hypotheses (e.g., "perhaps I do eat too much
fat"). Finally, two experiments look at motivational effects, particularly the
extent to which self-affirmation makes people more receptive to opportunities
they might have to enact behavioral change. In addition, these investigations
look at whether self-affirmation closes the oft-documented gap between people's
resolutions to change behavior and their actual behavior change. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Together, these experiments follow the sequence from self-affirmation
to behavioral outcomes, helping to elucidate why self-affirmation reduces
defensiveness. Thus, the findings will advance self-affirmation theory as well
as related theories of the self. Moreover, the findings will help in the
development of interventions that succeed in sidestepping defensive reactions in
such wide-ranging domains as health, performance evaluation, education, and
interpersonal relationships. Finally, the project features an international
collaboration between investigators in the United States and United Kingdom,
providing unique educational opportunities for the students involved with the
project as well as taking advantage of the unique expertise in the United
Kingdom on the interplay between social processes and health outcomes.