* 0924143
* Altered nociception and neuronal migration
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Patricia Phelps, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* James Deshler
* 08/31/2011
* USD 361,900.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

Reelin, the protein missing in reeler mice, binds to lipoprotein receptors
(VLDL/ApoE2) and causes phosphorylation of the intracellular protein Disabled-1
(Dab1). Mice with mutations in Reelin, VLDLR and ApoER2, or Dab1 have similar
migratory errors in the superficial dorsal horn of the spinal cord, the
termination site for primary sensory neurons that convey pain information into
the central nervous system. Previous studies by the principal investigator's
laboratory found a functional correlate of these developmental defects: an
increased sensitivity to heat and a decreased sensitivity to mechanical pain.
The differential effects observed on these pain modalities suggested that
Reelin-signaling pathway mutants naturally segregate the biological basis of
thermal and mechanical pain transmission.

The first aim of this project is to identify the mis-positioned neurons in the
dorsal horn of Reelin-signaling pathway mutants using a "knock-in" mouse line
with a blue reporter gene (beta-galactosidase) inserted in the Dab1 locus. Once
the positioning errors in reeler and dab1 mutant dorsal horns are identified,
they will use embryonic slice cultures to study the migratory defects in the
mutant dorsal horn. The second aim will link the migratory errors to thermal
nociceptive processing. Anatomical, behavioral, and perturbation experiments
will determine if the heat hypersensitivity found in mutants is caused by mis-
positioned neurons in the superficial dorsal horn that bear Neurokinin1 (NK1)
receptors. Because the NK1 receptor is the target of the substance P-releasing
nociceptors, it is expected that the ectopic NK1-expressing cells within the
superficial dorsal horn are likely responsible for the heat hypersensitivity in
Reelin-signaling pathway mutants.

Two undergraduate student researchers and a post-doctoral fellow will receive
mentoring and research training as they conduct experiments related to this
project. The broader impact will be to facilitate integration of research and
teaching activities in developmental neurobiology and to support undergraduate
and minority education and training in research careers.