* 0924421
* RAPID: Candidate Emergence for the Connecticut Legislature After Implementation of the Clean Elections Act
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2009,03/31/2011
* Raymond La Raja, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 03/31/2011
* USD 59,993.00

This project examines whether public subsidies encourage citizens of different
backgrounds to run for office and why some citizens who are potentially good
candidates refrain from running. Nationwide, roughly 1/3 of seats for state
legislatures go uncontested, and in the vast majority of other races incumbents
face weak opposition. Given the lack of candidacies, this project has important
implications for political participation, competition, representation and
accountability. The analysis focuses on Connecticut, which implemented public
financing called "Clean Elections" for the 2008 elections. It exploits a unique
opportunity to observe the effect of generous public subsidies by interviewing
potential candidates before and after the onset of reform. A previous grant from
the JEHT Foundation supported collection of pre-reform data during February-
March of 2007. A post-reform survey of these same respondents provides data for
a powerful panel study to observe the effect of reform on attitudes and behavior
of potential candidates.

This research examines the underexplored question about how candidates emerge
for state legislative office. Previous work has focused on congressional
elections, demonstrating that most candidates come from the ranks of state
legislatures. Since state legislatures appear to be the training ground for
future national leadership, it is critical to understand obstacles that deter
potential leaders from running for the statehouse. This study focuses especially
on the role of public campaign subsidies in motivating citizens to run. Several
states have, or are considering, public subsidy programs. But no study has
assessed systematically whether public funding might increase the pool of
candidates. Many candidates, particularly minorities and women, appear to lack
personal and professional connections that might draw them into politics or
boost their prospects of raising money. Although money is not the only obstacle
for challengers, it looms large because of its high value for emerging
candidates. Overall, this research sheds light on recruitment and participation
patterns among political elites, the role of money and the dynamics of political
competition in state elections.

The study has implications for public policy designed to stimulate civic
participation and political competition. Running for office is a demanding form
of political participation, but the health of American democracy depends on the
willingness of some citizens to declare their candidacies to ensure electoral
choice and competition. The dearth of candidates and lack of diversity have
significant implications for political representation and accountability. By
understanding factors that influence whether citizens choose to run, it becomes
possible to design reforms that may expand the pool of candidates. If raising
money looms large as an obstacle, then reforms such as Clean Elections or
similar public funding programs hold promise to decrease barriers to entry for
qualified citizens to run for office. Decreasing such barriers is especially
important at the local level where citizens develop skills, interest and
experience that might prepare them for higher levels of office. If, on the other
hand, reforms such as Clean Elections do not increase the number and diversity
of citizens who choose to run, then new policies need to be considered to
achieve this goal. This study helps in identifying other factors, besides
campaign money, that deter qualified citizens from running for office.