* 0924792
* Science, Policy, and the Community:  A Symposium in Post-Katrina New Orleans
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Amy Lesen, Dillard University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2011
* USD 25,000.00

This project funded by the Science, Technology &amp; Society program supports a
symposium that investigates communication among stakeholders, scientists, and
publics into policy decisions in post-Katrina New Orleans. The symposium takes
place in mid-November 2010, which coincides closely with the fifth anniversary
of Hurricane Katrina. The two objectives for the symposium are: 1) To examine
and improve the interaction among scientists, engineers, other academic
scholars, policy makers, and the public in the New Orleans region, to improve
mechanisms for public input into research and policy decisions, and to
scrutinize the role scientists and scholars play in community affairs; 2) To
bring together scholars from diverse fields who do not normally interact, to
stimulate innovative, interdisciplinary research addressing ecological and
social dynamics in the New Orleans region, research that can satisfy the needs
of citizens and policy makers and improve regional resilience.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merits: The symposium represents an effort to
scrutinize the societal, civic role of scientists, engineers, and other academic
scholars. This is an intellectual exercise that informs the way scientific
research is carried out, and the way scientists and scholars go about their
work. A key aim of the symposium is to bring together groups of researchers and
stakeholders, academic and non-academic, who rarely, if ever, have the
opportunity to interact and collaborate. The resulting discussions, coalitions,
collaborative teams, and interdisciplinary research programs catalyze
innovative, collaborative academic research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts: A major goal of the symposium is to involve public citizens and members
of underrepresented groups, to examine and enhance the venues for public input
into science policy in the New Orleans region (and beyond) and to improve social
and individual well-being in an area facing grave challenges in terms of
environmental and social vulnerability. The nature of the hosting institution,
Dillard University, a Historically Black College with longstanding close ties to
the African American community in New Orleans, enhances the participation in the
symposium of scholars from underrepresented groups, as well as community members
and leaders who are often disenfranchised from the workings of academics and
public policy. The inclusion of local citizens and students from
underrepresented groups bring about a new paradigm in inclusive research and
policy-making, a crucial goal when socioeconomically challenged communities
worldwide are often the ones most impacted by global change. The discussion and
interaction planned for this symposium thus has the potential to change the way
academic inquiry and public policy-making are carried out.