* 0924062
* In-Line Label-Free Fluid Diagnostics using Photonic Resonators
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2014
* Brian Cunningham, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* GEORGE HADDAD
* 07/31/2014
* USD 351,740.00

In-Line Label-Free Fluid Diagnostics using Photonic
Resonators&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prof. Brian T. Cunningham&lt;br/&gt;University
of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign&lt;br/&gt;Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective is to
integrate two novel photonics-based label-free detection modalities into the
internal surface of plastic tubing. The first detection method is a plastic-
based distributed feedback laser biosensor that is capable of high sensitivity
affinity-based detection of analytes such as disease biomarkers and bacterial
pathogens. The second detection method utilizes the resonant electric fields of
a photonic crystal surface to enhance the detection sensitivity of surface
enhanced Raman spectroscopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach is to develop an
active photonic resonator that generates its own narrowband light output that
has no stringent alignment requirements for coupling to its excitation source,
and thus elegantly solves an important problem that currently inhibits high
Q-factor passive resonator biosensors from implementation upon curved surfaces
such as medical tubing. The photonic crystal surface-enhaced Raman approach will
increase detection sensitivity by an additional factor of 30-50x, enabling
detection of analytes at lower concentrations, shorter integration times, and
lower laser power than is currently possible. Demonstration for applications
relevant for infused intravenous drug delivery, urinary catheter metabolite
monitoring, and early bacterial pathogen detection in intravenous lines will be
performed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Development of the capabilities described in
this project will have far-reaching implications for patient care in hospitals
for a broad range of clinical treatments that utilize sterile plastic tubing for
drug delivery and urinary catheterization. The proposal describes an education
plan with impact upon graduate student research, undergraduate research,
undergraduate classroom/laboratory learning, and teaching biosensing/photonics
concepts to a University-based all-girls middle school.&lt;br/&gt;