* 0924726
* Nitric Oxide and the Microcirculation in the Tibet Autonomous Region
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Cynthia Beall, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 08/31/2013
* USD 319,403.00

The goal of the study is to discover the mechanisms underlying the distinctive
pattern of adaption to high altitude that couples very high systemic blood flow
with extraordinarily high levels of nitric oxide. It is designed to discover 1)
the proportional contributions to systemic flow of red blood cell velocity and
capillary architecture in the microcirculation, 2) the extent to which those
features of the microcirculation, where oxygen is offloaded from the blood,
influence global oxygen delivery, 3) the contribution of vasodilators and
angiogenic factors to red cell velocity, capillary morphology, and oxygen
delivery and 4) the association of morphological and molecular markers with
single-nucleotide polymorphisms in candidate genes. &lt;br/&gt; The goal will be
achieved with simultaneous measurements at the circulatory, microcirculatory,
molecular, and genetic levels using a one-shot case study design to analyze the
consequences of the exceptionally large range of variation in circulating nitric
oxide metabolites in the Tibetan population of Benam County, Xigatse Prefecture,
Tibet Autonomous Region. This population, which includes Sherpas, is famous for
its ability to live and work at altitudes where people from the elsewhere are
severely impaired owing to less than sea-level amounts of oxygen in the air. The
question of whether the responses are likely to be evolutionary responses honed
by natural selection over more than 20,000 years or acclimatizations reached
after a few years will be addressed by comparison with a sample of high-altitude
Han Chinese migrants who migrated as adults. The biological basis of the ability
to live at high altitudes is an important long-standing question and may offer
clues to various ways people adapt to extreme environments. For examples, are
certain forms of human genes more effective than others, is a lifetime of
exposure a requirement, or is a certain exposure time required for anyone to
establish a different physiological homeostasis.&lt;br/&gt; Filling the gap in
our knowledge of oxygen delivery at the actual site of gas exchange in the
microcirculation is important for discovering how Tibetans have normal oxygen
consumption despite profound arterial hypoxia and for integrating scientific
discoveries across the population, individual, organ system, molecular and
genetic levels. Understanding the distinctive Tibetan pattern of adaptation to
high-altitude hypoxia will help answer central questions: how do adaptations
evolve, how fast do they occur, what are the genetic and adaptive origins of
human biological variation, and what can be used to assist humans who lack this
adaptation during times of hypoxia?&lt;br/&gt; The broader impact of the
proposed research includes expanded multidisciplinary partnerships with Chinese
and Tibetan scientists, research assistants and volunteers and students at all
research phases from design through publication. Addressing the range of
variation in successful responses to hypoxia in health and disease benefits
society since the response can be a matter of life and death if hypoxia occurs.
At present there is little understanding of why some people respond successfully
to hypoxia and others do not.