* 0924556
* SBIR Phase II:  Self Assembled Nanocrystal Thin Film Transistor
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Yuhong Kang, Nanosonic Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 07/31/2011
* USD 500,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF Phase II SBIR program aims to
develop and demonstrate large area and high performance nanocrystal thin film
transistor (NC-TFT) based active matrix backplanes for flexible display
applications. A novel electrostatic self assembly (ESA) technology will allow
significant cost reduction using organic, inorganic and hybrid materials. Such a
molecular-level self-assembly approach to form TFT materials and devices offers
numerous advantages since very different materials can be incorporated
uniformly, using the same chemical process at room temperature, thus allowing
the formation of TFT films on virtually any substrate material. During Phase I,
single and arrayed NC-TFT devices were developed on rigid and flexible
substrates with reliability and performance comparable to that of amorphous
silicon based TFT devices. High-K hybrid gate dielectrics, such as ZrO2/SiO2
hybrid thin films, were also deposited through the same ESA method. These films
exhibited a dielectric constant larger than that of SiO2 (4.7 versus 3.9). Self-
assembled gold nanoparticle-based memory devices. I-V tests were also
investigated and fabricated. I-V tests were conducted on the self-assembled TFT
devices, as well as on operational memory devices. The field effect mobility of
the prototype TFTs can reach 0.3 cm2/V/s and an On-Off ratio of 1000 was
achieved. We also fabricated TFT-based gas sensors, which demonstrated high
sensitivity to certain gas species such as ammonia. In the current project, we
will design and develop prototype NCTFT-based active matrix backplanes on
flexible substrates with improved efficiency and performance and reduced cost,
and beta-test those backplanes integrated with the E-paper based flexible
display films and partners' flexible electronics and sensor platforms. This
project also aims to establish a complete manufacturing process that is ready
for production and licensing to selected flexible display
customers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential will be
the development of flexible displays that offer many potential benefits over
other display technologies, including reductions in cost, weight and power
consumption, improved performance, ruggedness, and reliability. Other near term
applications include 1) direct replacement for conventional circuit boards,
wiring harnesses and flex interconnects on army vehicles, 2) as integrated
sensing, signal processing and communicating clothing for army personnel, 3)
electronic&lt;br/&gt;applications such as RF ID tags, antennas and stealth
coatings, and 4) very large, mechanically-flexible deployable systems. This
research has shown promise in producing devices of acceptable efficiencies at
significantly reduced cost using organic, inorganic and conductive polymer
materials. A revolutionary breakthrough in reducing the costs of TFT devices may
be achieved if the semiconductor is deposited from solution onto large flexible
substrates in roll-to-roll coating machines.