* 0924780
* Experimental Investigations of Infinitely Repeated Games
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Guillaume Frechette, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2013
* USD 336,182.00

A large variety of social settings involve people repeatedly interacting with
each other in the same strategic situation.. For example, firms play repeated
games when competing, nations repeatedly interact on the international stage,
and workers and employees repeatedly interact in the workplace. These repeated
games have been analyzed by game theorists, who have developed a broad range of
predictions. This project uses laboratory experiments to answer a series of
questions about how well those theories predict actual behavior in controlled
strategic settings.

The first set of experiments examine how to infer strategies by observing
decisions made by a specific participant. The second set investigates the role
of renegotiation proofness in equilibrium selection. The third group of
experiments test the ability of subjects to support cooperative outcomes when
they interact in multiple domains at the same time. The last project tests a
widely made assertion that participants play the same way in infinitely repeated
games with discounting and in randomly terminated games.

The project is intrinsically interdisciplinary, because the game theory methods
and ideas being tested with the experiments are widely used in economics,
political science, management, psychology, and sociology. The PI will be
integrating this research effort into both graduate and undergraduate classes.