* 0924572
* Inter-Level Explanatory Reduction in Biology: Assessing Reductive Strategies in the Neurogenetic Explanation of Reproductive Attraction in C. elegans
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2010
* Bryan Benham, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2010
* USD 67,883.00

The holy grail of behavioral neuroscience is a complete explanation of complex
behavior in terms of its underlying micro-biological components. Is it possible
to provide a "complete" biologically reductive explanation of behavior that
sort? In classical philosophical models of reduction, higher-level theories can,
in principle, be completely analyzed away or eliminated by appeal to privileged
lower-level theories. However, it has become apparent that this model does not
capture the way investigators in the biologically informed sciences actually
carry out their research. Scientists use "inter-level" reductionist strategies
that do not privilege a particular level of description, but instead capitalize
on the conjunction of both lower-level and higher-level properties in order to
achieve research and explanatory goals. A number of questions are open regarding
the adequacy of inter-level models of explanatory reduction. Three questions
guide the current project: (1) Which levels are most salient for research and
explanatory purposes? (2) How do different levels map onto each other in the
research and explanation? (3) What are the epistemic payoffs (and costs) to
favoring inter-level explanatory reductions? To address these three questions in
a systematic and empirically informed manner, the PI will devote a full academic
year to obtaining first-hand experience in a neurogenetics laboratory that
explicitly adopts an inter-level reductionist strategy to study pheromone-
mediated reproductive attraction and avoidance behavior in C. elegans. The
importance of the project rests in its advancement of scholarship on the nature
and limits of inter-level reductive explanations. Additionally, it will
facilitate interdisciplinary exchanges between philosophy and biology faculty.
Understanding the causal determinants of behavior, even in simple organisms such
as C. elegans, may also have an impact on how we understand the nature of
voluntary and responsible actions in general.