* 0924350
* SBIR Phase II:  Water and Food Analysis by Non-Uniform Electroosmotic Flow
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2009,05/31/2013
* Mark Peterman, OndaVia, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2013
* USD 741,824.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
Phase II project will result in a prototype portable instrument for water
quality analysis. The Phase I SBIR project was designed to show the feasibility
of a new technique for separating uncharged polymers; this objective was met
with remarkable quantitative accuracy, setting the stage for this Phase II
prototype project. The underlying Phase I effort was based on stochastic
mathematical models and molecular dynamics simulations through which the
Labrador Research team discovered an electrokinetic approach for the separation
of uncharged polymers. As efforts progressed, the power and potential of this
approach as a generic separation technology became evident as our
commercialization approach evolved into addressing the market need for water-
and food-quality analysis technologies. This Phase II project will lead to a
commercial prototype through iterative design improvements coupled with
validation testing. The results obtained during Phase I and the anticipated
Phase II results will set the stage for Phase III commercial participation by
our financing partners and for rapid deployment of this proprietary chip
technology in portable, hand-held analytical instruments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The world is running out of "quality" water for drinking
and agricultural purposes. At the same time, public health agencies do not have
the time, equipment, or resources to proactively check for hazardous chemicals
in our drinking water, our water sources, or our food on a routine basis. Recent
scares regarding melamine in baby food and pet food, bisphenol A in drinking
water bottles, or perchlorate in ground water demonstrate the fragility of the
water and food systems. Typical analysis requires collecting a sample in the
field and shipping the sample to a test laboratory; water monitoring agencies
depend upon these outsourced laboratories where transport and processing time
can take days to produce results, wasting precious time when the health of a
community is at stake. Existing portable tools can measure a few parts per
million, whereas hazardous compounds are often regulated in the part per billion
range. Handheld tools that measure a wide array of compounds at a parts-per-
billion or better level would be a powerful, valuable, and necessary addition to
the analysis toolbox.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;