* 0924191
* The 2010 Cooperative Congressional Election Study
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Stephen Ansolabehere, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2012
* USD 361,200.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Cooperative Congressional Election
Study is a collaboration of research teams from over 50 universities and
colleges. Collectively these research teams have fielded national, stratified-
sample surveys of 35,000 persons in 2006 and 37,000 persons in 2008. In addition
the project has produced a 10,000-person panel in 2006 and 2007 and a
2,000-person panel in 2006, 2007, and 2008. Each research team involved in the
project purchases a 1,000-sample survey from a firm (the same firm for all
teams, to be determined through a competitive bid in 2009). Each individual team
determines half of the questions on its survey (called Team Content). The CCES
PI (Stephen Ansolabehere) and a design committee, drawn from the participating
teams, determines the other half of the questions (called Common Content).
Common Content consists of questions that every team would like to measure, such
as voting behavior and electoral experiences, or questions that are of broad
interest and require a very large sample. The project fields as many surveys as
there are teams and also produces a single very large sample survey that
consists of the Common Content. The 2010 study projects to have 35 to 40
teams.&lt;br/&gt;This grant requests funding (1) to purchase additional cases in
order to reduce the costs to the individual teams for the 2010 study, especially
for those lacking sufficient research funds, (2) to purchase educational modules
to be designed by students in the MIT/Harvard PORTL seminar, at the Ralph Bunche
Summer Institute and at the NSF-sponsored summer EITM institute, (3) to pay for
vote validation for all cases, and (4) to provide general research support to
coordinate the project and the team?s activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CCES
provides a common survey platform that facilitates individual teams? research
agendas at a relatively low survey cost and yields a common survey of broad
interest to political scientists. The 2010 CCES will produce three-dozen smaller
surveys, exploring a vast range of research questions. The Common Content survey
examines individual voting behavior in congressional and state elections. The
large size of this survey allows researchers to measure how voting behavior
varies across political geography, such as state and district, and across social
contexts. The scale of the survey also allows researchers to study electoral
experiences, difficulties and barriers to participation, and satisfaction with
the voting process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond the contribution of the research
to knowledge, the 2010 CCES will have four broader impacts. First, the project
creates and supports a broad network of scholars and facilitates exchange of
ideas and research. The project is open to anyone working at or with a research
institution. The data, questionnaires, and research papers produced by the CCES
are distributed for free through the project?s website and at an annual
conference. Second, the project provides a survey platform for faculty and
students who do not normally have access to a survey research center. Over the
past three years, more than 150 faculty and students from a very broad range of
universities and colleges have gained hands-on experience writing questions,
designing survey instruments, and developing experiments through the CCES.
Third, this grant supports three educational modules to facilitate graduate and
undergraduate instruction and will yield educational materials for use in
teaching survey research and political behavior. These materials will be
distributed through the project website. Fourth, the study involves many
underserved groups, through the National Conference of Black Political
Scientists, the Ralph Bunche Summer Institute, and individual research teams
throughout the country.