* 0924620
* International Collaboration in Chemistry: Structural Mechanostereochemistry of Mechanically Interlocked Polymers and Networks
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* J Fraser Stoddart, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 07/31/2012
* USD 750,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Organic and Macromolecular
Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division at the National Science Foundation
supports a proposal from Professor Fraser J. Stoddart of Northwestern
University. This proposal, submitted in response to solicitation NSF 08-602:
International Collaboration in Chemistry between US Investigators and their
Counterparts Abroad (ICC), is a collaboration with Alexandra M Z. Slawin at St
Andrews University in Scotland. The team will develop the chemistry of
mechanically interlocking molecules (MIMs) into higher ordered network materials
and characterize these materials by a range of physical techniques, most
importantly, single crystal X-ray crystallography. The structural results will
be used to inform the development of the chemistry as the results are fed back
into the design and synthesis of the new materials. The combination of these two
teams to tackle the development of multi-dimensional mechanically interlocking
molecules represents a significant advance in the area and will be of benefit
and interest to a wide range of academics working in the area of supramolecular
chemistry. The resultant materials obtained will have enormous potential in a
variety of industrial applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts
will present an opportunity for students to work on highly interdisciplinary
research that enables the pursuit of grand scientific challenges. There is a
well-planned and extensive program for exchanging students between Northwestern
University and St. Andrews University, as well as regular cross-institutional
visits by the PIs that will be aided by state-of-the-art communication aids,
e.g., video conferencing, teleconferencing, and web-based data-sharing. Both PIs
support their institution?s initiative to bring students into the classrooms
from underrepresented groups. At Northwestern University, Professor Stoddart
runs a research group focused on synthetic and physical organic chemistry with
postdoctoral fellows drawn from all around the world, currently including
Canada, China, Germany, India, Lebanon, Mexico, Scotland, and Turkey as well as
the US. His present graduate students include Asian and Hispanic Americans, as
well as women from the US and abroad. At St. Andrews University, Professor
Slawin runs a world-class X-ray diffraction facility with unique support
activities (e.g., Automated Crystallization Facility) in a highly interactive
manner with postdoctoral, graduate and undergraduate students from the UK, the
EU, and non-EU countries. The value-added and enhanced experience, for research
performance and academic quality and for the education and training of students
in both groups, will be at a remarkably invigorating level because of the
complementary skills that will be gained through collaboration between these two
very different laboratories. &lt;br/&gt;