* 0924318
* International Collaboration in Chemistry: Decoherence control via quantum dynamical decoupling -- theory and experiment
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Daniel Lidar, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 08/31/2014
* USD 420,000.00

Daniel Lidar of the University of Southern California is funded by an ICC award
from the Theoretical and Computational Chemistry program to engage in a
theoretical/experimental collaboration for the purpose of developing enabling
tools for quantum information processing. Lidar is the theorist while the
experimental portion of the work is carried out by Dieter Suter of the Technical
University of Dortmund, a solid nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopist
funded by the DFG for this research. In the context of NMR, they are
investigating one of the toughest problems facing quantum technologies: that of
maintaining quantum coherence in the presence of the inevitable interaction of
any quantum system with its environment. This process leads to decoherence,
which effectively robs a quantum system of its quantumness. Lidar and Suter are
investigating the question whether one can maintain quantum coherence for
arbitrarily long times. Their approach is to apply "dynamical decoupling" pulse
sequences, i.e., pulse sequences designed to refocus or decouple the interaction
between the quantum system and its environment. This idea is closely related to
the spin-echo effect, but here the investigators consider a much more general
and robust approach, aimed at arbitrarily long coherence preservation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Underpinning quantum technologies is a new quantum
science, that aims to control matter at the microscopic level where quantum
effects are dominant. This ability to control the quantum state of matter has
the potential to take us beyond the point where Moore's Law for the exponential
growth in computer processing speeds comes to an end in 10-20
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal was submitted in response to
solicitation NSF 08-602: International Collaboration in Chemistry between US
Investigators and their Counterparts Abroad (ICC). The NSF and the partnering
international funding agency co-reviewed and made a joint funding decision on
this proposal. NSF supports the research of the U.S. investigators while the DFG
supports the research of the collaborating foreign investigator.