* 0924059
* LiT:   Life History Responses to Genetic and Environmental Perturbations in Arabidopsis thaliana
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Johanna Schmitt, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 08/31/2013
* USD 600,000.00

In order to flower during favorable conditions, plants use information from
multiple environmental signals, such as day length, temperature, and winter
chilling. However, global warming will alter not only temperatures, but also the
timing and length of the growing season, and may thus create a mismatch between
formerly accurate cues and the actual timing of those events. For example,
warmer winters may not allow sufficient chilling to trigger flowering, resulting
in delayed flowering despite earlier spring warming. This project will therefore
explore the sensitivity of seasonal timing to genetic and environmental change.
The study will take advantage of information and tools available for the genetic
model species Arabidopsis thaliana, a weedy annual relative of crops such as
canola, cabbage, broccoli, turnips, and mustard. It will combine a predictive
mathematical model with field and controlled chamber experiments. The research
will ask: 1. How does genetic variation in winter chilling requirements affect
flowering time in natural seasonal environments? 2. How does natural selection
act upon this variation in natural environments? 3. How will higher temperatures
predicted by global warming scenarios affect seasonal timing of flowering?
Predictions of the model will be tested experimentally in controlled chamber
environments simulating effects of warming temperatures predicted for the end of
the 21st century. If the model is accurate, warming temperatures and reduced
winter chilling will alter seasonal timing and the relative timing of different
genetic variants. Accurate timing of plant seasonal events - such as leaf
emergence, flowering, fruiting and senescence - is critical for crop and
forestry yields, as well as for the survival of wild species in the face of
climate change. The results of this study will therefore be important for
predicting how crops, weeds, forest trees, and wild plant communities will
respond to global warming. The modeling approach will be a significant advance
from traditional crop models and may improve their generality and predictive
ability. This project will provide career opportunities and training for two
female scientists: a postdoctoral researcher and a Ph.D researcher returning to
the workforce after a career interruption. It will also provide research
opportunities to several undergraduates, and will support development of a
classroom module on plant responses to climate change for Rhode Island high
school teachers.