* 0924320
* International Collaboration in Chemistry: Spatially Resolved Measurements of Cellular Releasates
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Daniel Chiu, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Zeev Rosenzweig
* 08/31/2012
* USD 300,000.00

Professor Dan Chiu at the University of Washington is supported by the
Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program in the Division of Chemistry with co-
funding from the Office of International Science and Engineering for an
International Collaboration in Chemistry (ICC) seeking to develop new
methodology for monitoring the spatiotemporal dynamics of cellular releasates.
Through the International Collaboration in Chemistry Program, the work includes
collaboration with Professor David McGloin at the University of Dundee (UK); Dr.
McGloin's work is supported by the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research
Council (EPSRC) of the UK.

The approach is based on holographic optical trapping, sensitive microfluidic
manipulation, and single-molecule assays. It targets orders of magnitude
improvements in spatial resolution and sensitivity over current techniques,
enabling progress toward answering biological questions that are currently
inaccessible with existing methods. The technology pushes the current limits in
holographic optical trapping and imaging, develops new techniques in
microfluidic manipulation, and expands current capabilities in single-molecule
assays. Applications address the spatial and temporal dynamics of cell secretion
and cell-cell communication, seeking a new level of understanding on the
functioning of immune cells.

In addition to the technical impacts, the project provides broader impact
through a unique multidisciplinary international training experience for
graduate students via bidirectional visits.