* 0924231
* Interdisciplinary US-European Workshop on Landscape-Based Cultural Ecosystem Services
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Terry Daniel, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Tran
* 06/30/2012
* USD 39,820.00

Policy makers and the general public have joined scientists in recognizing that
human wellbeing depends on sustaining the health and vigor of the earth's
ecosystems. This NSF award provides support for 10 ecologists, social scientists
and landscape planners selected from across the US to participate with European
colleagues in a 5-day workshop devoted to advancing scientific understanding of
cultural ecosystems services, including aesthetic and recreational experiences,
cultural heritage, and sense of place. Cultural services are highly valued in
their own right by people in the US, Europe and throughout the world, with the
particular origins, compositions and expressions of appreciation being nuanced
by regional environmental and cultural histories and contexts. The appreciation
of cultural services also plays a central role in determining peoples'
dispositions toward policies aimed at protecting ecosystems and ecological
processes that provide essential, but often less intuitively appreciated
services, especially regulatory and support services. The principal goals of the
workshop are to assess and document the state of science for cultural ecosystems
services, with specific attention to similarities and differences between US and
European contexts; to develop and promote an agenda for accomplishing needed
research and education; to better integrate cultural services into the broader
ecosystems services science and policy framework; and to identify and facilitate
opportunities to leverage public support for other essential but less readily
appreciated ecosystems and services. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will
bring together bio-physical and social science perspectives from the US, where
natural ecosystems and landscape values have typically been emphasized, and
Europe, where there has been greater focus on modified ecosystems and their
associated cultural heritage values. Key products from the workshop include
specific proposals for collaborative US and European interdisciplinary research
projects to address identified needs. The PI and his counterpart Dr. Andreas
Muhar of the BOKU University of Natural Resources and Applied Life Sciences in
Vienna are coordinating the workshop together and aim to hold the meeting at the
WasserKluster Lunz research station in Lunz, Austria in November
2009.&lt;br/&gt;