* 0924606
* Collaborative Research: Paleo Genetic Investigations at the Pre-Clovis Paisley Caves Site in the Northern Great Basin, Oregon
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Eske Willerslev, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/2012
* USD 180,755.00

With National Science Foundation support, Drs. Dennis Jenkins, Eske Willerslev,
and Brian Kemp will bring together an international team of colleagues to
continue archaeological, geoarchaeological, paleo-ecological, and paleo-genetic
investigations at the Paisley 5 Mile Point Caves site in the Northern Great
Basin region of Oregon. Central to the research is paleo-genetic (ancient
mitochondrial DNA) research on human coprolites (dried feces) recovered from the
site. The project brings together an inter-disciplinary team of specialists from
various U.S. and foreign Universities (Oregon, Oregon State, California,
Berkley, Washington State and Copenhagen, Denmark). The genetic research
addresses issues central to the study of the first human colonization of the
Americas by providing new evidence related to the genetic history of Native
Americans in the region spanning some 14,300 years from first occupation to
historic contact with Euroamericans.

Initially investigated by Luther S. Cressman between 1938 and 1940, the Paisley
Caves site was found to contain Pleistocene faunal remains (extinct camel,
horse, and bison bones) mixed with stone artifacts on a small house floor. This
suggested to Cressman that Native Americans had killed and eaten these animals
at the end of the Pleistocene. While admitting the evidence was quite promising,
most archaeologists have not accepted Cressman's Paisley Caves interpretation
due to the lack of adequate documentation for the association and context of the
cultural and natural materials. New investigations of the site by the University
of Oregon (2002, 2003 and 2007) represented an attempt to resolve this issue
through more adequate documentation of the association of cultural materials
with extinct Pleistocene animal remains by the application of modern excavation
techniques and analytical technologies. Coprolites containing ancient human
mtDNA were recovered in stratigraphic and spatial association with Pleistocene
camel, horse, bison, pika, fish, and water fowl bones. The coprolites and
extinct faunal remains proved by radiocarbon dating to chronologically overlap
between 13,100 and 14,300 years ago. The earliest coprolites predate the Clovis
cultural phase by more than 1,000 years. The highly distinctive Clovis
technology has been recognized as the earliest reliably identifiable "culture"
in North America for some 70 years, primarily because of its irrefutable
association with extinct Pleistocene megafauna -such as mammoths and mastodons
-dated by radiocarbon to more than 13,000 years. Thus, Clovis has been the
measure by which all other claims for earliest human colonization of the Western
Hemisphere have been compared. The Paisley Caves coprolites represent the first
time that human remains (DNA) have clearly been associated with extinct
Pleistocene animals in a context predating Clovis.

Ancient mitochondrial DNA recovered from the coprolites indicates that they were
produced by humans belonging to haplogroups A2 and B2, types commonly found
among Asian/Siberian and Native American populations. However, contamination of
the coprolites with modern DNA during the recovery or lab sampling process
limits the research potential of many specimens. This contamination can be
filtered out by separating longer strands of modern European DNA from the
shorter (partially decomposed) strands of ancient Native American DNA but this
decontamination process severely limits what can be determined about the genetic
history of the ancient site occupants.

The new Paisley Caves excavations will be conducted by excavation teams wearing
surgical garb (disposable coveralls with head covering, face mask, latex
surgeon's gloves, and boot coverings) and employing newly developed field and
laboratory protocols designed to protect against modern DNA contamination.
Coprolites will be collected with sterile disposable forceps and stored in
sterile lab specimen jars. The recovery of uncontaminated Paleoindian and
Holocene coprolites will allow research into group lineages, composition,
health, genetic diversity, and diet.

The results of the genetic analysis will significantly increase knowledge of
Paleoamerican genetic connections between ancient Asian/Siberian and modern
Native American populations. Current models of the first colonization of the
Americas are primarily based on the study of genetic diversity among modern
populations, and only secondarily on sparse archaeological and ancient DNA data.
This project will significantly increase the direct genetic and archaeological
data on which future modeling of the first colonization is based. This will
allow testing of models such as the Beringian Incubation Model constructed
predominantly from modern DNA studies. The research funded under this proposal
will also generate data broadly applicable to the fields of molecular genetics,
archaeology, and paleo-ecology.

The broader implications of this project are highlighted by the assistance the
project will provide graduate students at multiple institutions. The University
of Oregon has an established record in the recruitment of Native Americans with
a vested interest in the fields of archaeology, geoarchaeology, and molecular
genetic studies, particularly The Klamath Tribes. Laboratory assistant positions
to aid in the analysis, handling and management of collections, and data
management are included in the project to provide financial support for graduate
student assistants at the UO, WSU, and the University of Copenhagen.