* 0924699
* STTR Phase II:  An Advanced Antibiotic Screen of Marine Environmental DNA through a Metabolically Engineered E. coli Strain
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Blaine Pfeifer, EarthGenes Pharmaceuticals
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 08/31/2011
* USD 600,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer
(STTR) Phase II project offers a novel route to finding critically needed new
antibiotics. The emergence of antibiotic-resistant bacterial pathogens is a
growing medical challenge, urgently requiring new drugs. Natural products,
synthesized primarily by environmental microorganisms, have supplied most of the
current arsenal of effective antibiotics. However, the discovery rate of new
antibiotics has greatly diminished. With the recent understanding that the vast
majority of environmental microorganisms have never been screened for the
production of antibiotics because they cannot be easily cultured in the
laboratory, EarthGenes has developed a technology to access these organisms,
involving extracting environmental DNA, cloning large fragments into specialized
vectors to create DNA libraries, expressing these libraries in suitable easily-
grown surrogate hosts, and screening the libraries for antibiotics encoded by
the environmental DNA. Professor Blaine Pfeifer at Tufts University has
developed the most advanced bacterial host for expressing environmental DNA,
potentially improving the efficiency of this technology. Thus, the EarthGenes-
Tufts collaboration is designed to lead to the discovery of new, more potent
antibiotic drugs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this research
include a technology to provide a new, continuous supply of potent antibiotics
to treat infectious diseases, thus addressing a critical health-related goal
with technical innovation. The technology can also be extended to other disease
areas. The impact is augmented by education and outreach, including the
education of undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctoral associates,
with mechanisms in place to attract underrepresented students from diverse
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;