* 0924383
* Collaborative Research-RUI:  The role of extracellular H+ in processing visual signals
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2015
* Matthew Kreitzer, Indiana Wesleyan University
* Standard Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 07/31/2015
* USD 187,234.00

Inhibition of neuronal signals is an essential component of the normal
processing of information that takes place in the nervous system. Lateral
inhibition is a key type of inhibition that is believed to play an especially
important role in enabling the neuronal computations that mediate visual,
tactile, auditory, and olfactory sensation. The experiments in this project are
designed to clarify the molecular mechanisms of lateral inhibition in the
vertebrate retina. The focus of the work is specifically on the role that
hydrogen ions (H+) might play in the outermost synaptic connections of the
retina and the potential involvement of H+ in lateral inhibition. H+-selective
self-referencing sensors and fluorescence imaging studies will be used to
examine the molecular mechanisms governing the efflux and influx of H+ from
cells in the outer retina, and the effects of neurotransmitters and
neuromodulators on H+ efflux and influx will be investigated. This project is
structured as a collaborative endeavor between a faculty member and
undergraduate students at a strictly undergraduate institution (Indiana Wesleyan
University) with two faculty and their undergraduate and graduate students at a
Ph.D. granting institution (the University of Illinois at Chicago). It is
designed to be one in which undergraduate students truly participate in the
research endeavor and become actively engaged in addressing important questions
in neurobiology. Undergraduate involvement will be incorporated at both campuses
and will include joint video-conference lab meetings and seminar sessions to
integrate the undergraduates tightly into the research program. The PI at IWU
and several undergraduate students will also travel to spend one month working
jointly in the laboratories at UIC. These collaborative studies will serve to
better elucidate the role of H+ in synaptic processing in the retina and central
nervous system, while catalyzing undergraduate student understanding of and
involvement in neuroscience research.