* 0924242
* Late Holocene Paleoecology and Archaeology in the Central African Rain Forest
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,02/28/2013
* Karen Lupo, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2013
* USD 181,701.00

The Central African rain forest is the second largest contiguous tract of rain
forest in the world and currently supports a suite of highly diverse biological
communities, including a number endemic and endangered animals, as well as local
and regional economies and plays an important role in global climates. Renewed
efforts to protect and manage these ecosystems depend on accurate
reconstructions of the prehistoric ecological trajectory of this region. With
the support from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Karen Lupo will lead a
multi-institutional and interdisciplinary research project to build a
longitudinal paleoecological record for the northern Central African rain forest
spanning the last 4,500 years. This project is a collaborative effort that
includes archeologists, anthropologists, ethnoarchaeologists and palynologists
from Washington State University (USA), CURDHACA (Centre Universitaire de
Recherche et de Documentation en Histoire et Arch√©ologie Centrafricaines),
University of Bangui, and the Boganda Museum, Central African Republic. The goal
of this research is to lay the groundwork for investigating the timing, nature
and cultural developments associated with the transition to food production in
the northern Congo Basin. The transition to food production generated one of the
earliest significant anthropogenic impacts on rain forest habitats and had far
reaching effects (and interactions) on the human populations that occupied the
forest. By combining paired archaeological and proxy paleoenvironmental
information from fossil pollen and plant remains, the team will reconstruct the
historical ecology of the northern Congo Basin.

This research is important because it represents the first historical ecology
study in this region. Environmental reconstructions from parts of West Africa
suggest that the rain forest boundaries fluctuated and regressed dramatically
during an arid period spanning from about 4,500 to 2,000 years ago. This arid
period is often identified as a catalyst to the migration of Bantu-speaking
farmers from a core area in northwestern Cameroun to other portions of Africa.
Thus far, very little research on the historical ecology of the central African
rainforest has been conducted. Limited evidence suggests a high degree of
regional variation in vegetational response to Late Holocene aridity in the
central African rainforest. Furthermore, the timing and nature of the arrival of
farmers in this area and the subsequent impacts of horticulture are unknown and
controversial. Linguistic evidence suggests that farmers migrated to this area
between 2,300 and 2,500 years ago, but sparse archeological evidence support a
much later date of arrival.

The collaborative research partnership between scientists and students in the
Central African Republic and United States created by this research presents an
opportunity to exchange ideas and training. This study will also have broader
impacts and practical applications to the management of rain forest communities.
Outreach activities associated with this research include educational activities
with local communities to promote stewardship and protection of heritage and
environmental resources.