* 0924932
* The Moral Landscape of Adulteration: Cheating on Nature in the Age of Industrialized Food
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2011
* Benjamin Cohen, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2011
* USD 121,965.00

This project funded by the Science, Technology & Society Program examines how
cultural concepts of "nature" and "natural" were challenged with new food-making
techniques in the 19th century: how did new agricultural and industrial products
confront environmental ideas about the right way to work in non-human nature? It
addresses assumptions about "nature" and "natural" held by chemists who sought
to analyze food properties and what reactions to new products revealed about
Americans' prevailing environmental ethic(s). Though previous research has
focused on adulteration as a precursor to public health law, it has not
described this contingency of concepts of nature in adulteration and artificial
food debates.

The project has two central research objectives: (1) examine chemical texts and
writings of analysts on adulteration to identify the assumptions about nature
brought to that work (here looking to individuals) and (2) examine cultural
responses to adulterated and artificial foods as means of policing boundaries
around "natural". Toward those ends, the research draws from boundary work in
STS and moral economy literature as an interpretive framework for the study. The
project analyzes data from archives at the National Agricultural Library,
Library of Congress Manuscripts Division, National Archives, and FDA, along with
cultural responses to the issues from legislation, editorials, and images used
in food marketing.

The project offers new historical insights at the intersection of science,
technology, and environmental ethics. It moves beyond prior adulteration studies
that used consumer-based, anthropocentric views to propose a stable and distinct
"nature" against which adulteration was defined. Instead it identifies cultural
assumptions, beliefs, and values about nature scientists brought to their
analytical work. The project also speaks to current public issues, namely
continuing adulteration problems in the food chain, genetic modification of
crops and animals, and food toxins such as endocrine disruptors. It does so in
two ways: by showing that such issues of food safety and environmental
challenges to agriculture are part of a longer history; and by characterizing
such problems as irreducibly moral, environmental, and scientific.