* 0924407
* Horizontal Vector Wind Field Measurement with Eye-Safe Elastic Lidar
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Shane Mayor, Chico State Enterprises
* Standard Grant
* Bradley F. Smull
* 08/31/2013
* USD 554,585.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The ability of a scanning eye-safe aerosol lidar to measure the horizontal
vector wind field in the atmospheric surface layer will be quantitatively
evaluated. This will be done by calculating spatial correlation functions from
elastic backscatter lidar scan images displaced in time. This method capitalizes
on the wind-induced motion of aerosol features in the lidar?s scan imagery. The
primary hypothesis is that the correlation technique will perform well during
periods of sufficient turbulence intensity and may fail during periods of strong
stability. The hypothesis will be tested by comparing how well the wind vectors
from the lidar and in situ anemometers located within the scanned region agree
as a function of turbulence intensity and stability as measured by the
instrumentation on a tower within the scanned region.

In addition to testing the above hypothesis, the techniques refined and
evaluated in the first part of the project will then be used for a comprehensive
search for statistical relationships between perturbations in the lidar
backscatter intensity data and turbulence variables measured in situ on the
tower. The result will be a better understanding of the spatial distribution and
evolution of phenomena such as turbulent coherent structures, fine-scale gravity
waves, and the interplay between turbulence and waves during stable conditions.
The processed data set, in the form of images and animations of backscatter and
wind fields, will be made publicly available on a website.

This research will have several broader impacts. It will form the nucleus of a
new interdisciplinary research and education program at the California State
University, Chico, where the NCAR REAL resides on long-term loan. Students from
a variety of disciplines including physics, computer science, engineering,
agriculture and health sciences will benefit from participation in this program.
The lidar system and wind measurement capability will be available for other
investigators and students to use as new applications for the system develop.
The lidar system will be useful wherever there is a need to monitor and predict
the dispersion of particulate or hazardous material in the atmosphere. Potential
applications include: monitoring the air-shed around air quality sensors;
tracking and predicting the dispersion of hazardous material in the atmosphere
including releases from chemical and nuclear power plants; monitoring fugitive
dust from mining operations; monitoring the application of pesticides over large
agricultural areas; monitoring the emissions from agricultural sites such as
intensive piggeries; monitoring smoke plumes from agricultural operations such
as burning off rice and sugar cane fields; early warning of wildfires and
predicting the speed and direction of the fire movement; and monitoring the
plumes from industrial sites such as smelters and coal-fired power plants.