* 0924104
* International Collaboration in Chemistry:  A New Molecular Architecture for Organic Electronics
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Steven Bernasek, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Zeev Rosenzweig
* 07/31/2013
* USD 485,000.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professors Jeffrey Schwartz
and Steven L. Bernasek of Princeton University are supported by the Analytical
and Surface Chemistry Program in the Division of Chemistry to conduct research
in collaboration with Professor Marc Tornow of Braunschweig University of
Technology, and Professor Gerhard Abstreiter of the Technical University of
Munich to develop a new molecular architecture for organic electronics. Self
assembled monolayers of active organic molecules will be synthesized via
surface-bonding of phosphonate groups to native or grown SiO2. The resulting
complex is then reacted with aromatic biphosphonates to form a bilayer
structure. Multiple application of the reaction scheme results in the growth of
ordered multilayers. Finally, these multilayers will be included as the active
semiconducting component into Si-SiO2-based electronic devices. The ultimate
goal is to integrate fundamental surface science and interface synthesis
chemistry with novel device architecture to build the next generation molecular
scale transistors for applications in microelectronic devices. This project
exposes students to an international research experience and provides them with
opportunities to network with researchers in Germany. The project is supported
jointly by the NSF and the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG).