* 0924351
* Collaborations in Chemistry: Putative Intermediates in the Biosynthesis of Tedanolide
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Richard Taylor, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2013
* USD 450,000.00

This project will investigate fundamental aspects of polyketide biosynthesis and
evolution through a multidisciplinary collaboration. A synergistic synthetic
effort, between the Richard Taylor group (University of Notre Dame) and the
group of Professor Markus Kalesse (Leibniz Universitat Hannover), is directed at
the putative intermediates in the biosynthesis of the marine polyketide,
tedanolide. Putative biosynthetic intermediates, such as the targets of the
current proposal, are a valuable new source of chemical diversity with the
potential for discovery of novel biological targets and potentially new modes of
action. In addition, the synthesis of iso-tedanolide will provide a unique
opportunity to explore the feasibility of a 1,5-acyl migration, a key step in a
proposed biogenic pathway to the tedanolides. Biological analyses will be
carried out under the direction of Dr. Florenz Sasse at the Helmholtz Zentrum
fuer Infektionsforschung (HZI Braunschweig).

With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program and the Office
of International Science and Engineering are supporting the research of
Professor Richard Taylor of the Department of Chemistry & Biochemistry at the
University of Notre Dame. This award coordinates with a collaborative award
funded by Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) for Dr. Markus Kalesse, Leibniz
Universitat Hannover and Dr. Florenz Sasse, Helmholtzzentrum für
Infektionsforschung GmbH. Their research program involves the development of
synthetic and biosynthetic methods for identification of new biologically active
chemical entities inspired by the evolution of natural products and their
producing organism. Successful preparation of these highly complex targets such
as those proposed within this project will be enabled by the development of
novel synthetic methods and strategies while providing a training platform for
graduate and undergraduate student coworkers. Moreover, complementary biological
studies of the prepared derivatives will probe the evolutionary role of post-
polyketide synthase modifications in polyketide biosynthesis thus provide new
information of fundamental significance.