* 0924431
* ICC: Size and Structure Sensitivity of Metal Nanoparticle Reactivity in the Aerosol State
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Jeffrey Roberts, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2013
* USD 450,000.00

The Analytical and Surface Chemistry (ASC) Program with contribution from the
NSF Office of International Science and Engineering (OISE), and the German
Research Foundation (DFG) will support the international collaboration in
chemistry (ICC) research project of Prof. Jeffrey Roberts of the University of
Minnesota and Prof. Dr. Gerhard Kasper at the University of Karlsruhe in
Germany. The two groups will study the uptake and reaction of small,
catalytically relevant molecules- e.g., oxygen, hydrogen, carbon monoxide, and
simple unsaturated hydrocarbons- onto aerosolized gold nanoparticles. The
Minnesota group will measure particle size-dependent uptake probabilities of
analytically relevant molecules in the particle size range of 4-20 nm using
transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and Fourier transform infrared
spectroscopy (FTIR). Researchers at Karlsruhe will directly measure catalytic
activity of gold aerosol particles by using FTIR to probe gas-phase composition
during particle-mediated reactions. They will also apply the technique of
aerosol photoelectron spectroscopy (APES), which is available in fewer than 5
laboratories worldwide, to study the photoelectric response of particles during
catalytic reactions. As a result of these combined efforts, the Minnesota and
Karlsruhe teams will be able to provide a much more complete picture of metal
aerosol reactivity. The international collaborative project will provide
excellent training opportunities to students who will carry out a fundamental
research project aiming to develop new methods for studying and thinking about
aerosol surface chemistry, especially in nanometer-dimension aerosol
particles.&lt;br/&gt;