* 0924105
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Everyday Prosthesis: Stories of Ampuation, Technology, and Body
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Cynthia Schairer, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Kelly Moore
* 08/31/2011
* USD 9,163.00

This Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement grant--by the Science,
Technology &amp; Society (STS) program at NSF--supports research on the everyday
experiences and meanings of prosthetics to the people who use them. The image of
an amputee using a prosthetic body part has inspired much thought about the
parallels between bodies and machines in modernity, but scholars have yet to
explore if these ideas are borne out in the actual experiences of amputees. This
dissertation research collects stories of and reflections on recovery and
rehabilitation after amputation in order to elaborate on theories that employ
prosthesis as a metaphor for human relations with technology and the meaning of
being human. The project asks how medical procedure and assistive technology can
influence ideas about the body and the self and then apply these insights to
issues in technology studies, disability studies, and bioethics.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Data are collected in the form of 50 in-depth interviews with people
who began using an artificial limb in the last 6 years. To capture a range of
experiences, a diverse group of amputees will be interviewed, including men and
women and those who have lost limbs due to trauma and disease. The presentation
and analysis of these narratives will focus on how amputees come to interpret
their bodies and prosthetic limbs and how these interpretations reflect or
reinvent popular thinking about the body. The final dissertation thesis and
related publications will contribute to the literature a varied account of
amputation and recovery. The results should be of interest to scholars of
medicine and rehabilitation, as well as to amputees and their families. Further,
the dissertation will explore how the experience of amputation and use of
prostheses can inform STS theories about body, self, and disability.