* 0924129
* Molecular Mechanism of Proteus Mirabilis FliL Signal Transduction
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* M. Robert Belas, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 07/31/2013
* USD 631,652.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt; Most, if
not all, bacteria are able to live either as independent planktonic cells or as
members of organized surface-anchored communities called biofilms. Biofilm
formation is thought to be a developmental process that begins when a motile
bacterium (the swim stage) attaches to a surface (the stick phase). Many
bacterial processes are involved in biofilm formation. One such process is
flagellum-mediated motility, which facilitates attachment to and colonization of
surfaces. Both motile and sessile lifestyles confer specific advantages and
liabilities, therefore choosing the right one in any particular environment is
crucial for bacterial adaptation and survival. A successful swim-to-stick
transition requires that the bacterial cells properly sense and respond to their
interaction with the surface. It is clear that bacteria can sense and respond to
surfaces, but after years of research on sensory transduction pathways, we still
do not understand how cells transduce information about their physical
environment into their interior to alter gene expression and protein activity.
Previous research has demonstrated that the bacterial flagellum, normally
thought of as a helical motor that propels bacteria, acts as a sensor to monitor
surface contact, and a ubiquitous flagellum-associated protein called FliL plays
a central role in the response of cells to the surface. Using Proteus mirabilis
as a model, the research will determine the molecular basis of FliL function in
the pathway leading to gene expression and the control of the swim-or-stick
lifestyle switch. Successful conclusion of this research has the potential to
change the way we think about flagellar function. More importantly, it will
generate clues to how cells sense and respond to physical cues in bacteria and
higher organisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt; The results of
this research will be incorporated in well-established educational programs to
train high school teachers; graduate, undergraduate and high school students,
many of whom are underrepresented minorities and women; as well as to provide
community kindergarten-to-gray outreach, involving students of all ages. In the
broadest sense, since nearly all swimming bacteria possess a homolog of FliL, an
understanding of FliL function is likely to benefit a myriad of other
investigations that involve flagellum-mediated swimming, biofilm formation, and
regulation of the swim-or-stick lifestyle so prevalent amongst bacteria.