* 0924630
* Collaborative Research:  Evolutionary and Comparative Models of the Demographic Transition
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2010,12/31/2014
* Mary Shenk, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2014
* USD 298,000.00

Dr. Mary Shenk (University of Missouri) and Dr. Mary Towner (Oklahoma State
University) will use nested datasets from Matlab, Bangladesh, to examine
evolutionary and comparative models of the demographic transition, a global
phenomenon in which high fertility and mortality are replaced by low fertility
and mortality. Most research links the demographic transition to economic
development, but the underlying mechanisms still inspire interdisciplinary
debate; as a unifying framework, evolutionary theory shows great potential for
helping to clarify both the motivations and mechanisms involved. The goals of
the project are to advance theoretical and empirical understanding of the
demographic transition using evolutionary theory, and to provide the first
comprehensive comparative analyses of key evolutionary and non-evolutionary
models. These goals will be met through three specific aims: (1) use large-
scale, longitudinal data from Bangladesh to evaluate three influential
evolutionary models of the demographic transition, focusing on risk, parental
investment, and cultural evolution; (2) use an evidence-based statistical
approach to compare evolutionary models with their non-evolutionary
counterparts; and (3) collect detailed new data on a subsample of the Matlab
population to provide in-depth information to facilitate the comparison of
multiple models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The demographic transition will have
significant social impacts in the 21st century. High birthrates hinder economic
development in poor nations, while population aging and low fertility undermine
safety nets and contribute to social tensions in developed nations. Evolutionary
approaches have the potential to revolutionize the study of demographic
behavior, yet work in evolutionary demography has been limited in scope and is
only familiar to a small community of scholars. This project aims to alter this
pattern by testing evolutionary models using population-level data, comparing
them to models from other fields, and publishing the results across disciplines.
The project will address policy implications by disseminating findings to the
study population, policy journals, and the development work community. It will
also provide research training to students and forge durable ties between
collaborating institutions.