* 0924654
* INTERNATIONAL COLLABORATION IN CHEMISTRY: Local structures of heteroatom environments and their effects on the reactivities of alumino-and borosilicates
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Bradley Chmelka, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Tanja Pietraß
* 06/30/2013
* USD 450,000.00

In this project, funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
Division of Chemistry with support from the Office of International Science
&amp; Engineering, Professor Chmelka from University of California, Santa
Barbara and his French collaborators from the Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique Laboratoire de Conditions Extrêmes et Matériaux in Orléans, seek to
understand and control the molecular origins of the high activities and high
selectivities of heteroatom-containing porous silicate and silica catalysts
aimed at improving the energy efficiencies of chemical processes. The two groups
have complementary expertises in catalyst synthesis, characterization, and
spectroscopy method development. The main objectives of the project
are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(i) to develop and apply new state-of-the-art methods
of solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy to establish the
local compositions and structures at and near catalytically important aluminum
and boron heteroatom moieties in nanoporous silicate and silica
materials;&lt;br/&gt;(ii) to use the resulting insights to design and control
heteroatom environments in porous silicate and silica frameworks to improve
their macroscopic adsorption and reaction properties; and&lt;br/&gt;(iii) to
educate and train students to provide strong fundamental understanding of state-
of-the-art methods of NMR spectroscopy and syntheses, characterization, and
properties of new catalytic materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Local compositional
and structural features, especially of framework aluminum and boron sites, are
important, because they crucially influence the macroscopic adsorption and
reaction properties of many catalytic materials, such as aluminosilicate
zeolites that are responsible for nearly all of the world's current gasoline
production. Despite their technological importance, much remains unknown at a
molecular level about the origins of their activities, principally because of
insufficient knowledge about the local environments at the Al and B active
sites. Insights gained from solid-state NMR investigations will be correlated
with macroscopic physicochemical (e.g., acidity, reactivity, adsorption)
properties of the catalytic materials to obtain new molecular-level
understanding of their complicated behaviors.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of the
project include the demonstration of new and general approaches for the
measurement, understanding, design, and improvement of the local compositional
and structural features that account for the reactivities of diverse classes of
catalysts. Training of students in these areas is important, both nationally and
internationally, and participation by students from underrepresented groups will
be actively promoted. The collaborative and complementary efforts between the
U.S. and French partners will provide cross-cultural and interdisciplinary
research and education opportunities for students that will be broadly
transferrable. It is expected that the insights gained from the proposed project
will enable students and the broader scientific community to develop next-
generation materials aimed at improving the energy-efficiency of processes and
devices.