* 0924564
* DDRIG:  Seeing Is Knowing: Objectivity and the Creation of French Visual Culture, 1870-1930
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Gabrielle Hecht, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Kelly A. Joyce
* 08/31/2010
* USD 15,000.00

This doctoral dissertation research improvement grant--made by the Science,
Technology &amp; Society program at NSF--supports a project that examines the
role of nineteenth-century French photography and early French cinema in forming
social networks among scientists, expert users, journalists, and other
adherents. The objectives of this project include analyzing how technological
communities of self-identified adherents legitimate the adoption of
technologies; analyzing how communities are important for articulating and
defining new forms of professional identity like photojournalists and
documentarians; and investigating how pre-existing relationships shaped the way
these specialist networks advocated on photography's behalf in France.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this project is to relate
sociological approaches to technology to the history of modern visual culture.
With regard to modern visual culture studies, this project develops an approach
that goes beyond emphasizing the emergence of new forms of mass media and
popular spectacles to assert the important role that social networks play in
advocating new technologies. It also contributes to approaches that derive from
sociology of technology studies that focus on the role of designers and users.
This project observes how technologies engender broader spheres of sociability--
journals, clubs, public lectures, curricula--where ideas, identities, and usages
are continually debated and redefined. Consequently, the project seeks to relate
and refine both the fields of visual culture and technology studies by seeking
to understand how communities of technologists debate and promote the adoption
and extension of technologies and do so within specific national and cultural
forms.