* 0924783
* The Uneven Development of Industrial Hazards: Lead and Oil in the U.S. versus Mexico, 1930-1990
* SBE,SES
* 12/15/2009,09/30/2013
* Christopher Sellers, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 09/30/2013
* USD 260,663.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(public Law 111-5). The project is an historical study of select industrial
hazards in the United States and Mexico, from the Great Depression to just prior
to the North American Free Trade Agreement (1994). The project is a direct
outgrowth of NSF-funded conferences that have explored the history of industrial
hazards as an interdisciplinary "contact zone," where the history of science and
technology has increasingly met up with environmental and health history,
geography, other social sciences, and the labor and economic history of
globalization. The research question is how did the mid-to-late twentieth-
century trajectory of industrial hazard history in developed nations compare to
that in developing ones? The project uses a comparative hazard history of lead
smelters and oil refineries in the United States versus Mexico to answer this
question.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigation begins with how these
industrial processes materialized through "global assemblages," as portable
corporations, technology, and expertise forged adaptations to particular
locales. Research concentrates especially on expert and lay framings of key
hazards in these industries: lead and sulfur dioxide around smelters, and
benzene as well as hydrogen sulfide and sulfur dioxide around refineries.
Contrasting approaches to the perception, investigation, interpretation and
prevention of hazard are examined, as these coalesced among a variety of experts
as well as relevant non-experts in both nations. The project also tracks the
ways each identifiable approach to industrial hazards changed over time. These
differences in approach are analyzed for how they may have reflected differences
in political economy, regulatory strategies, in funding and support for
particular types of investigation and oversight; as well as in the respective
local and national balances of power. More detailed environmental, archival and
oral historical study and comparison of a few local industrial sites is
conducted: the lead smelters at El Paso, Texas and Chihuahua City, Chihuahua;
and the oil refineries at Beamont/Port Arthur, Texas and Poza Rica, Veracruz.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The project (1) tests the potential
and limits of a biographical approach to industrial processes and toxins, as
scientific objects, for integrating socio-cultural and constructivist insights
with materialist methods of political economy and environmental history; (2)
clarifies just how unevenly industrial hazards in these two nations evolved, and
why; (3) compares the turns in these two nations to a more precautionary
science, law and politics of industrial hazards, by concentrating on evolving
regimes for understanding, monitoring and controlling low-level exposures to
lead and benzene in particular; (4) compares the ways hazards inside these
workplaces came to be related to those imposed on local communities,
environments, and consumers.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
resulting book offers the first in-depth comparison between the history of
industrial hazards in a developed and a developing nation. It provides a
precedent for many further studies of this as yet under-examined but ever more
important contrast. Methodologically, the book provides a new model for how more
culturalist and materialist styles of scholarship may blend and effectively
speak to one another, and for how historians of science and their disciplinary
neighbors may address the newer world-scale narrative of globalization. A
secondary impact is providing important historical context and insight for
contemporary practitioners and policy-makers.