* 0924841
* Top-down Signals for Eye Movements and Perception
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Dorion Liston, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 07/31/2012
* USD 299,943.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Real-world decisions utilize both sensory evidence and "top-down" signals. When
buying a house, for example, sensory evidence might consist of the immediate
characteristics of the particular house (e.g., location, size, state of repair)
and top-down signals might include both objective (e.g., local school test
scores) and subjective (e.g., desirability) factors. How these two types of
information are combined in the brain is not well-understood. Voluntary eye
movements provide a model system to study this process because the visual
stimuli can be carefully controlled and relevant information can be specified
exactly. In the brain, eye movement decisions are guided using signals from an
interconnected network of areas, some thought to provide a purely sensory
encoding of the visual stimulus to support unbiased perception, and others
thought to provide the top-down signals known to bias behavioral choices. The
central hypothesis of this project is that top-down signals influence visual
perception. (For example, expected stimuli can appear brighter than unexpected
stimuli.)

To test this hypothesis, Principal Investigator Dorion Liston at San Jose State
University will utilize a series of two-stage tasks. The first stage requires
the subject to make an eye-movement choice (e.g., look at the brighter of the
two stimuli). Biases in these choices will be induced by varying top-down
signals (e.g., the bright stimulus is most likely to appear in one location).
The second stage requires comparing a perceptual property (like brightness) of
the initially-selected stimulus with a neutral test stimulus. This allows the
observer's perceptions of favored and unfavored stimuli to be quantified and
mathematically modeled. Using this approach, factors that contribute to the
economic concept of "expected value" (i.e., reward magnitude multiplied by the
probability of obtaining the reward) have been shown to shape perception. In the
house example, this might correspond to a factor like the desirability of the
location influencing the perceived state of repair of the house. A mechanistic
description of how top-down signals interact with sensory signals to generate
perceptions and choices will help us to better understand how these processes
occur within the brain.