* 0924719
* Binghamton Geomorphology Symposium:  Geospatial Technologies and Geomorphological Mapping
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,02/29/2012
* Allan James, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 02/29/2012
* USD 23,303.00

This project supports the 41st Annual Binghamton Geomorphology Symposium (BGS)
in Columbia, South Carolina in October 2010. The project will facilitate
participation of junior scientists and graduate students (including under-
represented groups), conference logistics, travel support for invited speakers
and publication of a proceedings volume. The BGS is widely recognized as a
leading international conference concerned with various topics in
geomorphology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theme of the 2010 BGS, Geospatial
Technologies and Geomorphological Mapping, set by co-organizers of the
conference Dr. Allan James from the University of South Carolina, Dr. Stephen
Walsh from the University of North Carolina Chapel Hill, and Dr. Michael Bishop
at the University of Nebraska-Omaha will address theories and applications of
modern mapping technology and geospatial analyses to geomorphic science. This
BGS will provide a scientific basis for understanding the immediate goals and
potential of modern digital geomorphic mapping (DGM). DGM provides insights into
geomorphic systems including recognition of causality, process mechanics,
historical reconstructions through change detection, multi-scale analysis and
modeling, and assessments of energy and matter fluxes. This BGS will review the
theoretical basis of DGM, new data sources, optical and non-optical remote
sensing systems, information-extraction technologies, image fusing for
enhancement and classification, spatial modeling, and analytical approaches
(e.g. tool boxes). It will review developments in landform genesis, external
forcings, process dynamics, and feedback mechanisms. By taking a broad approach
to modern geomorphic mapping, this BGS will seek to anticipate and facilitate a
new generation of geomorphic mapping and geospatial analytical capabilities.
This broad view of geomorphic 'mapping' will examine the potential for
incorporating modern interactive database technologies such as spatial decision
support systems and web-based mapping and explore concepts such as multi-scale
analyses and modern data storage, dissemination, and visualization strategies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This BGS will be the first conference on geomorphology
that addresses the fields of geomorphic mapping and geospatial technology as an
integrated theme. Technological advances in remote sensing, geographic
information technologies, and numerical modeling of surface processes have
revolutionized the field of geomorphology and call for a symposium for the
evaluation and dissemination of information. Geoscientists are not always aware
of the capabilities and limitations of new technologies, data sets, and
methodologies, so interpretations and reliabilities of new developments will be
addressed. New methods also permit Earth scientists to go beyond traditional
mapping and modeling of the Earth surface. Papers and posters will provide a
broad new synthesis and integration of a rapidly growing field that spans
subfields within and beyond geomorphology. Invited papers by leading scientists
will be reviewed and published in a proceedings volume prior to the meeting and
in a special issue of the journal, Geomorphology. A graduate seminar will be
taught at USC during the semester of the BGS to involve students in critical
evaluations of the papers, and the organization and hosting of the meeting.