* 0924786
* Formation and Dynamics of Organizational Routines
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Kent Miller, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Quinetta Roberson
* 07/31/2012
* USD 370,960.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Routines are vital to how work gets
done in organizations. Routines are repetitive, recognizable patterns of
interdependent actions carried out by multiple actors. These patterns can be
flexible or rigid; they can produce efficiency gains or persistent inefficiency.
This project seeks to advance our understanding about when routines are
advantageous or disdvantageous to organizational performance, including
performance in terms of innovation, organizational change, and assimilation of
new technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The inquiry centers on how organizational
routines form and change over time. The researchers address this question in
three ways. First, they look into the formation of networks of individuals who
engage in coordinated problem solving. The formation of networks for
accomplishing routines is especially important because once a pattern of action
starts, it tends to influence who gets involved and what tasks get done
subsequently. Second, they examine the challenges of forming and adapting
routines in complex and changing environments. This portion of the research
considers the factors that affect how well organizations handle problems that
change occasionally or persistently. Third, they identify the conditions under
which routines display inertia or change, and the implications for
organizational efficiency. This facet of the project examines how environmental
instability and organizational characteristics explain instability and change in
organizational routines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will involve an agent-
based computer simulation model of routine formation and evolution, which will
be used to run a series of experiments that illuminate the three central
research issues. In parallel with the three simulation studies, the team will
conduct field studies to help validate the simulation model and provide bounds
on the parameter space. They will also create a stand-alone computer simulation
program with a simple graphical user interface that can be used to teach the
dynamics of routines.