* 0924039
* SBIR Phase II:   Domain-Unified Modeling for Electro-Mechanical Component Libraries
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* James Stori, SFM Technology, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 07/31/2011
* USD 532,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project proposes a framework to
support product development, analysis, and decision making in multi-domain
engineering environments through domain-unified product models. Ad hoc and even
formal (standards-based) product data models, subject to the need for multiple
views and attributes to support domain-specific application requirements, suffer
from data redundancy and consistency problems. These problems are exacerbated by
the implicit nature of information in geometric representation schemes and the
difficulty and latency of its access. The intellectual merit of the work lies in
the ability of the developed formalism to support the simultaneous generation
and maintenance of multiple views of product model data, and the enforcement of
consistency between them. A framework is proposed to manage the complexity of
model synchronization and view-generation with the domain-unified modeling
environment through the active management of constraints and goals for model
population and transformation. The framework is to be validated within the
context of an environment for the creation, management, and distribution of
domain-unified models of packaged electronic components.

The broader impact of this work accrues from the application of the domain-
unified modeling methodology to packaged components for printed electronic
assemblies (PCAs). The design of electronic products is realized through a
combination of electronic design automation (EDA) software tools and computer-
aided design (CAD) tools that support a wide variety of inter-related design and
analysis disciplines spanning the electronic and mechanical domains (e.g.
functional, layout, thermal, manufacturability). These tools are critically
dependent on the availability of accurate computer-interpretable models of
packaged electronic components. Due to the absence of accepted modeling
standards, a lack of effective tools for the creation, maintenance, and
distribution of component data, and a lack of interoperability across EDA and
CAD tools. The proposed domain-unified modeling tools and data services will
enable OEMs to more efficiently mange and distribute component information
within their enterprises, OEMs and designers to leverage collective efforts in
component modeling, and provide efficient mechanisms for the communication of
data between component suppliers and OEMs.

