* 0924871
* Molecular Genetic Analysis of Ethylene Insensitive Loci in Arabidopsis
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Joseph Ecker, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 08/31/2012
* USD 600,000.00

Intellectual merit. How plants perceive and transduce hormone signals to effect
dramatic changes in form and function is a fundamental question in biology that
also has important practical applications. The response to ethylene gas
continues to serve as a paradigm for understanding the mechanisms of plant
hormone signal transduction. Ethylene plays critical roles in development, such
as in the ripening of fruits and in responses to a variety of physical and
biological stresses, such as pathogen attack. In order to understand the
molecular mechanisms that underlie these biological processes, genetic,
molecular, biochemical, genomic and cell biological approaches will be employed
using the reference plant Arabidopsis thaliana. In particular, the goal of this
research is to characterize the functions of the key positive regulator in the
ethylene signaling pathway: EIN2. EIN2 is an ER-located integral membrane
protein whose levels are regulated by ethylene-dependent proteosome degradation.
By a poorly understood process, a portion of the EIN2 protein called CEND, which
alone can activate ethylene responses, is cleaved and translocated from the ER
to the nucleus upon exposure to ethylene. The project is to investigate the
mechanism of ethylene-dependent processing of the EIN2, and to identify proteins
that may mediate its nuclear translocation and/or are required for CEND
function. Genetic approaches will be used to functionally assess the role of
proteins that interact with the essential ethylene pathway regulator EIN2.
Identification and functional ethylene signaling pathway components, along with
characterization of and analysis of their interactions with the known signaling
pathway components will provide new insights into the diversity of biological
effects of the simple hydrocarbon, ethylene. Moreover, understanding of the
functions of these proteins will enable the modification of the beneficial
and/or detrimental effects of ethylene in any plant, in particular, crops with
important economic or social value.

Broader impacts. The long-term goal of this research is to understand how
ethylene gas promotes myriad changes in plant development and stress resistance
at a very detailed, mechanistic level. The educational activities associated
with this quest for basic knowledge about plant hormone signaling processes
includes the training of students. The focus of the planned outreach activities
centers on exposing high school students to modern plant biological research.
These students will learn new ideas, concepts, and, through demonstrations, the
tools and technologies of genomic and computational biology. In addition, a plan
for mentoring of postdoctoral students is outlined, which involves numerous
opportunities to learn the skills required for a researcher to initiate a
successful scientific career. The program utilizes a variety of training tools
such as ethics training, preparation of seminars, writing and reviewing of
grants and papers, as well as opportunities for student mentoring.