* 0924811
* Comparative Investigations of Future-Oriented Cognitive Processes
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Gilles Einstein, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Anne Cleary
* 08/31/2013
* USD 400,523.00

People spend a lot of time thinking about the past and the future (what is
sometimes called mental time travel). Being able to remember the past, including
what, how, and when things happened, can be very helpful in new situations when
one is not sure how to behave. Planning for the future, and remembering to carry
out those plans (called "prospective memory"), helps people prepare for things
that are not immediately important but could be important hours, days, or even
years from now (a simple example would be deciding what to pick up at the store
on your way home from work and then remembering to do it). This ability to
flexibly plan for the future has long been thought to be a uniquely human
ability. In fact, it has been argued that animals are "stuck in time," and they
cannot think about the past or future because their behavior is affected only by
their current needs and surroundings. However, animals may show capacities for
mental time travel, and such evidence would provide a better understanding of
the evolutionary foundations of human memory and behavior. The NSF-funded
research project conducted by Michael Beran, Emily Klein, and Theodore Evans at
Georgia State University and Gilles Einstein at Furman University includes new
tests of future-oriented thought and behavior in humans and three primate
species (chimpanzees, rhesus monkeys, and capuchin monkeys). This project will
test each species' ability to anticipate future situations and plan future
actions so as to determine the relationship between the prospective memory and
planning abilities of humans and other primates. Each species will perform
computer tasks in which prospective memory is needed and future actions must be
planned at the beginning of the task. One experiment will assess whether
primates can learn to hoard food rewards that they have earned by working on a
computer task, so that they can eat them later when they have fewer chances to
earn rewards. Another experiment will test whether primates will use prospective
memory to remember something that they need to do in the future. In some cases,
primates may show that they can plan for future situations that are different
from present ones, and this performance will be directly compared to human
performance. This research will determine similarities and differences between
primates and humans in their planning behavior and prospective memory and will
help determine whether any of these abilities are unique to
humans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Failures of prospective memory and failures to plan
for the future can have profound consequences for humans. Understanding the
causes of such failures is important and can benefit from a broad scientific
approach. This project will provide a better understanding of the evolutionary
emergence, as well as the limits, of planning and future-oriented thought and
memory in humans and primates. These studies offer new ideas about the nature of
primate memory, the origins of planned behavior, and the nature of prospective
memory.