* 0924740
* An Analysis of Organizational Mortality:  The Case of Charter Schools from 1995-2002
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2012
* Linda Renzulli, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Quinetta Roberson
* 12/31/2012
* USD 260,104.00

In recent years, a substantial body of research has examined the establishment
and growth of charter schools, which are considered by many to be an important
in education. Despite the increasing popularity of this new organizational form,
approximately twelve percent of charter schools have shut their doors since they
were first authorized 1991, dramatically disrupting the educational pathways of
a significant number of students. Due to the relative youth of charter schools
and lack of national data, however, researchers do not yet know what causes
charter schools to close. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study examines the causes
of charter school closure in the United States. The project will produce the
first comprehensive national data set about charter schools and will use it to
examine the patterns and determinants of charter school closure over time. More
generally, the project will shed light on the question of organizational
mortality, the extent to which failures may result from market accountability,
organizational dynamics, or demographic factors related to distribution of key
institutional resources. In addition, the study will provide an in-depth
analysis of how innovation can affect the likelihood of organizational failure
or success, primarily in the educational marketplace but with implications
beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new information this project will provide about
charter school closures will help policy makers assess the performance of
charter schools and create improve and standardized guidelines that promote
school stability and accountability. The findings of this study will also help
advance knowledge and understanding within the study of organizations,
education, and sociology. Finally, it will provide the research community with
the first comprehensive, national, longitudinal database of charter
schools.&lt;br/&gt;