* 0924088
* Collaborative Research: SoD-TEAM: 'Values at Play: Integrating Ethical and Political Factors into System Design'
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Mary Flanagan, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2010
* USD 137,530.00

Title: "Collaborative Research: SoD-TEAM: Values at Play - Integrating Social
Factors into Design"

The focus of this project is on the development of a software design
methodology, titled "Values at Play (VAP)" that takes values into account when
developing software systems. The methodology, or set of best practices,
addresses such issues as: how values can be consistently and systematically
integrated into the design of software systems, how values investigations, in
the context of technical design, can be made scientifically rigorous, and, the
construction of a viable set of general software design principles that could
lead to the integration of values across a variety of design tasks. The VAP
project integrates the humanities, the arts, and social, and ethical interests
into the scientific design of technological systems by specifically focusing on
values in the design of games. The project involves three research activities
including: 1. Development of a rigorous methodology (or, best practices) for
supporting value conscious design; a handbook of the Values at Play methodology
is made available in hardcopy and on the Web. This phase explores such issues
as: how to identify values that might be relevant to a given design project, how
to embody or express values in system design, how to engage in appraisal of
whether and to what extent designers have successfully embedded target values in
a given system. 2. Development of a values-in-design toolkit which includes: a)
game building components to help students create games based on a values-
orientation; and b) several working examples demonstrating values-to-design-
feature correlations. 3. Assessment of design training interventions: the team
will design several instruments to assess the values integration in the
methodology and Toolkit. In addition to the research activities, this project
engages faculty and practitioners in a Workshop about Values at Play. Embedding
values within technological systems, and verifying that such systems actually
reflects those values, is particularly appropriate using computer games since
they affect larger society. This research will also be of use to educators and
systems designers in the IT field considering game structures in their
approaches as well as to scholars interested in the study of technology,
society, and humanity. Potentially, this project might advance this line of
inquiry to a pervasive, industry changing, international level of importance
which not only promotes the humanistic study of these issues but enhances real
products for real people.

Program Manager: Anita J. La Salle Date: July 12, 2006