* 0924181
* The Biological Basis of Musical Tonality
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Dale Purves, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 09/30/2013
* USD 360,148.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For thousands of years humans have made
music using specific tone collections called scales or modes that have a special
aesthetic and emotional appeal (the familiar 'do,re, mi...' scale, for example).
Since the time of Pythagoras, understanding the basis of these of this appeal
has fascinated musicians, scientists, philosophers, linguists and many others.
Although tonal relationships have been fully documented over the centuries, the
basis of this phenomenology is not understood. Recent results from this group of
investigators have indicated that musical tones are also embedded in the
characteristics of speech, providing a way to explore issues at the intersection
of music, language and aesthetics. Using and extending databases of music and
speech, the investigators will examine 1) why humans favor a few particular tone
collections out of the many billions that are possible; 2) why some tone
combinations are more consonant than others; and 3) why major and minor scales
or modes have distinct emotional effects. The hypothesis is that the answer in
each case lies in the similarity of musical tones and the characteristics of
human vocalization, leading to unconscious associations that determine the way
musical tones are perceived. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Answering these questions
would provide a major intellectual advance in the long history of work on the
basis of musical tonality and its effects on listeners. The hypothesis that the
answers lie in the similarity of the spectra generated by musical intervals and
the spectra generated by the human voice is a promising way to examine these
issues. Whereas numerous investigators in recent centuries have argued that
music derives from speech, no one has explored this possibility in terms of
spectral imitation. If it can be demonstrated that the tonal phenomena evident
in music arise from similarity to speech, theoretical, experimental and
practical work in audition, linguistics, psychoacoustics, phonetics, speech
pathology, speech recognition, anthropology and philosophy may have a new way of
understanding some very old problems.