* 0924960
* CEDAR Postdoc:  Polar Mesospheric Cloud Structures as Evidence of Coupling Between the Upper and Lower Atmosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Scott Bailey, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Anja Stromme
* 08/31/2011
* USD 183,906.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is an investigation of
Polar Mesospheric Clouds (PMCs) that uses both satellite observations and model
simulations to determine the cloud occurrence frequency, variation with latitude
and longitude, and the possible response to the lower atmosphere through waves
and the large scale circulation. The satellite data are from the CIPS instrument
on the NASA AIM satellite. AIM stands for Aeronomy of Ice in the Mesosphere;
CIPS measures atmospheric and cloud radiances. The models to be used are the
National Center for Atmospheric Research WACCM model (Whole Atmosphere Community
Climate Model) and the Navy Research Laboratory's NOGAPS ALPHA model; NOGAPS
ALPHA stands for Navy Operational Global Atmospheric Prediction System Advanced
Level Physics and High Altitude Model . Both models are whole atmosphere models
that extend from the ground to the lower thermosphere and include waves excited
in the troposphere and their effects as they propagate vertically to higher
altitudes. The satellite data will be processed to identify PMC occurrences, to
determine the size of the particles in the clouds, and to identify the
meteorological conditions necessary for formation of PMC ''ice voids'', dark
regions in the centers of the clouds that are regularly observed. The two models
will assimilate measured meteorological parameters during the observing period
in order to provide realistic predictions of the temperatures and winds in the
mesosphere and lower thermosphere. Joint analysis of the data and model results
will be done to isolate the conditions that do and do not support the appearance
of the ice voids. The broader impacts of the project include the support of a
new female researcher and the contribution to the CEDAR program goals of better
understanding of the polar atmosphere and the coupling between atmospheric
regions.