* 0924604
* Internet Research and Ethics 2.0
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Charles Ess, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Linda Layne
* 07/31/2012
* USD 355,257.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). This Science, Technology, and Society project investigates
research ethics for Internet based studies. Research conducted on and through
the Internet has expanded exponentially in the last ten years. Researchers
across disciplines make frequent use of such tools as online surveys, engage in
forms of participant observation of virtual worlds, and use profiles from social
networking sites to analyze behavior and communication patterns. When Internet
research is conducted, it is typically reviewed by academic institutional review
boards (IRBs). In traditional research settings, the researcher and the IRB
assume responsibility for protecting the participants, but online research,
especially research conducted through Web 2.0 technologies, confounds standard
models of ethics. The risks to participants increase when certain types of data
are being collected, such as medical information and thus, greater protections
are needed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has three major components to
assist researchers, research regulators, and research participants in Internet
research. First, the investigators are developing the Internet Research Ethics
Literature Digital Library, a searchable, online, annotated database and
resource center on the Internet research ethics literature; it will be coupled
with an Interactive Resource Center, including a collaborative wiki, to
centralize and simplify the task of developing practices for making sound
ethical decisions. Third, it develops an online ethics study group for sharing
information on challenging and emergent online research ethics issues.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project goes beyond traditional research ethics issues
while providing sound resources, a solid research base, and expert advice as
more researchers and IRBs struggle with the complexities of Internet research.
The project promises broad impact for Internet researchers from all disciplines,
the foundations of their research ethics practices, and nature of research
itself in an ever-connected information environment.&lt;br/&gt;