* 0924385
* CRI: Collaborative Proposal: Developing the Next-Generation Open-Source Network Simulator (ns-3)
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2008,06/30/2011
* Sumit Roy, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore Baker
* 06/30/2011
* USD 81,692.00

Abstract

Program: NSF 04-588 CISE Computing Research Infrastructure Title: CRI:
Acquisition of Research Instrumentation Infrastructure for Next-Generation
Broadband Communication Systems

Lead Proposal: CNS-0551686 PI: Henderson, Thomas R. Institution: University of
Washington

Proposal: : CNS-0551378 PI : Riley, George F. Institution: Georgia Tech Research
Corporation - GA Institute of Technology

Proposal: : CNS-0551706 PI : Floyd, Sally Institution: International Computer
Science Institute

Investigators at the University of Washington, the Georgia Institute of
Technology and the International Computer Science Institute will re-design,
enhance and maintain the Network Simulator to address research and education
challenges for the next generation of data networks. Improvements will include a
new simulator architecture, new models for wireless networks, provide for
software encapsulation, and integration of the tools with virtual network
testbeds. The changes will enhance scalability, extensibility, and new
application program interfaces that open the simulator to open source networking
software. Emulation capability will be improved to allow integration with
testbeds.Wireless modules will be rewritten to track advances in wireless
networking. Educational scripts will be facilitated in the enhanced version. The
Network Simulator is heavily used in research; these improvements will allow it
to continue to be a leading resource for