* 0924544
* New Black City: Pidgin English & Modern Citizenship in Nigeria's Capital
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Rudolf Gaudio, SUNY College at Purchase
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 08/31/2011
* USD 75,940.00

Dr. Rudolf Gaudio, of the State University of New York Colleage at Purchase,
will undertake sociolinguistic research on Nigerian Pidgin (NP), a low-status,
English-based creole language, used by poorer residents in urban areas to
communicate across ethnic lines. The goal of the research is to investigate the
interactions between the material and symbolic processes that organize cultural
and social diversity in contemporary cities of the developing world.

The research will be carried out in the Nigerian capital of Abuja. In 1976,
after a civil war and with the benefit of new oil wealth, the Nigerian
government relocated the nation's capital from Lagos, a metropolis in the
southwest, to Abuja, a new capital in the heart of the country that was sparsely
populated and ethnically neutral. Today, English is promoted as a means of
transcending the country's considerable ethno-linguistic diversity as well as
facilitating participation in the global economy. Yet many Abuja residents have
only a limited command of English. These migrants typically live in suburban
slums and often use Nigerian Pidgin. The gap between Abuja's official image and
its residents' lived realities highlights the political, economic and
sociocultural contradictions that have accompanied rapid urbanization in Africa
and elsewhere.

The researcher will employ a mix of social science research methods, including:
participant observation; audio recording of naturally occurring speech;
collection of social network data; semi-structured interviews; a household
survey; and the collection and analysis of language media. The researcher
hypothesizes that rather than being simply linguistically disadvantaged, some of
Abuja's residents may be forging a specifically working-class version of a
modern Nigerian identity, and (2) that this identity is expressed in part
through the use of Nigerian Pidgin.

Findings from this research will contribute to better theoretical understanding
of the spatial, technological, and political-economic dimensions of language use
and the foundations of inter-ethnic relations in changing urban environments.
More practically, research will be of use to urban planners and to policy makers
concerned with language policy.