* 0924808
* Batch-Fabricated Nanochannel Devices for Direct Electrical Probing of Biomolecules
* ENG,ECCS
* 11/24/2008,07/31/2012
* Carlos Mastrangelo, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 07/31/2012
* USD 329,993.00

NSF Proposal 0824180&lt;br/&gt;PI: C. H. Mastrangelo and S.
Bhunia&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
research is the development of a technology for mass production of low-cost
nanochannel devices with electrodes. The project includes modeling, fabrication,
characterization and testing these devices. The approach is to define
nanochannels lithographically with sidewall batch fabrication techniques. Each
device consists of a nanometer-sized channel with inlet and outlet openings and
two metallic nanoelectrodes embedded across the nanochannel walls.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits: Nanochannel devices for single
molecule probing and analysis are presently fabricated with direct write
techniques which are not viable for low cost fabrication. In this program we
will develop methods for mass production of low-cost nanochannel devices with
transverse electrodes on silicon substrates. These structures will be tested and
characterized in terms of their physical properties and their ability to
interrogate macromolecules. Fast and accurate semi-analytical models for
estimation of device parameters such as channel conductance in the presence and
absence of single biomolecule will be developed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: Single molecule interrogation technology using nanochannel probes
provides tremendous opportunities in biological, environmental and clinical
applications. The project will provide research and training opportunity to two
graduate students; up to four undergraduate students and up to two high school
students from Hathaway Brown, a local all girls school with a distinctive
student research program. Emphasis will be given on recruiting bright
underrepresented students, including minorities and women engineers. The
technology developed through this project will be shared with peer research
groups from various institutions for additional testing and characterization of
the devices.&lt;br/&gt;