* 0924636
* Neurophysiological Constraints and Model of Reflexive Spatial Attention
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Saumil Patel, The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston
* Standard Grant
* Anne Cleary
* 08/31/2013
* USD 257,471.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The NSF funded research project conducted by Anne Sereno and Saumil Patel at the
University of Houston will use human behavioral experiments and a mathematical
model to examine the brain mechanisms underlying reflexive spatial attention in
vision. The information processing capability of the human central nervous
system (CNS) is limited by factors such as the number of neurons available in
the system as well as the way they are connected to each other. These
limitations are overcome by mechanisms that either move and aim the sensory
organs towards the source of relevant information in the environment (such as
head and eye movements) or "aim" the CNS itself towards the relevant information
arriving from these sensory organs ("covert" attention). It is well known that
visual spatial attention can occur reflexively and automatically without
conscious awareness. However, the details of the neural circuitry involved in
reflexive spatial attention are still largely unknown. Further, although much of
what is known about the neural mechanisms of visual spatial attention has been
learned from studying monkeys, there are few, if any, theoretical models that
link neurophysiological data from monkeys to human behavioral data. Sereno and
Patel's research will begin to fill this gap by extending a physiologically
plausible model of reflexive attention to analyze previously collected neural
data from monkeys. Recent work suggests that the parietal areas of the brain,
previously thought to be largely devoted to spatial processing, and thus
important for spatial attention, are also sensitive to stimulus shape. Thus, an
additional goal of this research is to determine the role that object shape
plays in reflexive spatial attention.

Understanding the neural circuitry of reflexive spatial attention is an
important step in linking sensory signals to perception and behavior. This
research will provide a theoretical framework for linking physiological data
from monkeys to human behavioral data. In particular, the work proposed here
will yield insight into how the brain automatically filters information and
guides behavior. Knowledge gained from this project may improve the design and
performance of machine-vision systems (such as those used in robotics),
particularly their ability to automatically focus attention and thus
successfully function in crowded environments. This project will also provide
unique training for psychology graduate students, with an emphasis on the
application of mathematical tools to understanding the workings of the human
nervous system.