* 0924358
* Participant Support for  Workshop on Statistical Methods for the Analysis of Network Data in  in Dublin, Ireland.
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2010
* Stephen Fienberg, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2010
* USD 5,000.00

This award will support travel and expenses for young U.S. participants in a
three-day Workshop on Statistical Methods for the Analysis of Network Data in
Practice, to be held on June 15-17, 2009 in Dublin, Ireland. Many modern data
analysis problems involve large data sets from social, biological and other
networks. In these settings, traditional modeling assumptions are inappropriate;
the analysis of these data must take into account the structure of relationships
between the entities being measured. In keeping with this perspective, the
Annals of Applied Statistics (AOAS) has been planning a special section to
appear in late 2009 or early 2010 with papers on the modeling of network data.
This workshop will pay special attention to model design and computational
issues of model fitting and inference. The workshop will take advantage of the
high quality papers that have already been submitted to AOAS to bringing
together statistical network modeling researchers from different communities,
and encourage the submission of papers by young researchers and graduate
students in a broad spectrum of disciplines. The workshop goal is to foster
collaborations and intellectual exchange resulting in novel modeling approaches,
diverse applications, and new research directions for network research and its
application.