* 0924135
* Everett Papers Archive and Commentary
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Peter Byrne, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2011
* USD 160,681.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The quantum measurement problem
encountered in the standard formulation of quantum mechanics results from the
incompatibility of the deterministic dynamics characterized by Schrodinger's
equation and the stochastic collapse dynamics that obtains only during
measurement. Hugh Everett III famously proposed solving the measurement problem
by simply dropping the collapse dynamics from the standard theory. He then
believed that the empirical predictions of the standard theory might be
recaptured as the subjective experiences of observers who are themselves treated
within the theory. Everett called this the relative-state formulation of quantum
mechanics, also, more popularly, known as the many-worlds interpretation.
Everett's proposal has been deeply influential in how physicists have thought
about quantum mechanics, but it has proven difficult to determine how best to
understand Everett's proposal. This is due, in part, to the fact that Everett
only published three short works on the subject: his Princeton Ph.D. thesis, a
research paper that is essentially identical to the thesis, and an earlier and
longer version of the thesis. New primary material, however, has been
discovered. In addition to providing drafts of earlier work, this material
indicates that Everett continued to think about the foundations and
interpretation of quantum mechanics long after he published on the subject. The
investigators will sort, catalog, archive, and put this material in a form that
is easily accessible to physicists, historians, philosophers, and students of
physics. The three main products of the research will be (1) a sorted collection
of original source material, (2) a general online archive containing scans of
all of the material relevant to Everett's interpretation of quantum mechanics,
and (3) a bound edited collection of the material most salient to Everett's work
on the foundations of quantum mechanics with extensive biographical and
conceptual notes and commentary.