* 0924848
* The Economics of Matching, Dynamic Games, and Crime
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,09/30/2011
* Lones Smith, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 09/30/2011
* USD 229,955.00

This project contains sub-projects spanning four research areas: matching, game
theory, information, and crime. The first ?Iron Sharpens Iron: Rethinking
Dynamic Matching Theory? challenges the traditional economic theory of
employment, that workers move when the wage rises. In fact, we know that many
take lower paying but higher status jobs as ?career moves?. This project offers
a tractable and parameterized framework fleshing out the implications of this
insight, assuming that individuals are changed by their environments. It should
offer insights about employment decisions, job turnover, and wage volatility. It
will explain failures and confirmations of positive sorting across an array of
economic and social settings. It should also explain why social matching often
yields homogeneous neighborhoods: Likes should match with likes one is pulled
types down to the ?weakest link?. From a more applied perspective, this should
inform the wisdom of anti-segregation policies and on-the-job training programs
alike.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second two sub-projects offer unrelated attacks
on a key open theoretical problem in dynamic economics known when individuals
repeatedly interact with others and their actions are hidden from view. This
problem ? known as imperfect private monitoring ? is currently at the frontier
of the game theoretic approach to economics. Economists have long realized that
hidden actions can strangely facilitate cooperation, because individuals can
correlate their behavior, thereby achieving outcomes not possible with
independent play. The first project constructs and analyzes a tractable upper
bound for the set of possible payoffs owing to such correlation. The second
introduces a class of repeated interactions when players suffer from a simple
form of ?source amnesia? ? forgetting how they arrived at their information.
While more foundational in nature, this project should shed light on the
behavioral implications of forgetfulness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The final sub-
project ?An Economic Theory of Crime and Vigilance? offers a strategic
reformulation of the economic theory of crime, and derives a wealth of new
implications that come from an understanding of the equilibrium interplay of
vigilance and criminal behavior. Specifically, it derives sharp predictions
about the nature of crime across theft levels by explicitly accounting for the
motivation of various calibers of criminals in choosing what to steal and
potential victims in choosing how carefully to protect their property. This
should help us understand the precise cause-effect relation in the underlying
determinants of crime.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;