* 0924902
* Collaborative: Tax Evasion and Corruption Around the World? Are firms victims or perpetrators?
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Vojislav Maksimovic, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Quinetta Roberson
* 08/31/2012
* USD 87,480.00

Corruption is an important, and not well understood, problem in economies of all
sorts. It can degrade trust and predictability in transactions and may alter
distributions of wealth and opportunity. Most corruption studies treat countries
as monoliths without attention to corruption in specific industries and
individual firms across countries. Also, most assume corruption has only
negative effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this study, a unique and comprehensive
database will be used to study the illegal activities of firms across 76
countries, focusing on small innovative firms in both the public and private
sectors. The framework and the data used in this project enable the research
team to address new questions, including questions about possible positive
effects of corruption and tax evasion. The researchers will explore, for
example: whether corruption constitutes a tax on innovation; whether firms that
bribe receive special advantages in dealing with bureaucracy and regulation;
whether certain industries have a proclivity towards bribe payments and tax
evasion?; and what factors explain the distribution of firms as victims and
perpetrators within and across countries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The findings
should have direct implications for policy reform in designing anti-corruption
strategies and in informing strategies to improve tax collection and
administration.