* 0924535
* Huerequeque Site and the Development of Complex Society in the Casma Valley of Peru
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Thomas Pozorski, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2013
* USD 89,504.00

Civilizations emerged independently in many regions of the world and scientists
wish to understand the underlying processes which led to the development of such
complex societies. The comparison of individual cases and the search for
similarities and differences provides a powerful method to gain such insight.
Archaeologists have long focused on the Andean region because here, in contrast
to multiple regions in the Old World, it appears that no extra-regional contacts
with other developing societies were involved. Thus the Andes provide a
'pristine' case. In Peru, the heartland of Andean civilization, the widely
assumed scenario is being rewritten. It was believed that the first Andean
civilization appeared in the Early Horizon (1000-200 BC) period. However more
intensified research into the proceeding Initial Period (2100 - 1000 BC) has
revealed an ever earlier Pacific based florescence marked by monumental
construction, irrigation agriculture, ceramics, woven textiles and coastal-
inland subsistence exchange systems. Most recently, to archaeologist's surprise,
excavation at the site of Caral in the Supe Valley and the publication of
associated radiocarbon dates made it immediately clear that the hallmarks of
complex society in Peru began much as probably 1,000 years earlier
still.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With National Science Foundation support Drs. Thomas
and Shiela Pozorski will explore this issue through excavation at the inland
Casma Valley site of Huerequeque. They will better define the main preceramic
occupation at the site and use these data to evaluate models of the rise of
early social complexity. They will also define the role of the site as a likely
precursor to the developmental trajectory that characterized Initial Period
sites. The work will have the potential to shed light on critical aspects of
early civilization and Huerequesque is particularly appropriate because the site
is well preserved and not overlain by extensive later occupation. Grant funds
will be used to support excavation, concurrent analysis of artifacts and more
specialized analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fieldwork will include
collaboration with Peruvian and U.S. colleagues in the excavation, analysis and
interpretation in both the field and laboratory. The results will be
disseminated in a timely manner to interested local citizens, Andean scholars
and the global archaeology community.