* 0924327
* A Biographical Study of Dr. Martin Lister (1638-1712).
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2010
* Anna Marie Roos, Roos                    annamarie      E
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 09/30/2010
* USD 38,426.00

This project is to carry out research for what will be the first scientific
biography of Dr. Martin Lister (1638-1712), vice-president of the Royal Society,
Royal Physician, and the first conchologist and arachnologist. It will address
the extent to which Lister's study of natural history is a conceptual bridge
between the work of Renaissance naturalists and those of the Enlightenment, such
as Linnaeus and Buffon. Like Darwin two hundred years later, Lister corresponded
most of his adult life (over 1000 surviving letters) with explorers and
scientists who provided him specimens, observations, and locality records from
all over the world. The impact of his work extended into Jamaica, America,
Barbados, France, Italy, the Netherlands, China, and his native England, his
research truly cross-cultural.

This biographical study and intellectual history will also provide an
unprecedented picture of what it meant to be a virtuoso in the seventeenth-
century republic of letters. Rich archival resources show that Lister was an
innovator in archaeology, medicine and chemistry, Robert Boyle considering him
an investigator of ?piercing sagacity.? Though Lister is known to have
discovered ballooning spiders and his work on molluscs was standard for 200
years, he also invented the histogram, provided Sir Isaac Newton with chemical
procedures and alloys for his telescopic mirrors, did archaeological studies
demonstrating York?s walls were Roman, received the first reports of Chinese
smallpox vaccination, and donated the first significant natural history
collections to the Ashmolean Museum. His letters reveal he was involved in the
day-to-day administration of the early Royal Society in its formative years,
revealing some of the unknown internal workings of the world?s first scientific
society.

There is a fascinating subtext to this story: Lister's teenage daughters, Anna
and Susannah, engraved over 1000 plates of shells for his masterwork on
molluscs, engraved Antonie van Leeuwenhoek?s microscopic illustrations for the
Royal Society, and used microscopes themselves. The importance of women in the
?scientific revolution? has never been clearer. Just as Lister was the first to
make a systematic study of spiders and their webs, this biography will be first
to analyze the significant webs of knowledge, patronage, and familial and gender
relationships that governed his life as a scientist, presenting a humanistic
view of early science studies with broad appeal.