* 0924809
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Braking Detroit: State Management of The Automobile in The United States, 1966-1988
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* David Hounshell, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Kelly Moore
* 07/31/2011
* USD 9,934.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This doctoral dissertation research
improvement grant--supported by the Science, Technology &amp; Society program at
NSF--examines the governance of automobile technology in the United States.
Throughout the 20th century, the automobile reigned as the great American
machine, a object bound to every level of American life and culture, from
economic cycles to passions of teen dating, from travails of labor to travels of
soccer moms. Yet, automobiles brought with them multiple dimensions of risk:
crashes mangled bodies, tailpipes spewed toxic exhausts, and engines guzzled
increasingly scarce fuel resources. During the 1960s and 1970s, the United
States federal government created institutions--primarily the National Highway
Traffic Safety Administration and the Environmental Protection Agency--to
regulate the automobile industry around three concerns, crash safety, fuel
efficiency, and control of emissions. This dissertation research examines the
growth of government institutions (i.e., the state) that regulate automobile
from the 1960s through the 1980s when the state came under fire from new
political forces and governmental bureaucracies experienced large cutbacks.
While previous studies of regulation have focused either on biographies of
regulatory visionaries (a.k.a. policy entrepreneurs) or on legislative
histories, this dissertation research examines how the state built bureaucratic
organizations and administrative capacity to regulate and enact change in
industry through performance standards. Only by examining these micro-practices
of governmental power, this project argues, can we understand how regulatory
regimes have truly influenced their intended objects. This dissertation research
examines how these institutions developed, learned, and evolved, and how they
shaped technological change in the automobile industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project is based on traditional historical methods, including archival research;
government document, newspaper, and periodical research; and oral histories. The
project is significant not only because it fills historiographical gaps, but
also because a deep understanding of regulation and regulatory institutions is
important for potentially shaping other technologies (e.g., those emitting
greenhouse gases) and for guiding the domestic auto industry beyond its current
tribulations.