* 0924282
* Collaborative Research: Measuring the Bias of Technological Change
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Jordi Jaumandreu, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 09/30/2013
* USD 237,848.00

When technological change occurs, it can increase the productivity of capital,
labor, and the other factors of production in equal terms or it can increase the
productivity of some factor of production more rapidly than that of others.
Whether technological change is biased in this way is an empirical question that
is central to economics. Yet, the existing evidence on the bias of technological
change is scarce. Factor-neutral (also called Hicks-neutral) technological
change is assumed, either explicitly or implicitly, in most of the standard
techniques for measuring productivity, ranging from classic productivity
decompositions to recent structural estimators for production functions. In
contrast, most research on economic growth assumes labor-augmenting
technological change, sometimes in the more specific form of human capital
accumulation. More generally, the bias of technological change influences how
goods and services are produced and shapes (as vividly illustrated by the
history of technology) the evolution of individual workplaces, firms, and entire
industries. In this way, the bias determines which societal groups are the
winners and which are the losers and thus their willingness to embrace
technological change.

In this research project we combine recently available firm-level panel data
with advances in econometric techniques to directly assess the bias of
technological change. We develop a general framework for estimating production
functions that enables us to measure, at the level of the individual firm, how
much of technological change is factor neutral and how much of it is labor
augmenting. Enlarging the body of evidence from a microeconomic point of view is
a step towards understanding (and ultimately influencing) the sources of
technological progress and its impact on society. We further relate the speed
and direction of technological change to firms' R&D activities, a natural lever
for encouraging technological progress.