* 0924202
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: SustainabiliTea: Shaping Sustainability in Tanzanian Tea Production
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Lawrence Busch, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Kelly A. Joyce
* 08/31/2010
* USD 14,945.00

This doctoral dissertation research improvement grant--funded by the Science,
Technology & Society program at NSF--examines how sustainability standards are
determined. In Africa, certification of agricultural practices to meet ethical
standards is being promoted by donors, policy-makers, the private sector and
civil society as a new techno-scientific means to add value to agriculture,
while simultaneously promoting sustainable development. This dissertation
research addresses the values embedded in techno-scientific standards and seeks
to understand their impact in current production networks. These policies are
not unique to Africa, but reflect a global movement towards the use of standards
to govern trade in the agri-food system. More specifically, ethically certified
products have become popular with consumers who identify with the value claims
they represent. These claims include the values of sustainability, corporate
social responsibility (CSR), and gender equity; yet, there is no agreement over
whether these standards enable more sustainable futures for food producers.

This research project adopts a case study approach that examines the
performances of these values in key interactions within each of the four
sustainable tea value chains (Ethical Tea Partnership, Fairtrade, Organic, and
Rainforest Alliance) that link producers and processors in Tanzania with buyers
in Kenya and standards developers in Western Europe. The research focuses on how
the values of sustainability, CSR and gender equity are performed. Multiple
methods (document analysis, field observations, in-depth interviews and focus
groups) will be used to identify and analyze the performance of these three
values at key sites of negotiation in the sustainable tea value-chains: in
production (grower-factory), the market (factory-blender) and standards nexus
(certifier-factory). Constant and comparative analysis of these performances
will seek to develop grounded theory that will reveal differences and
commonalities between how each network envisions sustainability and how they
enact it.

This dissertation work will contribute to knowledge on the use of techno-
scientific standards in agricultural development and global trade. Moreover, the
concepts of sustainability, CSR and gender equity that emerge from this research
will contribute to academic and policy dialogue on the nature of sustainable
practices. Finally, the findings will explore synergies and possibilities for
harmonization for those actors currently struggling with the onus of multiple
certifications in the tea industry.