* 0924192
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Linguistic and Orientalist Research in Late Nineteenth-Century Germany
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2010
* Lynn Nyhart, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2010
* USD 14,715.00

This dissertation research will investigate the relationship between language
sciences and Oriental studies in Germany from 1875 to 1900. Based on the
observation that this period witnessed a methodological shift from ancient,
often textual, evidence of language history to contemporary spoken data, it
asks: In what ways did researchers interested in Near Eastern languages claim
their work was "scientific"?

Methodologically, the project draws from the history of science, nineteenth-
century German intellectual and political history, and the historiography of
linguistics. It analyzes leading journals of comparative linguistics and German
Oriental studies, such as the Zeitschrift für vergleichende Sprachforschung
(Journal of Comparative Linguistic Research) and the Zeitschrift der
Morgenländischen Gesellschaft (Journal of Oriental Society). It requires
archival research in Halle (Saale), Leipzig, Berlin, and Göttingen involving the
papers of linguists and their professional organizations. Based on an analysis
of these sources, it will outline the institutional development of
Sprachwissenschaft (Linguistics) and Orientalistik (Orientalism) in the last
quarter of the nineteenth century. At its core, the project will carry out case
studies of linguists who worked on the Iranian sub-family of Indo-European,
notably, J. H. Hübschmann (1848-1908) and F. C. Andreas (1846-1930).

This project poses fundamental questions about how boundaries of the scientific
enterprise have been defined and controlled over time. In this period, German
linguists actively debated the position of language study in relation to other
fields. In particular, the "Neogrammarians" associated with the University of
Leipzig claimed scientific status for their work by prioritizing method over the
particularities of cultural and social history. The institutional and
intellectual consequences of their work are essential to an understanding of
"science" during this time of remarkable academic growth and self-conscious
university modernization. Thus, this interdisciplinary project seeks to relate a
context-specific understanding of science to later divisions between science and
the humanities.