* 0924914
* CEDAR Postdoc: Coordinated Optical and Radar Observations of the Ionosphere and Thermosphere
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,03/31/2012
* Elsayed Talaat, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Therese Moretto Jorgensen
* 03/31/2012
* USD 238,072.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The mid-latitude ionosphere is considerably more dynamic than previously
thought. Medium-scale traveling ionospheric disturbances (MSTIDs), sporadic-E
(Es) layers, and mid-latitude spread F are examples of mid-latitude ionospheric
dynamics that occur during periods of quiet geomagnetic conditions. During
active geomagnetic conditions, large plasma depletions and enhancements, along
with associated steep density gradients, often form and move through the mid-
latitudes. Both quiet- and storm- time dynamics have profound effects on radio
waves. This is especially crucial for users of satellite-based navigation
systems, for which ionospheric variability is the largest uncorrected error. The
origins of MSTIDs observed at mid-latitudes are not well established and may be
due to forcing by the aurora or by coupling to Es layers below, perhaps even
both. The expansion of the SuperDARN radar system to mid-latitudes has made
large-scale and long-term study of these phenomena possible. However, the radars
lack spatial resolution and photochemical information (notably plasma density
and altitude information) to fully characterize the effects and small-scale
dynamics of the MSTIDs. This project will perform a coordinated study utilizing
an all-sky airglow imager in conjunction with the SuperDARN radar at Wallops
Island, VA, to observe the relationship between observations of the electric
fields and ion velocities within MSTIDs and variations in density and altitude
inferred from the airglow. The following questions will be addressed: 1. Is the
MSTID a geomagnetic artifact that propagates out of the auroral oval or is it
generated by a local instability, perhaps coupled to a sporadic-E layer? 2. Are
(all) MSTIDs electrified? 3. What is the effect of the MSTID on the F region
after it passes? The broader impacts of the project include enhancing the
SuperDARN infrastructure at Wallops Island and the datasets obtained by it and
supporting a new researcher in his first research effort after completion of the
Ph.D. The long-term results of studying the mid-latitude ionosphere will help
users and designers of these systems, especially augmentation systems such as
WAAS, produce better corrections and prepare appropriate mitigation strategies
for severe disturbances.