* 0924476
* Recovery and Analysis of Early Pleistocene Hominin Fossils and Footprints, Ileret, Kenya
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,02/29/2012
* David Braun, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 02/29/2012
* USD 69,999.00

Recently about half of an associated hominin (human ancestors and extinct
relatives) upper limb skeleton and several layers of sediment containing hominin
and other animal footprints were discovered at a 1.5 million-year old site
(FwJj14) in Kenya. This award continues the fieldwork on this important
discovery. Its goals are to 1) recover more of the newly-discovered associated
hominin skeleton likely belonging to the extinct human relative, Paranthropus
boisei; 2) excavate, scan, and analyze three footprint layers at FwJj14E,
including two layers with hominin footprints; and 3) excavate, scan and analyze
a footprint layer at GaJi10 that also preserves hominin prints. These
discoveries offer a unique opportunity to test long-standing hypotheses, ask
novel questions, and dramatically improve our understanding of hand and upper
limb anatomy, bipedal gait, behavior, and environmental context of sympatric
hominins during this critical time in human evolutionary history.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project offers a number of measurable broader impacts
for the scientific community by fostering interdisciplinary and international
collaboration, improving training of African scholars, and improving ethnic
representation in paleoanthropology in the US. The data as well as 3D scan data
of footprints will be available to the National Museum of Kenya, other scholars,
and the Human Origins Database, soon-to-be publicly accessible through the
Smithsonian National Museum of Natural History. This project will strengthen
international (US-Kenya-South Africa-UK) and, within the US, inter-institutional
(George Washington University-James Madison University-Smithsonian Institution-
Rutgers University) collaborations. Furthermore, this project demonstrates a
strong commitment to train US students from groups underrepresented (e.g.,
African-American, Hispanic) in paleoanthropology, as well as graduate students
from Kenya and South Africa.