* 0924659
* SBIR Phase II:   Epitaxial Metal Oxide Thin Films Using a Novel Polymer Assisted Deposition (PAD) Technique
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2009,03/31/2012
* Bo-Kuai Lai, Lake Shore Cryotronics, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 03/31/2012
* USD 499,521.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II proposal seeks to
develop extremely high energy density capacitors based on spin-on metal oxide
dielectric and conductor technology and will combine this technology with very
high surface area substrates fabrication technology. This capacitor technology
will be all solid state, inexpensive to produce, and will rival ultracapacitors
in energy density. The frequency range and loss characteristics will be superior
to those of other capacitor technologies and will be polarity independent. The
dielectrics will be adaptable through the range of properties of the perovskite
family of metal oxides, as well as non-perovskites, and will be useful for
multilayer, metamaterial tailoring of properties to fit the requirements of
various applications, including high voltages.

The broader impact/commercial potential from this technology will be
availability of high reliability, high performance capacitors for critical
applications at a reasonable price due to lower cost of manufacturing. It is a
disruptive technology that has applications in other areas such as solar cells,
ferroelectric memories, sensors, and micro-actuators. This technology will be
part of the solution for alternative energy sources and will help improve the
nation's chances for energy independence.

