* 0924313
* International Collaboration in Chemistry: Mechanisms of Iron Uptake and Storage in Marine Macroalgae-An Integrated Bioinorganic Approach
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Carl Carrano, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 08/31/2013
* USD 305,822.00

The award was submitted in response to solicitation NSF 08-602: International
Collaboration in Chemistry between US Investigators and their Counterparts
Abroad (ICC). The NSF and the partnering international funding agency co-
reviewed and made a joint funding decision on this proposal. NSF will support
the research of the U.S. investigators while the partnering international
funding agency will support the research of the collaborating foreign
investigators.

This research award by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry
Program and the Office of International Science and Engineering supports work by
Professor Carl J. Carrano at San Diego State University who, with his German
collaborator Berthold Matzanke (supported by the Deutsche
Forschunsgemeinschaft), will conduct fundamental studies on the Iron Uptake and
Storage Mechanisms in Marine Macroalgae. Iron is a critical micronutrient for
all plant species including those associated with the marine environment. Indeed
iron has been found to be the growth limiting nutrient with respect to the
growth of phytoplankton in large areas of all the oceans. Thus the chemistry and
biochemistry of how this element is acquired, stored and processed is of
critical importance to an understanding of the marine coastal environments in
which macroalgae are usually the dominant organisms in terms of biomass, often
forming extensive kelp forests. The key role of kelp forests, effectively
constituting an interface between the ocean, the atmosphere and land masses,
impacts such diverse areas as oceanic primary productivity, alternate energy
sources and global carbon sequestration. Using a variety of sophisticated
chemical, molecular and biological tools this project will increase our
understanding of this environmentally important class of marine organisms.
Marine macroalgae (seaweeds) represent an important resource with a wide range
of uses in the food, cosmetic, and fertilizer industries with an estimated
annual global value of about 4 billion dollars. They are also attracting
increasing attention as a source for biofuels that do not compete with
terrestrial plants for food production. This work also provides for the training
of graduate (both MS and PhD) and undergraduate students in a wide range of
important techniques. Because San Diego State University has a high minority
population (10th largest grantor of minority bachelor's degrees in the USA) it
is expected to impact minority recruitment and training in the sciences. The
international nature of the research team and the proposed student exchanges
will also promote international cooperation in science.