* 0924709
* STTR Phase II:   Ferroelectric Liquid Crystal (FLC) Gels for Facile Processing and High Yield Manufacture of Hardened FLC Displays
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2009,12/31/2011
* Michael Wand, LC Vision, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 12/31/2011
* USD 523,981.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase II project will enable the
widespread use of ferroelectric liquid crystal (FLC) electro-optic devices,
leading to a new generation of displays that have greater speed, higher
resolution and lower power consumption than today's liquid crystals displays
(LCDs), which use nematic LCs. A proprietary family of additives, "polymer
dopants" demonstrated in Phase I, overcomes the main technical obstacles to
large-scale application of FLC devices: manufacturing and stabilizing properly
aligned cells. The proposed work will develop FLC-polymer materials that
expedite processing and increase the yield of well-aligned FLC cells. In Phase I
the team: 1) Identified side-group liquid crystal polymers that dissolve in FLC.
, 2) Showed that the FLC-polymer mixtures retain fast electro-optic (EO)
responses3) Demonstrated that the FLC-polymer mixtures robustly and rapidly
adopt the proper alignment, giving bistable switching that is elusive in the FLC
alone. In Phase II the team will establish the structure-activity relationships
for polymer dopants. It will optimize the FLC-polymer mixtures to establish
reliable processes to produce well aligned FLC cells in high yield at high
production rates.

Approximately 2x109 small flat panel displays are used annually in cell phones,
PDAs, iPods, etc. Currently, nematic LCDs overwhelmingly dominate this market
$20 billion/year in LCDs, manufactured using $350 million/year of LC materials.
The additives developed in this project will allow FLCs to be processed into
displays in this size range, providing a step-change in resolution and speed in
LCDs. This will lay the foundation for moving FLCs into LCD TVs ($86.3
billion/year market in 2008, growing rapidly). Enabling commercial production of
FLC displays 10 cm and up could revolutionize display technology and potentially
fuel the growth of display manufacturers in the U.S. Scientifically, solutions
of polymers in FLCs represent a nascent class of materials that has hardly been
explored. This project is at the cutting edge of experimental research in LCs,
providing the first glimpse into the consequences of orientational coupling in
chiral smectic LCs.