* 0924510
* Collaborative Research: Perennial Wetland Formation and Human Adaptation in NW Belize
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Timothy Beach, Georgetown University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2014
* USD 40,698.00

Tropical wetlands are important ecosystems with complex interactions between
their soils and water, but little is known about how humans further affect and
alter them over long time periods. This project will study northern Belize's
wetlands to test models of wetland formation and long-term human-environmental
interactions in the Maya Lowlands. Most previous Maya research has focused on
risks such as recurrent droughts but rising water tables and water quality may
prove to be comparable but insidious risks. This is a case of humans forced to
adapt to rising water tables of extremely hard water. The main goals of this
project are to determine the timing and processes of perennial wetland formation
across a range of environments in the northern Belize coastal plain; to discern
the underestimated role of water chemistry in landscape formation in this
tropical region; and to establish the types and ranges of human adaptations to
wetland formation, linking sites of previous research, including Blue Creek and
Pulltrouser Swamp. The underlying questions come from both natural and social
science. The project is testing six possible hypotheses to explain large-scale
landscape aggradation and formation during the Holocene across the Belize
coastal plain. This project will test the landscape development models by
studying seven known ancient Maya wetland field sites that span from the Blue
Creek research sites, through a zone that received no previous research on
stratigraphy and dating, to the zone of research done several decades ago. This
project will test these models with multidisciplinary research at two scales:
intensive excavation across canals and fields and extensive vibracoring to
determine wetland field extents. In each site, the project will study the lines
of evidence that explain landscape formation and human interaction:
stratigraphy, dating methods, soil morphology, sediment chemistry, ecofacts
(pollen, diatoms), and artifacts. This project will also conduct water chemical
analysis across this zone because of its key role in wetlands and its little-
understood role in Maya Civilization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will
provide a case of an important Pre-Columbian society's land use responses in the
face of natural sea level and water table rise; it will help flesh out the
mechanisms of landscape formation over a little understood, large tropical
wetland region; and it will help determine the Holocene rates and processes of
tropical wetland formation when these bio-diverse regions again face sea level
rise and other widespread threats. The study also provides basic soil and water
chemistry data to a developing region, and these baseline parameters can help
scientists and resource managers judge many aspects of environmental change such
as wetland ecosystem functions. This project will provide graduate and
undergraduate students experience in international field science and laboratory
research. The project will include and train many from local communities during
and between the field seasons. The project will disseminate findings on wetland
formation and Maya cultural ecology to international conferences, peer reviewed
journals, to students, and more widely through websites and the mass media. The
infrastructure of science will be improved through both the multidisciplinary
approach and the international nature of this research.