* 0924012
* SBIR Phase II:  A Higher Throughput SPR Biosensor
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2009,02/29/2012
* Bruce Gale, Wasatch Microfluidics, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 02/29/2012
* USD 495,089.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
Phase II project will develop a 48 channel surface plasmon resonance (SPR)
instrument and demonstrate a high throughput flow cell array for use with a
variety of label-free biosensing platforms. Flow cell technology is currently
the limiting factor in the development of high throughput label-free sensing
technologies. Modification of Wasatch Microfluidics Continuous Flow
MicrospotterTM into a highly parallel flow cell should begin to eliminate this
bottleneck and provide a template for even more highly parallel systems. We will
develop an understanding of how the proposed flow cell technology will impact
the sensing capabilities of a commercial-ready surface plasmon resonance (SPR)
instrument and an optimized baseline protocols will be developed. The end result
will be a 48 channel flow cell, which will be scalable to much higher
throughputs (192, 1536). This flow cell will be flexible such that it will be
easily integrated with a variety of label-free sensing technologies. The end
result of this research and development effort will be an SPR instrument with
approximately 10 times the capacity of the best current systems and will lay the
ground work for much higher density systems. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of this technology include the commercial opportunities of the
Microfluidic Flow Cell Array (MFCA). The MFCA will be developed for integration
with the biosensing platforms of a number of other companies. Specifically we
will target label-free technologies used to measure kinetic and affinity
constants for binding of molecules to one another. This is currently a
$100M/year market. From our discussions with pharmaceutical companies, higher
throughput label-free systems will lead to much larger implementation of these
technologies and a significant commercial potential, including a larger market
opportunity. Even the most basic implementation of our flow cell will have a
substantial impact. Currently, it takes the flagship Biacore (GE) instrument up
to 28 hrs to process 384 samples. These same 384 samples would only take 1 hr
with our proposed combined MFCA / SPR instrument utilizing our CFM technology.
These same instruments will then lead to substantially faster and more effective
drug discovery processes, and eventually better health for the US population.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;