* 0924354
* Scholars Award - A. Jean Ayres and the Development of Sensory Integrative Therapy:  A Cognitive-Social Analysis
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Michael Gorman, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Linda Layne
* 08/31/2014
* USD 117,965.00

This project--supported by the Science, Technology & Society Program at NSF-- is
a case-study of the development of a new expertise that combined science,
therapy and empowerment for a nascent profession. The central focus is on A.
Jean Ayres, a woman scientist, therapist and pioneer. She invented Sensory
Integration (SI), a new form of therapy for children experiencing learning and
social difficulties because they could not adequately integrate information from
multiple sensory modalities. Ayres combined a desire to help children with a
recognition that scientific rigor was essential in diagnosis and treatment. She
established a scientific basis for her diagnoses and treatment, using
statistical techniques to identify symptoms and neuroscience to determine a
cause. Ayres encouraged her students to set up their own clinics, diagnosing and
treating children; in the process, she and her students elevated the field of
Occupational Therapy (OT), from paraprofessional to professional, giving OTs
autonomy and decision-making authority. Such a transformation met with
resistance, of course, even within OT.

This project involves analyzing Ayres' thinking processes, including the
development of her theory, her diagnostic tests and how she designed devices to
enhance therapy. The project also studies the way in which her network of
students and allies grew, and where her efforts experienced resistance. The
analyses of thinking are usually referred to as cognitive, and the analyses of
the growth of a network of practitioners as social, but in fact the cognitive
and the social are inextricably intertwined. For example, Ayres was particularly
open to ideas from students; therefore, her network expanded not by conversion
but by incorporating the best ideas from those who were drawn to SI.

The Ayres case-study will provide valuable lessons for those who contemplate
socially-relevant scientific careers, and these lessons will be highlighted in
dissemination. This project will contribute to the growing field of psychology
of science by improving on existing methods for graphing discovery, invention,
and innovation in ways that can be applied to new case-studies by other
researchers.