* 0924146
* Kinetics of Atmospherically Important Radical-Molecule Complexes
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Jaron Hansen, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 09/30/2012
* USD 259,999.00

Recent experimental and computational studies have highlighted the effects of
water vapor on the kinetics and product branching ratios of important
atmospheric processes. In many cases, these reactions involve the OH and HO2
radical. To date, the literature only contains studies on the effects of water
vapor for reactions involving the OH and HO2 radical. The formation of a
radical-molecule complex during the reaction mechanism has been implicated as
the reason for the perturbed kinetics and product branching ratios. This project
presents experiments designed to measure the effects of water vapor on the
kinetics of the 2-hydroxyethylperoxy radical (HOCH2CH2O2) self-reaction and
reaction with hydroperoxy radical (HO2) using the method of laser flash
photolysis/UV absorption spectroscopy/two-tone frequency modulated diode laser
spectroscopy/laser induced fluorescence. Additional experiments to measure the
effect of water vapor on the product branching ratio for the reaction of
HOCH2CH2O2 + NO are also planned. The results of this work will provide
fundamental insight into the reaction mechanism of atmospherically important
processes and the role of radical-molecule complexes in perturbing the
reactivity of organic peroxy radicals. An understanding of the effects of water
vapor on the kinetics of these prominent organic species will serve to refine
tropospheric models and improve their predictive capabilities. The results of
this investigation would provide data so that generalizations about the
influence of water vapor on a variety of reactions could be developed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide research and training
opportunities for both graduate and undergraduate students at the PI's
university as well as create research opportunities for undergraduates, mentored
by the PI and faculty members from Brigham Young University's sister school,
Brigham Young University-Idaho (BYUI). (BYUI has recently been accredited as a
four year bachelor degree granting institution and currently does not have
research facilities.) This program will provide resources so that a number of
qualified and properly prepared undergraduates from BYUI can spend time in the
PI's laboratory during summer months collecting kinetic data on important
atmospheric reactions.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Additionally, two series of video
podcasts will be produced. One series will present the motivation behind the
current research and describe the methods/instrumentation used as well as the
conclusions reached after analysis of the data and will be used at BYU to teach
an upper division/graduate level class in atmospheric chemistry and in another
physical chemistry course. A second series of video podcasts will be made that
are designed to supplement the material presented in the interdisciplinary
classes as well as in a science fundamental class at BYUI as part of their
General Education curriculum. These video podcasts will include information on
the effects of the emission of organic molecules and their relationship to the
production of tropospheric ozone and an introduction to kinetics and the
usefulness of understanding the rate of reactions. The research described in
this project will serve as the backbone for the discussion in these video
podcasts. Podcasts will also be produced that relate the influence of pollution
to climate change and how the research is related to this topic. They will be
produced in a way that illustrates to the general public how much we know about
atmospheric chemistry, but they will also highlight the questions/research that
still needs to be done.