* 0924224
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Tracking Climate-Driven Changes in Neandertal Subsistence Behaviors and Prey Migration Patterns
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Curtis Marean, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2010
* USD 15,000.00

The Neandertals were a species of ancient human that occupied Europe during the
last ice age. By ~30,000 years ago, they were fully replaced by modern humans
who emigrated from Africa, but the ultimate reason for their disappearance
remains controversial. The process of the extinction of Neandertals in Europe
remains an unanswered anthropological topic of considerable scientific interest.
The proposed project contributes by testing the "Climatic Stress Model", which
holds that successive cold phases doomed Neandertals to extinction before modern
humans entered Europe. Specifically, this project tests the models assumptions
that 1) cold climates stressed Neandertal populations, and 2) global climate
changes affected local Neandertal habitats. If cold climates stressed
Neandertals, their subsistence behaviors may have changed, requiring intensified
use of prey. Additionally, if global climates disrupted local Neandertal
habitats, they should have affected local mammal migrations. To test the
hypothesis that Neandertals were stressed by cold climates, an analysis of
Neandertal butchering will be completed on red deer and reindeer skeletal
material deposited during global warm and cold phases from the French site of
Roc de Marsal (RDM)). Comparing butchering strategies during different climates
will address whether cold climates induced hyper-processing of bones. Because
mammals migrate less in warm, well vegetated environments, but more in cold,
open, and resource-poor environments, the hypothesis that global climates
affected local habitats may be tested through isotopic reconstruction of large
mammal (e.g. horse, red deer, reindeer and bison) migration patterns. These
reconstructions are based on the principle that living tissues absorb chemical
isotopes in the water and nutrients that are unique to the region in which they
are consumed. Identifying isotopic variation in mammalian fossils enables home
range size and migration distance to be inferred, providing an indication of
whether environments at Pech and RDM tracked global climates. This project uses
independent, multi-proxy methods to address the climate stress
hypothesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding climate-mediated behaviors of
Neandertals and their prey will help to explain how climatic fluctuations
influenced Neandertal extinction and the colonization of their habitats by
modern humans. This interdisciplinary project will incorporate
zooarchaeological, isotopic, and paleoecological research to generate an easily
accessible relational database (Microsoft Access). In addition, a strontium
isotope ratio map of France will be developed as a critical aide for tracking
the migration routes of Pleistocene mammals and inferring the mobility patterns
of European hominids.