* 0924274
* US-Rwanda International Workshop: Tropical Rift Lake Systems:  Integrated Volcanologic, Tectonic, Biogeochemical, and Geohazard Assessment of Lake Kivu; Kigali, Rwanda 2009
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Anthony Vodacek, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* DeAndra Beck
* 06/30/2010
* USD 56,363.00

Dr. Vodacek of the Rochester Institute of Technology will convene a 3-day
multidisciplinary workshop in Rwanda for US, African, and European participants
designed to develop and enhance understanding of tropical lake systems with
emphasis on the gas-charged, tectonically active Kivu rift system. The intent is
to integrate data sets and experiences to 1) determine the stability of the main
and smaller fault-bounded basins of Lake Kivu and their response to methane
mining; 2) evaluate the time and length scales of seismic and volcanic hazards;
3) integrate the sedimentological and tectonic records to deconvolve the
tectonic and climatic history of Western rift lakes; and 4) assess the impacts
of human activities on the Lake Kivu and its dynamics. Key foreign collaborators
are Nicolas d?Oreye (European Centre for Geodynamics and Seismology), Alfred
Wüest, (EAWAG), and Crispin Kinabo (University of Dar es Salaam). The foreign
collaborators all work actively in the Western rift region and will serve as
session chairs and help organize European and African invitee
lists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Tropical lakes in the East
African rift system preserve a long record of tectonic and climate change and
record the environment of hominid evolution. The deep, anoxic lakes of the
Western rift system appear stable, yet, the geological record reveals a complex
interplay between periodic overturn in response to faulting, volcanism and
volcanic degassing, and climate change. The Lake Kivu system is particularly
precarious, in that dissolved gas levels are dangerously high within the deep
waters of the lake and periods of volcanic and tectonic unrest could lead to
destabilization. Previous reconnaissance studies of the volcanically and
seismically active Lake Kivu system have identified the fundamental components
of the fragile lake system, but data are too few and unevenly distributed in
space and time to evaluate the relative importance of hydrological, tectonic,
climatic, and recent human impacts. Focused studies after the Lake Nyos
(Cameroon) overturn disaster, and the 2002 Nyiragongo volcanic eruption
highlighted the complex interplay between regional development and geological
hazards. The limited geographic scope and focus of these limnological,
geophysical, and sedimentological studies, however, raise as many questions as
the data answer. An integrated, multi-disciplinary examination of the Lake Kivu
system, its tectonic processes, and its future is required to answer these
important questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The primary aims of
the meeting are to link the diverse communities, and to build a strong network
for multi-disciplinary research with a truly international team. The workshop
aims to forge strong links with the energy sector within Rwanda, and to invite
exploration teams to the workshop. The goals of the workshop are to establish a
new initiative for cooperation in East Africa and to design programs to
comprehensively evaluate and monitor the stability of the Lake Kivu system
within its seismically and volcanically active tectonic setting. Each of the US,
African and European PI?s have made field visits to the rift, and it is felt a
meeting in Rwanda is essential to communicate hazards, to inform stakeholders,
and to build support for expanded monitoring. &lt;br/&gt;