* 0924778
* Social and Spatial Networks, Social Capital, and Leadership Accountability in Rural Development: A Study of Uganda's Agriculture Productivity Enhancement Project
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Delia Baldassarri, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* erik herron
* 07/31/2013
* USD 495,090.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Development scholars and policy
planners regard cooperative producer organizations as a core component of
poverty reduction strategies, but little is known about the social dynamics that
make some of these organizations more successful than others. This research
focuses on the social factors that explain variation in economic performance of
such groups, and the consequences of economic development on the quality of life
of households and villages. The research team will examine the roles of social
and spatial networks, associational capital, and leadership accountability in
shaping economic and social outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will
focus on Uganda's largest rural development project -- the Agriculture
Productivity Enhancement Project (APEP) -- which involves over 60,000 farmers
and 2,500 village-level organizations. APEP's stated goal is to increase small
farmers' productivity and marketing capabilities. Its rate of success varies
across villages. It is thought that the variations are related to local leaders'
capacities to spread information, elicit trust relationships, and facilitate the
emergence of accountability practices. Following a multilevel and multimethod
research design, data will be collected at the farmer, village, and parish
levels and will include observational data, social networks, and behavioral
games, to capture the motivations behind actors' strategic interactions and
provide valuable insight on the effect of interpersonal, associational, and
spatial (inter-village) networks on economic outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research contributes to the shift from a suggestive to an empirically grounded
understanding of social capital. Also, the theory that underpins the study
distinguishes between social capital -- defined as the ability of persons and
groups to secure benefits through social networks -- and its source mechanisms
(i.e., social norms, trust, reciprocity) and consequences (i.e., innovation
adoption, organizational building, economic performance).