* 0924027
* Radio Frequency Free Electromagnetostatic Dissociation Cell for Tandem Mass Spectrometry
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Max Deinzer, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2013
* USD 661,247.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

With this award from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities:
Instrument Development (CRIF:ID) program, Valery Voinov, Douglas Barofsky and
Max Deinzer and their research group at Oregon State University will develop a
novel electromagnetostatic (EMS) electron capture dissociation (ECD)/collision-
induced dissociation (CID) cell for use in tandem mass spectrometry. The
proposed EMS cell would be more robust, simpler to implement, require less
maintenance than current dissociation cells, which employ designs with rapidly
varying electric forces. Voinov and his collaborators will provide their
research students (undergraduate and graduate) with training in instrument
design and development, and will work with a number of campus programs to
highlight the impact of mass spectrometry on a number of areas from forensic
science to human health.

New kinds of mass spectrometry techniques open up brand new avenues of research.
The instrument developed with this award will allow scientists to study the
structure of complex molecules with two complementary fragmentation methods in a
single collision cell. The instrument to be developed will enable scientists to
rapidly determine the complex structures of bio-molecules -- an area of
significant practical importance. Increasingly, mass spectrometry has enabled
rapid advances in a number of areas with significant societal impact -- from
biomedicine to criminalistics. Technology like that developed in the present
award will aid in future advances in these and other areas.