* 0924369
* RUI:  Using GIS to Integrate the NOAA HYSPLIT Model with Surface-Based Air Quality and Mercury Deposition Data
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Jack Livingston, Slippery Rock University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 09/30/2013
* USD 175,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act
of 2009 (Public Law 111.5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Atmospheric airsheds, surface
areas that contribute contaminants and/or pollutants to a defined location or
the airmass above this location, have been previously defined as spatially and
temporally static. Dr.s Julie Snow and Jack Livingston at Slippery Rock
University of Pennsylvania and Dr. Peter Weiss-Penzias at the University of
California, Santa Cruz will address the need for more meaningful airshed
delineations by exploring the variability of airsheds. Further, the research
will examine how temporal and spatial changes in airsheds relate to air quality
and mercury deposition variability and evaluate environmental factors that
significantly affect changes in air quality chemistry and mercury deposition
rates. The project will incorporate three objectives: (1) Delineate atmospheric
contribution basins (airsheds) based on long-term back trajectory trends, which
will allow for the analysis of spatial and temporal variability of these basins.
(2) Determine the relationship between airshed geometry and air quality
(including specific considerations of criteria pollutants and mercury
deposition). This portion of the research will integrate air chemistry data that
is publicly available from the EPA and mercury deposition data that is publicly
available from the Mercury Deposition Network (MDN) with airsheds in
Pennsylvania. (3) Create a website to host a user-friendly airshed delineation
extension for the ArcGIS platform that integrates with the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration HYSPLIT trajectory model for use as a research and
teaching tool. The available extension will allow the user to delineate
contribution basins based on the frequency of back trajectory paths for a given
time period and location.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of tools for
defining airsheds and their variability, quantifying inputs of pollution to the
airsheds, and understanding regional air transport will integrate existing
approaches and technologies in a novel way. In doing so, the project will
reconsider the temporal and spatial variability in regional air transport and
improve our understanding of air quality and mercury deposition variability in
Pennsylvania. While this work is critical to directing air quality policy, it is
equally important in developing accurate air quality forecasts, which will
improve the health of individuals and communities. The final result of the
project, an ArcGIS extension made publicly available via a webpage, will provide
a unique tool for examining regional air quality and teaching undergraduate
students; the tool will enable individuals to explore regional atmospheric
transport for any given location. Undergraduate students at Slippery Rock
University will participate in the development of the webpage, the authoring of
documentation, and troubleshooting end user concerns. The dissemination of
results will occur broadly through peer reviewed publications and presentations.