* 0924991
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: Innovation and Environmental Justice in the Clean Tech Space: Measuring Performance and Anticipating Risks of Renewable Energy Technologies
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2011
* Dustin Mulvaney, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Kelly Moore
* 09/30/2011
* USD 119,996.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of
2009(Public Law 111-5). This Science, Technology & Society (STS) Postdoctoral
Fellowship project explores the development of metrics to evaluate clean and
renewable energy technologies.

Metrics such as life cycle analysis, indirect land use change, and carbon
footprint are used to evaluate the consequences of renewable energy technologies
and to make decisions about which technologies to pursue. But different social
actors engage these metrics in different ways. Our primary research questions
ask what these performance metrics leave out, and how they anticipate risks.
Where do the boundaries get drawn for the life cycle analysis, for example? What
factors count in the development, adoption and codification of metrics? The
project conducts a broad survey and then focuses on two instances of a renewable
energy case study--nanotechnology in solar photovoltaics and biotechnology in
biofuels.

The project draws on semi-structured interviews, participant observation of
industry association meetings, tradeshows and workshops, and convenes focus
groups with industry, regulators, and activists. Secondary data will be
collected from patents, government reports and hearings, academic publications
and conference proceedings, energy policy blogs and venture capital podcasts,
and published interviews. The intellectual merits of the project include
comprehensive postdoctoral training in the synthesis of emerging frameworks from
STS, global commodity chains, and social studies of finance. The significance of
this research is understanding: 1) how various metrics gain prominence, 2) what
is included and excluded and, 3) how these metrics are used to make strategic
decisions. The project promises broader impacts in informing discussions on the
new energy economy, "green collar" jobs, and environment, health, and safety
policies for emerging technologies. Narrowly construed metrics could miss
important societal concerns and opportunities for promoting environmental
justice. Failing to evaluate risks could lead to societal apprehension about new
energy technologies, potentially slowing investment and innovation.