* 0924142
* Workshop on Neogene Mammalian Chronology of Asia, June 2009 in Beijing, China
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2009,03/31/2012
* Lawrence Flynn, Los Angeles County Museum of Natural History Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Boush
* 03/31/2012
* USD 44,065.00

Neogene Mammalian Chronology of Asia

A Roundtable Workshop on Neogene Terrestrial Mammalian Faunas of Asia:
Correlation and Biogeographic Relationships with Greater Holarctica and Africa

PI, Xiaoming Wang; co-PI, Lawrence J. Flynn

Abstract Located at the cross-roads of intercontinental migrations of
terrestrial mammals, Asia plays a crucial role in our understanding of mammalian
evolution, zoogeography, and related questions about species first appearances
in surrounding continents and their function as major markers of biochronology.
This strategic geographic position is particularly apparent during the Neogene
(~24-2 million years ago) when Asia was intermittently connected to Africa and
North America, and widely connected to Europe. A well-established mammalian
biostratigraphic framework in Asia will go a long way toward a global picture of
mammalian evolution. Despite such importance and promise, however, Asia lags
behind Europe and North America in the studies of terrestrial biostratigraphy
and geochronology, and many unresolved issues become bottlenecks for detailed
understanding of mammalian evolution elsewhere. This proposed roundtable
workshop, to be held in Beijing in June 2009, represents the first large-scale
gathering of world experts on Asian terrestrial mammal biostratigraphy and
geochronology, including scientists with expertise in biostratigraphy,
magnetostratigraphy, biochronology, zoogeography, paleoenvironment, as well as
phylogenies of various groups of extinct mammals. In addition to offering the
latest progress from individual regions and countries, the workshop will
initiate in-depth discussions about the best methods to establish a mammalian
biostratigraphic framework and will produce a book (Columbia University Press)
that is the only comprehensive treatment of Asian terrestrial geochronology.
This volume will represent the state of the art in construction of an Asian
temporal framework, and will become a standard reference for many years to come,
not only for students of mammalian biochronology in Asia, but also for the
geoscience community in surrounding continents in Europe, Africa, and North
America. The workshop will foster broader collaborations among specialists who
are limited by a previously regional view, and lay the groundwork for
establishing the first working network of vertebrate paleontologists across the
study area. The workshop offers unprecedented opportunities for collaboration
among geologists and paleontologists. More than half of the participants are
expected to be from countries previously under-represented in international
conferences, many of them also women (two from the United States, three from
Russia, six from China, and one each from Turkey, Kazakhstan and Thailand). This
project is co-funded by the Sedimentary Geology and Paleobiology Program and the
Office of International Science and Engineering (Turkey [TU] and Pakistan [PK])
of the National Science Foundation, USA.