* 0924749
* LiT: Rel Homology Domain Signal Transduction Pathways in the Sea Anemone Nematostella vectensis
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2014
* Thomas Gilmore, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 06/30/2014
* USD 579,015.00

The survival of all organisms depends on their ability to manage environmental
stress, whether caused by physical (e.g., heat, oxygen, chemicals) or biological
(e.g., pathogens) insult. Many animals, including insects and vertebrates,
respond to a wide range of environmental stresses by activating a conserved
molecular pathway, called the NF-kappaB transcription factor signal transduction
pathway. Although the NF-kappaB pathway is critical for many higher animal
stress response systems, its evolutionary origins are obscure. In the current
project, genes encoding many key proteins similar to the human NF-kappaB pathway
have been identified and cloned in a simple marine organism, the starlet sea
anemone Nematostella vectensis (phylum Cnidaria).

This project involves interdisciplinary research between a molecular
evolutionary biologist (Finnerty) and a cell & molecular biologist (Gilmore)
that seeks to gain insights into the ancestral function of the NF-kappaB
signaling pathway, and the biological and ecological significance of a gene
variant of NF-kappaB that exists in wild populations of Nematostella.
Specifically, this research is investigating how NF-kappaB functions in simple
marine animals, and three major experimental aims will be accomplished. (1) NF-
kappaB signaling proteins are being characterized in the sea anemone
Nematostella using a variety of molecular, cellular, and whole animal assays.
(2) Genes regulated by NF-kappaB and stressors that can activate NF-kappaB and
its target genes will be identified in Nematostella. (3) The functional and
selective consequences of gene variants of the NF-kappaB protein of Nematostella
will be determined.

Broader Impacts The research will lead to a better understanding of the
evolutionary origins of the stress response pathways of contemporary animals,
and a better understanding of how these pathways can evolve in response to
environmental change (climatic shifts, new physical/chemical insults, novel
pathogens). The research program will have three major broader impacts. It will
provide interdisciplinary training in cell and molecular biology, evolutionary
biology, genomics, and developmental biology to students at the PhD and
undergraduate levels, including students from groups that are under-represented
in science. It will augment three heavily utilized Internet databases that serve
a broad research community: StellaBase (http://stellabase.org); The Nematostella
Web Resource (http://nematostella.org); and Rel/NF-kappaB Transcription Factors
(http://www.nf-kb.org). It will contribute to ongoing marine conservation
efforts by identifying molecular markers for environmental stressors. Such
information may better enable conservation scientists to monitor the biological
effects of environmental threats impacting indicator species in key coastal
habitats, such as the coastal estuaries inhabited by the sea anemone
Nematostella.