* 0924521
* Spatial Variability in Mountain Birch Population Dynamics Under Herbivory Pressure at Treeline in Northern Sweden
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2009,02/29/2012
* David Cairns, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/29/2012
* USD 90,001.00

During the coming century the Earth's climate is expected to warm and
precipitation patterns are expected to change. Vegetation patterns across the
globe are coupled to climatic conditions and are therefore also expected to
change. Because of the linkages between climate and vegetation, the boundaries
between vegetation types are thought to be excellent monitoring locations for
identifying the effects of altered climate. In addition to their implications
for climate change, vegetation boundaries are significant biogeographic features
in their own right. One such boundary with the potential to be a sensitive
bioindicator is the forest-tundra ecotone of northern latitudes. It exists
because cold temperatures constrain tree establishment and growth at higher
elevations or latitudes. The treeline environments of Fennoscandia are
particularly sensitive indicators of climate change. They are of special
interest because they occur at the intersection between both Arctic and alpine
conditions, and the species that forms the treeline (mountain birch: Betula
pubescens ssp. czerepanovii) is deciduous, while most other northern hemisphere
treelines are characterized by coniferous trees. A particularly notable
characteristic of these treelines is that they are impacted by reindeer
herbivory. In fact, reindeer browsing may interfere with the upslope/northward
migration of birch and thereby limit the ability of treeline to respond to
climatic warming. Reindeer herding is an important part of the culture of the
local indigenous people (Sami) and consequently the interaction between reindeer
and the treeline environment is of interest both scientifically and practically.
This research examines the interaction of physical environmental characteristics
such as aspect, topographic position, and tundra vegetation with herbivory
pressure exerted by reindeer to evaluate the establishment of mountain birch
within the supra-treeline zone of a reindeer herding district in the mountains
of northern Sweden. Dendrochronological methods combined with historic reindeer
populations and regional climatic data will reveal periods of establishment
within this environment. Additionally, plot-level data depicting fine-scale
spatial variations in the density of tree seedlings that were established under
recent warm conditions will elucidate the influences of topography, reindeer
herbivory, and competition from tundra vegetation on the ability of birch to
migrate upslope

This research will make a vital contribution to the literature on ecotones
(ecological transition zones) by investigating the interplay between herbivory
and tree establishment under a changing climate. The treeline ecotone is
considered an analog for transition zones in a wide variety of environments and
therefore the results should be broadly applicable. The procedures used to
analyze ecotone pattern can be used in similar situations elsewhere. This
research will aid in the training of graduate and undergraduate students and
will strengthen ties between scientists in the US and Sweden. Findings from this
research will be shared with the Sami.