* 0924988
* How Flowcharts Got into the Brain: Diagramming Brains, Minds and Computers Together
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2014
* Joseph Dumit, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 09/30/2014
* USD 228,427.00

This project, supported by the Biology & Society initiative between the Science,
Technology & Society Program and the BIO directorate at NSF, examines the role
of flowcharts in neurosciences. Flowcharts are commonly used today in computer
science, psychology, and neuroscience. Despite the near ubiquity of diagrams
like flowcharts in the development of computers and the founding of neural nets,
artificial intelligence, and cognitive psychology and neuroscience, there has
been almost no attention paid to the history and uses of those diagrams. This
project examines the impact that visual diagrams and flowcharts had on the
development of computers, psychology and neuroscience from the 1940s and 1970s.
Published reports and archival research provide the basis for this study of the
interactions between programming diagrams, flowcharts, neural models, and brain
modules, as their conceivers borrowed and built upon visual metaphors and
analogies. Engaging with scholarship on the importance of drawing and visual
ways of thinking in the growth of science, this project investigates whether and
how these diagrams and models enabled and constrained theories and experiments
in cognitive neuroscience and artificial intelligence research.

This project will augment our understanding of the historical development of
computers, brains, artificial intelligence, and cognitive psychology by
demonstrating their sometime dependence and interaction with flow diagrams. It
promises a richer, more comprehensive and balanced historical grasp of several
aspects of the mind-brain-computer nexus than has hitherto been available,
potentially clarifying a key episode in the history of modern science and
technology. The project documents the variety of flowchart techniques, as well
as alternate ways of reading and interacting with the diagrams that may be worth
revisiting. If successful, contemporary cognitive scientists, neuroscientists
and AI researchers may benefit directly from rethinking the meaning and use of
their diagrams.

