* 0924702
* STTR Phase II:  Diffractive Imaging Micro-Spectrometer
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2009,08/31/2011
* David Cook, Spectrum Scientific, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Grace Jinliu Wang
* 08/31/2011
* USD 515,611.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer
(STTR) Phase II project seeks to develop miniaturized optical spectrometers with
high resolving power and wide operating wavelength ranges. The realization of
such devices will open up important new applications areas. Factors which have
limited the usage of current spectrometers include their size, weight,
complexity, and cost. This project seeks to use both integrated optical (that
is, mainly 2D) elements as well as micro-optical (3D) components to create a new
type of spectrometer. We propose a unique separation of functions between these
elements that allows for miniaturization, which is not available with pure
integrated optical or pure micro-optical designs. The 2D part of the
microspectrometer is implemented in a planar waveguide. The 3D part is mounted
on top of the waveguide slab. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of these devices will be a broadband spectral sensor
that is orders of magnitude smaller than the smallest devices currently
available. This diffractive imaging micro-spectrometer is expected to promote
transformative changes in industry sectors dealing with micro-systems that use
optical spectroscopy.