* 0924206
* Cognitive and Perceptual Constraints on Rhythmic Action
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Bruno Repp, Haskins Laboratories, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2011
* USD 287,618.00

Humans readily move in time with a regular beat. This skill, known technically
as sensorimotor synchronization, underlies activities such as dancing, marching,
and music performance, all of which require precise temporal coordination of
actions with rhythmic sequences of sounds. The standard laboratory task to
investigate synchronization is finger tapping in time with a rhythmic sequence
of stimuli. Although a good deal is known about the basic principles underlying
the process of synchronization, there is still much to be learned. In most
previous studies, both perceived and produced rhythms have been quite simple,
often just a regular beat. How does synchronization work when perceived and/or
produced rhythms approach the complexity of real music? Do the same principles
apply, and with the same effectiveness? Inevitably, these questions about
rhythmic coordination are intertwined with theoretical issues concerning rhythm
perception and rhythm production.

The nature of error correction by trained musicians attempting to synchronize to
complex rhythms will be examined in several situations. Small timing deviations
will be introduced into the rhythms, the complexity of the rhythms will be
varied, and pitch changes will be introduced. Finally, the effect of purely
mental subdivision of a beat on the precision of synchronization will be
investigated. The research will increase our understanding of the special skills
involved in music performance, provide paradigms for a cognitive neuroscience of
rhythmic behavior, and point to possible mechanisms for specific impairments of
temporal coordination.