* 0924497
* Interaction of LIN-28 and let-7 family microRNAs in the heterochronic pathway
* BIO,IOS
* 11/15/2009,10/31/2014
* Eric Moss, Rowan University School of Osteopathic Medicine
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 10/31/2014
* USD 600,001.00

Intellectual merit: MicroRNAs are small regulatory molecules encoded in plant
and animal genomes that control genes as organisms develop to maturity. By
investigating microRNAs one will gain a deeper understanding of how development
proceeds from genetic information - an understanding that is relevant to growth
and health of diverse animals, including humans, livestock, and wild species.
The larval development of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans is an exceptional
model system for the study of microRNA function. At least five microRNAs and
twelve proteins act together to control a succession of developmental events in
the C. elegans larva. LIN-28 is one of these proteins and its molecular
mechanism is not known. Many diverse animals possess a gene for LIN-28 which is
believed to have many important developmental roles. A combination of molecular
and genetic approaches will be employed to answer these specific questions: (1)
Does C. elegans LIN-28 bind to and inhibit specific microRNA precursors? (2)
Does LIN-28 act via these specific microRNAs to regulate development? (3) Are
regulatory feedback circuits involving microRNAs part of a larval development
control mechanism? The outcome of this work will be a more complete
understanding of the molecular mechanisms of these regulators, which will be
relevant to other investigators in medical, veterinary, and ecological sciences.

Broader impacts: The research will be performed by high school students,
undergraduates, and doctoral candidates. Undergraduate students will be
recruited from around the Philadelphia/Camden region to participate the
research. High school students will spend afternoons working on independent
aspects of the project in preparation for science fairs. The PI is committed to
reaching underserved and underprivileged individuals for these opportunities.
Doctoral candidates will present their findings at international scientific
conferences. All strains and reagents generated will be shared freely with other
investigators.