* 0924346
* Finding Sustainable Solutions to Honey Bee Health
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2009,03/31/2013
* Daniel Kleinman, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 03/31/2013
* USD 215,421.00

This project funded by the Science, Technology, &amp; Society Program and by the
Biology and Society Program examines socio-political reasons for Colony Collapse
Disorder (CCD). Honey bee colonies in the U.S. and elsewhere are dying at
alarming rates. As a result the agricultural sector, which is dependent on honey
bees for crop pollination, is estimated to lose up to $15 billion annually. In
response, the USDA funded a nation-wide biological research initiative to
uncover the factors causing CCD. But the cause(s) of CCD are yet to be
identified. While biological studies are essential, their scope in resolving a
complex, multi-factorial phenomenon like CCD is partial. Additional socio-
political factors, which could affect honey bee health by shaping beekeeping
(apicultural) practices, also need to be considered. This project investigates
the role of specific socio-political factors in collectively shaping apicultural
practices as a necessary addition to biological
investigation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three overarching research questions are
addressed: 1. How have historical shifts in the structure of the agro-industrial
sector affected apiculture? 2. How did the culture of risk assessment in the
U.S. lead to risk assessments of the insecticide imidacloprid and to what extent
has this insecticide contributed to honey bee decline? 3. How does expertise in
CCD and apiculture get constituted? Methodologically, the project employs a
combination of semi-structured interviews with beekeepers, farmers, researchers
and regulatory officials; targeted archival research and historical analysis of
government documents, scientific articles, and beekeeper trade journals; and an
ethnography of the research- and extension-related activities of a honey bee
laboratory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is unique in being an
interdisciplinary endeavor that integrates the intellectual and material
practices of Science and Technology Studies (STS) with biological study
undertaken by a postdoctoral research associate. The project thus heeds Bruno
Latour's programmatic call to cut across disciplinary boundaries that separate
the study of nature from that of society by considering both biological and
socio-political propositions in relation to honey bee health.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CCD threatens the viability of at least 90 different food
crops, which require honey bees for their production. As a result, CCD can
negatively affect a major portion of the American public's diet. By studying how
socio-political forces shape apicultural practices the proposed research widens
the scope of investigation of the factors causing CCD.