* 0924252
* Optimizing Implicit Attitude Measurement
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Brian Payne, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2013
* USD 280,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Some of the traits social scientists
most want to measure are the ones that research volunteers are least likely to
report. Socially sensitive topics such as racial prejudice have historically
presented challenges for social science researchers because respondents are
reluctant to report about them on questionnaires. Implicit tests offer a way
around that obstacle by measuring attitudes without relying on self-reports.
Instead, implicit tests assess attitudes indirectly via their impact on task
performance. Implicit attitude tests have thus become a critical tool for
studying race attitudes in modern societies, where blatant expressions of
prejudice are taboo. The goal of this project is to develop an optimally
reliable and valid implicit test of racial attitudes. The Affect Misattribution
Procedure (AMP) is an implicit measure that works on the principle that people
have difficulty distinguishing their feelings toward two items presented in
rapid succession. Using this principle, the test measures favorable or
unfavorable attitudes toward various racial groups without asking respondents to
express their attitudes toward those groups. Initial research has shown the AMP
to be a valid test with several advantages over other available tests. This
project aims to build on past progress by using item response theory, a state-
of-the-art psychometric approach, to optimize the quality of the test. The study
will use a nationally representative sample to calibrate a pool of items with
known psychometric properties. The items can then be used to measure racial
attitudes on a standardized scale. The project will produce a short test with
optimal measurement properties that is freely available to researchers in the
form of user-friendly software. Such a test will contribute to research
infrastructure and enhance scientific understanding across many fields where
racial attitudes are important, including psychology, political science,
economics, sociology, and law.