* 0924279
* SHF: EAGER:  Transactional Processors:  Exploiting Hardware Transaction Processing for Reliable Computing
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Jie Hu, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ahmed Louri
* 08/31/2010
* USD 74,999.00

With the semiconductor technology entering the nano-scale era, CMOS devices are
facing a dramatic increase in vulnerability to transient faults such as soft
errors induced by energetic particle strikes. Such soft errors have become a
major challenge in designing next generation microprocessors. While techniques
for optimizing reliability at low levels can be accurate, they incur
significantly high hardware overheads and costly manufacturing processes. The
objective of the proposed EAGER proposal is to explore a new flexible processor
architecture for highly effective reliable computing by exploiting the semantics
of hardware transaction processing. Instead of simply augmenting existing
processors for an attainable reliability, the PI proposes to exploit the
semantics of transaction processing from database management systems and recent
transactional memories for the design and implementation of the transactional
processor architecture, where the reliable computing is an inherent property.
The transactional processor aims to provide highly effective and flexible
transaction-level verification and native supports for recovery from detected
errors. The PI will explore the design space of hardware transaction processing
and transaction based reliable computing, as well as new programming language
constructs to extend current programming languages for writing programs
efficiently in transactions.

The success of this project may result in design of low-cost reliable computing
platforms based on hardware transaction processing. In addition, the proposed
activities will provide a unique channel to attract students from under-
represented groups and minorities into science and engineering. The PI plans to
take advantage of several college and university wide outreach programs to
interact with high school students and teachers to motivate them in computer
science.