* 0924140
* Collaborative Research: Endangered Languages Information and Infrastructure Project
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,02/28/2011
* Lyle Campbell, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Keren Rice
* 02/28/2011
* USD 32,624.00

NSF researchers, Lyle Campbell (University of Utah), Helen Aristar-Dry and
Anthony Aristar (Eastern Michigan University) are collaborating to create The
Endangered Languages Information and Infrastructure Project (ELIIP)) which has
two coordinated goals: 1) the production of an accurate, comprehensive source of
information on the world's endangered languages and 2) the integration of this
information into the electronic infrastructure of the discipline. These goals
will provide for the coordination of this information with other sources,
providing multiple access points and expanding on related research facilities.
This project enlists the help of distinguished experts representing each region
of the world who will provide the research team with authoritative information
for the database. The LINGUIST List (LL) will create an ELIIP interface on the
LL website, where ELIIP information, then accessible online, can be browsed,
searched, and downloaded, as well as easily updated by
users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The present proposal funds an initial planning
workshop for the development of ELIIP. The workshop is designed to be a two-
stage event, with approximately fifty invitees engaged in working groups and
plenary discussions. The workshop will address central issues involved in
producing an accurate, comprehensive source of information on the world's
endangered languages and on the integration of this information into the
electronic infrastructure of the discipline. Invitees will discuss how best to
collect the most authoritative information possible on endangered languages and
how to create electronic infrastructure which allows constant updating of the
information and maximizes its visibility, accessibility, and
interoperability.&lt;br/&gt;