* 0924655
* The Urban Economy of Aztec-Period Calixtlahuaca, Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,09/30/2015
* Michael Smith, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/2015
* USD 198,630.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Michael E. Smith and an
international team of colleagues will conduct a series of technical analyses of
archaeological artifacts and deposits excavated at the Aztec site of
Calixtlahuaca. NSF-supported excavations uncovered a series of houses and
terraces that present a unique opportunity to answer important questions about
ancient urban centers. Like the shantytown areas that surround many Latin
American cities today, the residential zones at Calixtlahuaca extended up steep
slopes, with houses built on stone terraces. Yet the residents of this Aztec
city were not poor rural immigrants; instead, their houses and artifacts reveal
that they forged a prosperous way of life. Many families engaged in the
production of textiles, stone tools and other craft items, and most houses
contained ceramic vessels, stone tools, and bronze jewelry imported from distant
zones. How did a hilltop city in a provincial area achieve such a high and
sustainable standard of living for its residents? The analyses will help answer
this question.&lt;br/&gt;The NSF funds will be used for three major types of
study. First, the excavated artifacts need to be counted, classified, and
described. Professionals and students from the U.S., Mexico, Europe, and Canada
will spend two months in each of the next three years doing this work. The
results will shed light on the lifestyles, activities, and social conditions of
the urban residents of Calixtlahuaca. All such research will take place in a
laboratory facility in Toluca, Mexico. The second type of study will be
technical scientific analyses of artifacts. Chemical analysis and other
techniques will allow researchers to determine the places of origin of imported
objects, to reconstruct the procedures of manufacture of local items, and to
determine the ages of the houses and features of the sites through radiocarbon
dating. The third group of analyses will be scientific studies of the soils and
plant remains excavated in terraces and other deposits. This work will shed
light on a unique Aztec form of successful agriculture: urban terraced
cultivation. An understanding of this ancient sustainable farming system may
help agronomists design appropriate small-scale agricultural strategies for the
hilly areas of Mexico today.&lt;br/&gt;When the analyses are completed, Dr.
Smith will compare the results to his former excavations in Morelos, another
region of central Mexico. Both were prosperous areas conquered by the Aztec
Empire for their resources. Together, the two sets of results will clarify the
processes of ancient imperial expansion and its impact on cities, farming, and
society.&lt;br/&gt;Numerous graduate and undergraduate students - U.S., Mexican,
and European -will receive laboratory training and experience on this project.
International cooperation between the U.S. and Mexico will be promoted through
the work of several Mexican collaborators as well as through interactions with
local archaeologists and historians working in the Toluca area. Dr. Smith's
laboratory facility at the Colegio Mexiquense in Toluca contributes to an
improved scientific infrastructure in this Mexican city.