* 0924685
* SBIR Phase II:  Ultrafast spintronic devices based on magnetic tunnel junctions using magnesium oxide (MgO) tunnel barriers
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2009,12/31/2013
* Matthew Carter, MICRO MAGNETICS INC
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2013
* USD 804,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
Phase II project will develop an ultrafast solid-state magnetic sensor using
MgO-based magnetic tunneling junction (MTJ). The operating frequency range will
span from DC to 2 GHz, the broadest among competing technologies. The sensor
will have a compact size and high sensitivity and will operate at ambient
conditions with no supporting system. The ability to mass produce these devices
will provide a significant cost advantage. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a
critical unmet need in ultrafast sensors. These sensors can perform non-
destructive evaluation (NDE) of VLSI semiconductor chips, aircraft components
and engine turbines, they will allow computers to process information faster in
data storage devices, and they can be used to measure fast currents in devices
such as antenna. The sensors hold great promise for monitoring the health of
aircrafts. Ultrafast sensors can also monitor the performance of VLSI in failure
analysis, enhancing the competitiveness of the semiconductor industry by
shortening the development cycles. Knowledge gained in ultrafast sensor can be
used to make faster data storage devices and build better national defense
infrastructure.