* 0924028
* STTR Phase II:  Optical Fiber Distributed 60 GHz Wireless Personal Area Network
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Rod Waterhouse, Pharad LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 07/31/2011
* USD 500,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer
(STTR) Phase II research project will create novel technologies for the
realization of a cost-effective, optical fiber distributed 60 Gigahertz (GHz)
wireless personal area network (WPAN). The 60 GHz frequency region for wireless
communications is attracting much interest worldwide because of the huge
bandwidth it can provide. The integration of a 60 GHz WPAN with a fiber-optic
signal distribution scheme will enable the required high data rate signals to be
efficiently and cost-effectively delivered to a large number of radio access
points ensuring optimized radio coverage. A cost-effective prototype wireless
access point for a fiber distributed 60 GHz WPAN will be developed and multi-
gigabit-per-second (Gb/s) bi-directional data transmission demonstrated.
Consumers will directly benefit from the fiber distributed 60 GHz WPAN through
the provision of new communication services and the increased affordability in
gaining access to unprecedented multi-Gb/s data rate tetherless connectivity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this research are the advancement
of high data rate communication systems through the deployment of new integrated
wired and wireless infrastructures with enhanced flexibility and scalability.
The technologies created in this project will also greatly enhance the security
of data on wireless networks due to the inherent security in the physical layer
of the 60 GHz wireless network. The enhanced security of short range 60 GHz
wireless networks will be of direct benefit to organizations such as law
enforcement agencies, homeland security, financial institutions and medical
institutions, for which the secure transmission of data is critical in ensuring
the protection of individuals.