* 0924534
* Contextual Influences on the Category Construction of Geographic Scale Movement Patterns
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,12/31/2013
* Alexander Klippel, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 12/31/2013
* USD 93,217.00

The world we live in is dynamic on all scales. On a small scale, think of
walking across a room or driving to the grocery store; on a large scale, imagine
a hurricane crossing a state. Research that addresses how humans understand
relationships between space and time is, therefore, central not only to
geography, but also to cognitive and information sciences. The objectives of
this project are two-fold: to develop a research framework for examining how
movement patterns at the geographic scale (MPGS) are understood, and to evaluate
how formalisms used in geographic information science are able to capture how
people understand MPGS. Linking cognitive and formal characterizations enables
models that align with how people think about large scale spatial processes,
thereby enhancing communication at the interface between humans and computers.

Dr. Alexander Klippel at the Pennsylvania State University will conduct a set of
experiments that are based on a grouping paradigm that is used to elicit
conceptual knowledge (i.e., categorization). Participants view animations of
large-scale spatial phenomena ending at different spatio-temporal stages. For
example, participants will look at 63 different animations of a hurricane
approaching shore, making landfall, and finally moving far inland. Participants
will then classify these animations based on their similarities. The question
these studies are attempting to answer is whether formal, topologically
equivalent characterizations across different domains (e.g., whether the moving
entity is a hurricane or a glacier) are also equivalent cognitively. In other
words, how does the semantics of dynamic features influence the cognitive
conceptualizations thereof? Does semantics change the cognitive salience of
individual topological relations? Additionally, the project will address the
geographically critical question of scale effects and a contribution will be
made to the formal underpinning of geographic event language by relating the
conceptualizations of movement patterns to linguistic externalizations. To
accomplish these goals, the PI has developed software to both collect and
analyze behavioral data efficiently. The software to analyze the data will be
developed within existing geovisual analytics software developed at the GeoVISTA
Center in the Geography Department at the Pennsylvania State University.

This project will contribute to the understanding of how humans conceptualize
movement patterns at the geographic scale, such as hurricanes moving across a
peninsula, from the perspective of how these movement patterns are characterized
formally. Connecting formal and cognitive characterizations of spatio-temporal
information is essential to develop efficient human-computer interfaces and
models of spatial cognition. This project will develop software solutions for
the design of experiments and the efficient analysis of the collected data using
visual analytics approaches. As cognitive conceptualizations are core to
research on ontologies and categorization, and also to fields such as
anthropology, we expect both the developed research framework and the software
solutions to be beneficial to a large research community.