* 0924232
* Household Water Security in Low-Income Rural and Peri-Urban Communities in South Texas
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Wendy Jepson, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 09/30/2013
* USD 126,789.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Social scientists recently exposed the
myth of universal water services coverage in the United States: migrant farm
workers, the rural poor, and urban homeless communities face substantial
deficiencies in water and sanitation infrastructure. Although institutional and
location factors are thought to explain limited water and sanitation services,
scholars have overlooked two key aspects of the water-poverty problem: (1)
access to water infrastructure does not guarantee water security, which is
defined as adequate, reliable, and affordable water and sanitation for a healthy
life; and (2) considerable water security variability exists within low-income
communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Wendy Jepson at Texas A &amp; M
University will fill these gaps by examining household water security
variability in low-income Mexican-American communities in the lower Rio Grande
Valley of Texas, one of the poorest regions with the largest population lacking
suitable water supply and basic sanitation in the United States. The project
will be executed in three parts. First, the PI and her research team will
conduct household case studies, group interviews, and semi-structured interviews
to describe the meaning and experience of household water security in colonias,
low-income rural and peri-urban communities. Second, they will use information
gathered in the first part of the project to develop and pretest a household
water security survey instrument. Pre-testing and respondent evaluations will
allow researchers to revise the survey for full implementation. Third, they will
administer survey instrument and analyze results. Descriptive analysis and
multivariate relationships with predictors will be assessed using standard
statistical analysis, and hypothesis testing will be conducted. These data will
enable the identification of the variables that predict different levels of
water insecurity, relationships between the degree of water insecurity and
household characteristics, and relationships between the degree of water
insecurity and type of water service provider. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will provide the basis for new empirical discoveries and advance
conceptual innovations related to water security in low-income communities in
the United States. Project outcomes include a new survey instrument that could
be applied in other low-income areas where substantial water and sanitation
deficiencies exist. In addition, the project changes the current understanding
of water-poverty problems from 'infrastructure' at a regional scale to 'water
security' at a household scale. The focus on the household as the unit of
analysis allows for fine-grained assessments of a broad array of water and
sanitation issues, incorporating physical, relational and behavioral dimensions
of water deficiency. Therefore, expected research results will advance current
knowledge about water and poverty, transform policy and social scientific study
about poverty and water, and provide scientifically informed recommendations to
improve the human condition of economically excluded groups in the United
States.