* 0924896
* A Neuroeconomic Theory of the Decision Process
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Aldo Rustichini, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 08/31/2014
* USD 257,667.00

A fundamental component of economic analysis is the theory of how economic
agents make decisions. Subjective Expected Utility Theory is the standard model
for such choices. It has the virtue of providing a unified analysis of decision
making. It has, however, been criticized as a descriptive model of decision
making and empirical tests demonstrate that its predictive power is limited.
Alternative theories that reconcile the experimental and empirical evidence have
been proposed. However the price paid has been the lost of a unifying view.
&lt;br/&gt;In this research project, the PI focuses on developing a theory of
the decision process, that is, a theory of the sequence of operations that take
the individual from the moment in which the options are presented to the moment
in which an option is selected. This theory will have to satisfy several
important requirements. First, it will have to predict choices but also errors
(which may occur when the same individual chooses different options in different
points in time from the same set). Second, it will have to find support in
auxiliary evidence, like the time to choose (response time). Finally and most
importantly, it will have to provide testable implications on the effort the
brain makes when making a choice, and of the neural networks recruited in the
choice. In sum then, the objective is formulate an algorithmic procedure that
leads from the presentation of the feasible options to the choice which detailed
enough to imply hypotheses on the choices, response time, error rate as well as
brain activation can and be tested experimentally.&lt;br/&gt;