* 0924649
* RUI: Urbanization and Parental Investment among Fijians
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2010,12/31/2012
* Dawn Neill, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2012
* USD 219,971.00

Dr. Dawn Brown Neill (California Polytechnic State University) will undertake
research on how urban ecology effects changes in children's diet, education, and
activity levels, through a focus on parental investment in urbanizing ecologies.
High levels of internal migration to urban centers are occurring throughout the
developing world. Urban expansion introduces novel ecological conditions that
produce shifts in diet, education options, and work and fertility patterns.
Research has demonstrated a strong link between urbanization and increasing
overweight in children and adults. Similarly, demographic transition theory has
linked modernization to decreases in offspring quantity. By focusing on parental
behavior, this research will contribute to understanding how demographic
transition, nutrition transitions, and urbanization are interconnected.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researcher will test the proposition that ecological
conditions associated with urbanization will stimulate different patterns of
nutritional and educational investment in children, given individual-level costs
and benefits. She will carry out the resarch as a cross-sectional study in
village, peri-urban, and urban areas of Fiji. The environmental variables will
be elements of urbanization and the responsive behavioral traits will be
parental investment outcomes that impact the quality and quantity of offspring,
given the socio-cultural context of Fijian urban and village life. The
researcher will examine parental investment decision-making by collecting cross-
sectional quantitative data on diet, anthropometrics, family size, land use,
remittances, education, and work activity measures of children and adults. These
data will be complemented with qualitative interview data on migration,
identity, and kinship and family practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is
important because its findings can inform public health and policy programs on
intra-household dynamics involved in the linkages between nutrition, education,
and reproductive decisions, on the one hand, and and child welfare, on the
other. It also will help to develop more ecologically sensitive theory for
understanding parental decision-making. Results of this study will shed light on
the dynamics of internal migration and urbanization and the related consequences
to population health and rural development policy.&lt;br/&gt;