* 0924257
* Seventh International Workshop on Objective Bayesian Methodology; Philadelphia, PA
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Lawrence Brown, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2010
* USD 20,000.00

The investigator will coordinate a five-day Objective Bayes workshop to be held
at the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania. This workshop will
bring together leading researchers from around the world who are active in the
area of objective prior methodology. It may be viewed as a continuation of
previous international meetings convened over the past 12 years devoted to
Objective Bayes theory and methodology. The main objectives of the meeting are
to facilitate the exchange of recent research developments within this
scientific community, to provide opportunities for new researchers and
underrepresented groups to be knowledgeable and active in this important area of
research, and to establish new collaborations that will channel efforts into
pending problems and open new directions for investigation. Objective Bayesian
methodology is, for the most part, oriented towards the development of prior
distributions that can be used automatically, i.e., that do not require
subjective input other than the specific probabilistic model chosen to describe
the data. Accompanying the development of forms particularly suitable for
particular types of applications is the study of computational techniques for
their implementation and evaluation of both the theoretical and concrete
implications of their use. Many of the topics proposed for the workshop reflect
an emphasis on objective Bayesian methodology for general classes of practical
applications such as spatial-temporal models, hierarchical random-effects
models, multiple comparisons and goodness -of-fit. In the direction of specific
applications there will be sessions on Bayesian applications in astrophysics and
on Bayesian applications in Business and Marketing research. In a more
theoretical direction, there will be sessions on the foundations of objective
Bayes analysis, including a special retrospective examination of Harold
Jeffreys' seminal contributions to the area, and on the unification of Bayesian
and frequentist statistical methods. The principal behind these so-called
objective Bayes methods also has a long history dating at least back to work of
Laplace almost 200 years ago. But two much more recent developments have brought
emphasis and importance to the use of these methods. One is the rapidly
increasing massiveness and complexity of modern statistical data. This has put
extreme and often unmanageable strains on the theory and implementation of
conventional non-Bayesian methods. (At the same time such complexity almost
completely denies any reasonable possibility of formulating reasonable
subjective prior opinions needed for ordinary Bayesian analyses.) The other
parallel factor is the development within the past two decades of a suite of
mathematical and computational strategies for successfully computing
appropriately structured objective Bayesian procedures in highly complex
situations. Within this time span an expanding community of scholars has been
investigating these objective Bayes models and methods. The current conference
proposal is to organize a workshop devoted to the investigation of objective
Bayes methods.