* 0924761
* Nearly Perfect Fluids: From the Quark-Gluon-Plasma to Ultracold Atoms; Durham, NC
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2010
* Steffen Bass, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Bradley D. Keister
* 04/30/2010
* USD 5,000.00

This award will support the participation of young scientists at the NEAR
PERFECT LIQUIDS 2009 workshop, to be held April 6-8 2009 in Durham, NC. The
Workshop will attempt a synthesis between physical relationships among the
hottest matter (quark matter at more than 2 trillion degrees Kelvin) and the
coldest matter (cooled atoms at a few billionth degree Kelvin) produced in the
laboratory, new insights gained from superstring theory, which make it possible
to infer the properties of certain strongly coupled thermal systems from the
physics of black holes in five or more dimensions, and recent progress in the
many-body theory of strongly coupled systems. The Workshop aims at advancing the
knowledge of the physics of nearly perfect liquids. It has recently been
recognized that the ability of fluids to flow frictionless is limited by
fundamental quantum effects; but the precise form and the absolute nature of
this limitation is a conjecture. All material substances known until recently
were far away from the conjectured universal bound; only during the present
decade has matter (quark matter and ultra-cold atoms) been discovered and
studied that approaches it. It is not fully understood whether a common
mechanism is at work in all instances or whether there are several distinct
paths leading to perfect fluidity. While superstring theory has furnished a
tractable theoretical model of such a fluid, it remains unclear how it relates
to the two materials discovered in the laboratory. By bringing experts in the
different areas together for an intense exchange of ideas, the Workshop will
help to develop new ideas for answers to these wide-ranging questions at a
forefront area in the physical sciences. It is hoped that the cross-disciplinary
nature of the workshop may lead to scientific advances in all of the above
fields of physics and counter the increasing compartmentalization found in many
areas of the hard sciences.