* 0924394
* SBIR Phase II:  A New Method for Quantitative Calibration-Free Chemical Analysis
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2011
* Arel Weisberg, Energy Research Company
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 07/31/2011
* USD 549,998.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project seeks to develop
an analysis method based on plasma physics with unique advantages for in situ
process control in coal-fired power plants and in metal and glass production.
Software developed from this program will result in development of process
control sensors capable of rapidly measuring the elemental composition of a
material solely from the material's analytical laser induced breakdown
spectroscopy (LIBS) spectrum. Analyses without calibration curves or standard
reference materials (SRM's) would be revolutionary because conditions change and
material compositions vary outside their expected range in industrial plants,
rendering calibration curves inaccurate. Analytical LIBS could not be developed
in the past because of these large uncertainties. This project will verify the
algorithms developed are effective when applied to actual industrial materials:
coal, aluminum, and glass. Coupling Analytical LIBS with a LIBS sensor for coal
and patented LIBS probe for molten metals and glass will result in real time
monitoring and control, a new and potentially paradigm shifting capability for
these industries.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be to the coal-
fired power plants and manufacturing plants that produce glass, metal alloys,
and other products by allowing the plant personnel to monitor the composition of
their material continuously, which is currently impossible. Alloying and other
mixing operations will be monitored in real time, eliminating errors in these
operations. Increased plant output, reduced waste, and reduced energy
expenditures per pound of product will result from problems in the production
process being caught much more quickly. New manufacturing paradigms, such as
continuous alloying of aluminum, are also made possible by development of this
technology. Developing Analytical LIBS for the measurement of coal properties at
electric utility power plants will increase their efficiency and optimize boiler
performance. There will also be benefits in other fields such as atomic emission
spectroscopy, plasma physics, and astronomy. Analytical LIBS can also be
extended for accurate LIBS analyses of the environment (e.g. minerals, oceans,
atmospheric aerosols), planetary science (e.g. Mars, moon, and comets),
agriculture, and security (e.g. WMD detection). The development of Analytical
LIBS for these fields is crucial because no standard reference materials (SRM's)
exist for many of these materials, and hence accurate calibration curves are
difficult to construct and will have limited utility.

