* 0924512
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Citizen-based Sea Turtle Conservation Across the First World-Third World Divide
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,09/30/2011
* Myriah Cornwell, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 09/30/2011
* USD 14,926.00

This research compares case studies of citizen participation in sea turtle
conservation in the US and Mexico to analyze how different frameworks for
participation impact citizen engagements with science and resource management.
To explore the impacts of these different frameworks on citizen contributions to
conservation science, this research compares case studies of sea turtle
conservation programs in North Carolina, USA and Baja California Sur, Mexico.
This comparison will examine the ways in which citizens in both projects may co-
produce sea turtle science in similar and different manners, and consider how
discursive constructions change engagements with science and its institutions,
and with participation in resource management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This primary
research objective will be explored through three specific questions: (1) How do
citizens participate in sea turtle conservation monitoring? (2) To what degree
do citizens co-produce sea turtle science? (3) In what ways might citizens be
empowered through participating in science?To answer these questions, data
collection will proceed through participant observation, document analysis, and
in-depth interviewing. Analysis is driven by a grounded-theory approach, coding
and categorizing data into themes and will be undertaken throughout the
research. Overall, the research seeks to better understand: the significance of
participation, such as the degree to which participation opens conservation to
local control and knowledge as well as the potential empowerment of citizens
through participating in science; the possibilities for democratizing science
and how this process may improve models of science and conservation; the nature
of the First-World/Third-World divide, and how the production of this divide is
bound up with the exercise of power and the creation of knowledge. Recognizing
how different frameworks for participatory conservation impact outcomes is
important for understanding what conservation can achieve and for realizing the
full benefits of citizen participation.