* 0924648
* Proposal for travel grants to students to attend the International Society for the History, Philosophy, and Social Studies of Biology (ISHPSSB) meeting in Brisbane, Australia
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Robert Malone, History of Science Society
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2010
* USD 25,000.00

This award is to provide travel awards to graduate students to facilitate
attending the biennial meeting of the International Society for the History,
Philosophy, and Social Studies of Biology (ISHPSSB) to be held July 12-16, 2009
at Emmanuel College in St. Lucia, Brisbane, Australia. ISHPSSB is a professional
society that brings together scholars from diverse disciplines, including the
life sciences as well as history, philosophy, and social studies of science.
Apart from ISHPSSB meetings, there are few opportunities for historians,
philosophers, and social scientists of biology who are committed to
interdisciplinarity to interact with one another and with practicing scientists.
The interactions that occur improve scholars? work in progress and establish
ties that promote opportunities to engage in collaborative research in the
future. Such opportunities are no less important, and arguably even more
important, for graduate students than for established faculty. This is the first
of the society?s biennial meetings to be held in the southern
hemisphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The society is concerned that the high cost of
travel to Brisbane will disproportionately affect graduate students, and as a
result, this group will be underrepresented at the meeting. This could have a
negative impact on the quality of the meeting, governance of the society, and
the career paths of students. Although ISHPSSB has a strong record of supporting
graduate student participation at its biennial meetings, the society lacks the
financial resources to be able to subsidize travel to Brisbane at a level
comparable to what has been provided in the past. This is due to the high cost
of travel to Brisbane and the fact that only a handful of student members live
in Asian and Pacific Rim countries. Because almost one-half of ISHPSSB's student
members live in the US, the ability to offer NSF-funded travel awards will
significantly bolster the number of graduate students at the Brisbane meeting as
well as the number of US participants overall. &lt;br/&gt;