* 0924646
* Bringing Nanotechnology and Society Courses to California Community Colleges
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2011
* Patrick McCray, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 06/30/2011
* USD 90,000.00

This pilot project funded by the Science, Technology &amp; Society program and
the Nanotechnology Exploratory Research program introduces new courses that
integrate technological and societal issues to community colleges in California.
These interdisciplinary courses address different technical and social issues
associated with nanoscience and emerging technologies. They build on the
innovative pedagogy and instructional resources developed for a general
education course on the interplay of science, technology and society introduced
at the University of California, Santa Barbara in 2007. This new project
involves curriculum enhancement, pilot testing and course evaluation,
professional development for community college faculty, and opportunities for
tomorrow's educators to gain experience in course development and innovative
teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The distinctiveness of these courses is that they
are built around a single technology theme (e.g. surveillance technologies,
green technologies) that highlights nanotechnology in its social and technical
context in concert with alternate technologies. In addition, the modules
rigorously address the science and technical content as well as the historical
and societal aspects of current technology through the inclusion of hands-on
science and social science laboratory activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project also addresses effective practices for curriculum development and
instruction at the community college, especially in introductory science courses
that are open to a wide range of students. This focus is highlighted during a
faculty workshop that integrates teaching strategies with course content and
laboratory experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project introduces a new brand
of course that potentially increases the number of community college students
engaged in interdisciplinary curriculum that addresses the intersection of
science, technology and society. Given the high percentage of students from
underrepresented groups in the California community college sector, it also
engages substantial numbers of talented students who currently do not choose to
pursue further courses and careers in science and engineering. The project also
updates many faculty (both science and social science) in community colleges
about the latest developments in nanotechnology, especially with respect to
societal impacts and concerns. It introduces graduate researchers to this field,
broadening their understanding of how the research they do fits into a larger
societal context while giving them teaching and mentoring experience.