* 0924043
* STTR Phase II:   Laser Vapor Deposition for thin film functional polymers and nanocomposites
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Hee Park, AppliFlex LLC
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 07/31/2012
* USD 615,988.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This Small Business Technology Transfer Research (STTR) Phase II project seeks
to commercialize an innovative technology for depositing thin films and
heterostructures of functional polymers, functionalized nanoparticles and
nanoparticle-loaded polymers. Laser vapor deposition (LVD - trademarked) can be
used to increase efficiency and reduce cost of thin-film devices as varied as
organic light emitting diodes (OLEDs), organic solar cells and polymer
chemosensors. This project will prove that LVD can meet industrial production
requirements by (a) performing scaling studies of the process-throughout versus
laser power in various process configurations and (b) building a table-top mid-
infrared laser prototype using nonlinear optical frequency conversion from a
commercially available high-power near-infrared laser. This objective will be
supported by thorough studies on the physical mechanism of laser-materials
interaction under mid-infrared vibrational excitation. The outcome of this
project will also provide the development roadmap for high power industrial
lasers for materials processing applications in mid-infrared wavelength
spectrum.

The broader impact/commercial potential from this technology will be the
technique for mass production of thin-film organic optoelectronics devices. For
example, the OLED is an energy-efficient display and solid-state lighting
device. Widespread adoption of solid-state lighting products such as white-light
OLEDs could cut the US consumption of electricity for lighting by 29%, while
saving the nation's households about $125 billion in the process, according to
the Department of Energy. It would also reduce America's dependence on foreign
oil and reduce greenhouse gas emissions, thereby improving the environment.
Furthermore, LVD will accelerate the penetration of organic electronics into the
consumer space and create new applications such as flexible displays. Just as
polymers have replaced metal in everything from children's toys to automobiles,
polymers are revolutionizing electronics and optoelectronics by reducing costs
and opening new markets for devices such as polymer electronics and
nanostructured displays. In addition, the blueprint of table-top high-power
lasers developed in this process will provide a new path into ultra-short-pulse
laser materials processing applications in the near and mid-infrared.

