* 0924378
* Doctoral Dissertation: Nano-Images on Display: Mediation for Public Consumption in the U.S.
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Bruce Lewenstein, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2011
* USD 10,000.00

This dissertation project funded by the Science, Technology & Society Program
examines nanoscale-images and image-work in public science education networks.
It focuses on how multidisciplinary groups use images and other visualizations
to represent nanotechnology for different publics. A key aspect of the research
is a case study of a national network of researchers who address informal
nanoscience education, the Nanotechnology Informal Science Education (NISE)
network.

Visual images have played an integral part in public understanding of
nanotechnology. Therefore, this project makes images its primary focus,
reconstructing the pathways through which the images travel from laboratories
and other research sites to public exhibitions and websites to try to understand
what counts as public understanding in the NISE network. Of particular interest
is the role of technological mediators -- scientists, former scientists, and
non-scientists -- who prepare exhibitions and image galleries for educational or
public engagement purposes. Through in-depth interviews, participant
observation, and review of documents and drafts at the sites, this project
compares practices of image mediation.

This research's intellectual merit lies in its contribution to STS scholarship
on visualization in laboratory research, public engagement with science, and
social and cultural aspects of nanotechnology. Specifically, it provides an
account of cultural conceptions (mostly in the United States) of nano-images,
drawing out analytical connections between images, mediating practices, and the
social contexts of research and public education. Nanotechnology's broader
societal implications are still being determined, but it is widely believed that
if they can be addressed earlier, the economic and other benefits will be
realized with fewer negative consequences. If images do play a significant role
in efforts to cultivate public understanding of those implications, it will be
important to study what image-mediators consider public engagement of
nanotechnology, and how they achieve that engagement.