* 0924695
* SBIR Phase II:  An Advanced Aeroelastic Thermoplastic Composite Blade for Residential-Scale Wind Turbines
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Kevin Luke, Z4 Energy Systems
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 08/31/2012
* USD 491,291.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project seeks to
prototype/validate a novel, self-regulating blade for a 3-kW Residential Wind
Turbine (RWT). Successful development of this next-generation blade will
eliminate major technical/economic drawbacks and reliability issues with current
RWT's, and will promote widespread national and international commercial
deployment of wind turbines. This project will demonstrate the following: 1)
low-cost, durable, impact-resistant, mass-producible (and recyclable) blades; 2)
self-regulation in high-winds and load mitigation in turbulence (allowing for
reduced blade mass and cost); and 3) a simpler, more-reliable downwind turbine,
for which the blades themselves protect the RWT in high winds and the cost and
complexity of the tail and furling mechanism are eliminated.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project enables the nation to
meet or exceed ambitious industry projections, which state that 3% of U.S.
electricity could be supplied by RWT's operated by a significant share of the 15
million households that have suitable land/wind resources. The timing for the
breakthroughs being pursued by this project is ideal, as incentives similar to
those offered for residential solar installations are being offered for RWTs. By
substantially reducing the final market barriers of high cost and low
reliability, this project will have a significant market advantage and will
produce a next-generation wind-power technology that will allow individual
households to make significant contributions to national energy independence and
security.

