* 0924684
* STTR Phase II:  Abrasion Resistant Ultrahydrophobic Coatings for Corrosion, Erosion and Wear Resistance
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Yuliang Wang, Seashell Technology
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 07/31/2011
* USD 455,854.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase II project aims to further
the development of abrasion resistant, environmentally friendly,
ultrahydrophobic coating formulations. The ultrahydrophobic property is created
by optimizing the coating matrices to generate a so-called "lotus leaf"
structure that robustly repels water, preventing water penetration and
accumulation. In addition to super water repellent activity, the self-cleaning
coatings have a superior corrosion protection function. These properties reduce
failure rates, increase life time, and effectively lower maintenance and
replacement costs of the coated material. A major objective of the project is to
refine the formulations to improve the performance properties. This
ultrahydrophobic coating will be optimized for application on specific
commercially important substrates such as plastic, concrete, asphalt, wood,
glass, fabrics, and metal.

The broader impact/commercial potential of multi-functional coatings will be to
provide improved, abrasion resistant ultrahydrophobic coatings for commercial
applications in a variety of different areas such as shipping, automotive,
building and aviation industries. These multi-functional coatings are
environmentally compatible and will have a significant societal and
environmental impact.

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."