* 0924426
* Grants for Collaborative Research: John Tyndall and Nineteenth-Century Science
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Michael Reidy, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 09/30/2013
* USD 579,430.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a project to coordinate and
complete the transcription of letters and other scholarly works of the Victorian
physicist John Tyndall (1820-1893) as intiated by the John Tyndall
Correspondence Project. Tyndall was one of the most influential scientists of
the nineteenth century. He became a leading figure in the debates over
evolution, defending Darwin against his harshest critics, and he published
numerous essays and popular books on the role of science and the burgeoning
scientist in broader culture. He was an eminent practicing physicist, publishing
significant works in electro-magnetism, thermodynamics, sound, glaciers, global
warming, and spontaneous generation. He was also an accomplished alpinist,
largely responsible for the growth of mountaineering as a sport. In short,
Tyndall stood at the intersection of some of the most important developments in
science and society, and his correspondence touches on all of them. His
published correspondence will interest humanists ranging from historians to
literary scholars, as well as scientists, from glaciologists and climatologists
to physicists and biologists. One of the primary goals of the project is to
publish a one-volume calendar of Tyndall's correspondence and to issue (a
projected) ten volumes of his collected correspondence, both in print and
eventually in an accessible, searchable, on-line format. The other primary goal
is to galvanize a community of scholars at varied stages in their careers, from
graduate students and postdoctoral researchers to junior and senior scholars,
around themes raised through an intense study of John Tyndall. The project puts
graduate students at the center of the project, thereby constructing a new
cooperative model of graduate student training and research that can be used for
other correspondence projects or similar large-scale endeavors. This is an
innovative model of graduate education and training that will promote the
development by graduate students of new research questions within a
collaborative research project fostered at several of the top history of science
and technology programs.