* 0924983
* Chymistry of Isaac Newton: A Rigorous Analysis of the Language of Alchemy
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Wallace Hooper, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2012
* USD 523,359.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A team at Indiana University is now
completing an online, searchable edition of Newton's chemical writings,
comprising over one hundred manuscripts, which comes to about a million words of
manuscript material. That project has received substantial support from NSF and
it will be complemented by the present project. The electronic corpus of
Newton's chemical work is filled with obscure and archaic terms such as
"foliated earth" and "vegetable Saturn," whose physical referents are not
immediately obvious. In addition, Newton left behind substantial manuscript
laboratory notebooks filled with chemical experiments, whose aim or purpose he
nowhere describes. The present project proposes to analyze such experiments and
technical terms by means of well established tools of computational linguistics.
In particular, the proposal aims to use machine-collocation of terms and their
statistical occurrence to locate meaningful patterns of experimental practice
and recurrent terminology. The project will result in a new and deeper
understanding of Newton's goals for his chemical theory and practice, which is
in itself a very major undertaking. More than this, however, the tools developed
and adapted from computational linguistics by the team at Indiana University
will be applicable to other corpora of scientific texts once they have been
digitized. Historically significant sources in biology, material science, and
medicine are filled with archaic and unclear terminology that is often as opaque
as the chemical vocabulary of Newton. In short, the tools developed by the
Chymistry of Isaac Newton team will be applicable to digitized textual corpora
ranging from the works of the second-century physician Galen up to the
correspondence of the famous founder of modern evolutionary theory, Charles
Darwin. The history of science is intrinsically a difficult area of research, in
part because of the technical language that scientific writers have used from
antiquity up to the present day. The approach being implemented in the current
project will greatly facilitate and possibly transform history of science
research.