* 0924489
* Suction Feeding Evolution: Functional Morphology, Biomechanics and Performance
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2014
* Peter Wainwright, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 07/31/2014
* USD 813,811.00

Suction feeding is believed to be the ancestral method of prey capture in bony
fishes and is used by the majority of aquatic feeding vertebrate animals,
including most bony fish and many aquatic amphibians, turtles and mammals.
Although suction feeding is a very evolutionarily conserved mechanism, it
supports unparalleled diversity in feeding habits because of its effectiveness
and versatility for prey capture. This research is aimed at identifying major
innovations in the mechanical design of suction feeding systems in animals and
how this system has been modified during evolution to produce the extensive
diversity that suction feeders represent. This will be accomplished by focusing
on the fluid mechanics of two major mechanisms whereby some suction feeders
amplify the hydrodynamic forces they exert on prey items, and by using data from
high-speed video recordings and water-flow visualization techniques as the basis
for studies of evolutionary patterns in feeding behavior across seven major fish
radiations. This research will measure the impact of several mechanisms in
shaping the diversification of this complex mechanical system. The results will
lead to a deeper understanding of how breakthroughs in function impact
subsequent diversification and how constraints such as trade-offs and modularity
of design can both limit and facilitate evolution. It is hoped that general
design mechanisms will be identified whereby evolution has been able to overcome
fundamental mechanical trade-offs and these may have applicability in human-
designed mechanisms. This project will also focus on the recruitment and
training of young scientists, including a postdoctoral researcher, a doctoral
graduate student and four undergraduate students per year. Outreach activities
will include the development of a Youtube channel where the public can view
suction feeding videos, a research blog aimed at undergraduate students, and
participation in television documentaries.