* 0924363
* SBIR Phase II:  Security Solutions for UHF passive Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) tags
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2009,01/31/2013
* Iris Anshel, SecureRF Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 01/31/2013
* USD 600,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop and
prototype passive UHF RFID tags implemented with strong public key cryptography
for the pharmaceutical industry. Implementing cryptography directly on passive
tags is a significant innovation as current security solutions cannot address
this need effectively. The FDA is urging the United States pharmaceutical
industry to adopt RFID technology to assist with the enforcement of pedigree
laws and reduce drug counterfeiting. Today's RFID tags, however, cannot protect
the user from unauthorized reading, copying, or tracking because they lack
onboard security. Thus, a large exposure remains since the security of the data
on the tag cannot be ensured. SecureRF is developing a security protocol which
holds the promise of beings thousands of times smaller and faster than any other
cryptographic function. Secured tags will enable drug manufacturers and
distributors to ensure patient safety and drug integrity as well as improve
their supply chain process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR project targets the
pharmaceutical industry supply chain which handles over 4 billion U.S.
prescriptions annually. Pharmaceuticals must be protected from counterfeiting
and theft which impacts public safety and drives up consumer drug prices.
Without onboard security, the FDA's recommended use of RFID tags could
inadvertently introduce new societal threats including patient privacy concerns
under HIPAA. The use of secure RFID tags will also enable the pharmaceutical
industry to run their supply chain more efficiently. Additional commercial value
from this project will come from developing secure products for high value asset
tracking and contact-less payment systems in addition to military and Homeland
Security needs. Existing cryptographic algorithms cannot provide strong
authentication and data protection on resource-constrained computing devices
like passive RFID tags. This SBIR proposal offers a breakthrough with broad-
based significance that will help advance the technological understanding of
public key cryptography for small, low powered computing devices.&lt;br/&gt;