* 0924539
* Spatiotemporal Dynamics of Word Processing in the Bilingual Brain
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Eric Halgren, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Akaysha Tang
* 09/30/2012
* USD 506,559.00

Almost as remarkable as the ability to know one language is the ability to learn
a second. However, current understanding of how the human brain acquires,
organizes, and processes multiple languages is highly limited. A fundamental
issue is whether multiple languages are represented in common brain areas. When
monolinguals read, words enter the cortex at its posterior tip, and work their
way forward. Within two-tenths of a second, the words are encoded visually, and
then in the next three-tenths of a second they are encoded for meaning in
specialized areas of the left temporal and frontal lobes. With support from the
National Science Foundation, Dr. Eric Halgren and Dr. Jeffrey Elman of the
University of California at San Diego, with their colleagues, will study word
encoding in young adults reading words in their native Spanish, or in their
second language, English, which most have been using since they started school.
Cortical neurons process information using electrical currents, which in turn
produce minute magnetic fields. These will be detected using arrays of
superconducting quantum interference devices as the magnetoencephalogram, and
then mapped to particular cortical areas using magnetic resonance imaging.
Experiments will determine if the English and Spanish words are encoded in the
same areas. Specifically, experiments will test a model that hypothesizes that
the second language does engage the same areas as the first, but in addition
accesses the corresponding areas in the right hemisphere. Experiments will also
attempt to confirm the suggestion that the second language uses brain areas
which are otherwise engaged in high level vision, and explore if the second
language is characterized by perceptual representations of words. Experiments
will test how early in the processing stream English and Spanish words diverge,
and whether this divergence is due to top-down strategic control or quick
categorization. Subjects will vary in how well they know English and when they
began learning it, so that the effects of age of acquisition, order of
acquisition, and proficiency can be determined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research brings together neural, cognitive, language and imaging sciences,
providing interdisciplinary training, especially for bilingual Spanish-English
students, and introducing neuroimaging to a societal problem previously
approached mainly behaviorally. Over two-thirds of the global population is
multi-lingual. Bilingualism binds together the multiple American subcultures,
being essential for socioeconomic integration of recent immigrants, and for the
access of American goods and services to a global marketplace. Yet, second
language education is often ineffective. A clearer picture of how the brain
organizes multiple languages will form part of the scientific basis for
developing effective second language teaching methodologies.