* 0924260
* Opposition, Rhetoric, and Democratic-Styled Institutions in the Middle East and North Africa
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2009,01/31/2015
* Burt Monroe, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 01/31/2015
* USD 404,916.00

This project analyzes the floor records of democratic-styled legislatures in the
Middle East and North Africa ("MENA region") to answer fundamental questions
about the nature of democracy and political opposition in the MENA region and
beyond. Parliaments are a surprisingly important focus of politics in the MENA
region. Despite the obvious importance of the region, virtually no quantitative
study, of any kind, of any sort of parliamentary behavior has been conducted in
most MENA states.

The investigators apply techniques for the analysis of political speech
developed under the NSF-funded Dynamics of Political Rhetoric and Political
Representation ("DynRR") project. Regimes with widely varying claims to
democracy use parliaments and similar institutions to mediate and control
political conflict and opposition. Typically, detailed records of the speeches
and debates that occur in these institutions are maintained, and increasingly
these are provided in electronic form online. Examples range from the British
House of Commons to the Tunisian Majlis al-Nuwaab. The DynRR project has
collected such records for many western democracies and developed computational
and statistical models of language patterns in such data, useful for determining
the range, content, and relationships of political topics discussed in any
legislature, the attention paid to different topics, and the landscape of
political conflict.

The project will look specifically at the parliaments of Egypt, Jordan, Morocco,
Iraq, the Palestinian Legislative Council, Kuwait, the United Arab Emirates,
Bahrain, Djibouti, Algeria, Tunisia, and Iran. The data from these legislatures
will be analyzed with the DynRR models in an effort to understand the nature of
political opposition, particular that of democratic and Islamic oppositions,
across the MENA region. The data will be made publicly available, creating one
of the first systematic large-scale data sets available for broad use in
comparing the politics of MENA states with each other and with states outside
the region.

