* 0924379
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Hannah Rogers:  SymbioticA: The Practices of Art and Science
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2010
* Judith Reppy, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Kelly A. Joyce
* 08/31/2010
* USD 10,797.00

This doctoral dissertation research improvement grant--funded through the
Biology & Society initiative between the Biological Sciences Directorate and the
Science, Technology & Society (STS) Program at NSF--supports research that
explores the question of how "art" and "science" work as categories that
circumscribe bodies of knowledge. The research interrogates how knowledge
communities label and materially shape artistic and scientific objects in
various contexts. This research focuses on bioartists and how they understand
and struggle with materials associated with biological knowledge production.
Through their work, bioartists demonstrate and contest broader aesthetic,
ethical, and political values. The members of the bioart movement use biological
materials and laboratory techniques to create projects that critically question
modern biology.

This project conducts an ethnographic study at the artist-run biological
research laboratory, SymbioticA, located at the University of Western Australia.
SymbioticA actors position their activities according to a particular
understanding of the art/science distinction. This investigation of bioart work
can offer new ways to think about how the public can be engaged in scientific
issues and the democratization of science through art.

The research will also contribute to scholarship on how knowledge systems work
by unpacking the categories of art and science. The project will show how social
actors in different contexts rhetorically produce knowledge as either "art" or
as "science." The intellectual merit of this project is insight into the nature
of specific critiques in the life sciences and contributions to current STS
scholarship that analyzes concepts as categories. A broader impact of this
research is that it investigates how art can inform and engage our understanding
of science.