* 0924751
* The Nature of Ethical Decision-Making in Research
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2009,11/30/2012
* Thomas Van Valey, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Linda Layne
* 11/30/2012
* USD 357,073.00

This project, supported by the Science, Technology &amp; Society program at NSF,
examines ethical decision-making in research. Recurring reports of scientific
misconduct, plagiarism and abuse of human and non-human research participants
has dramatically increased awareness of the real and potential harms associated
with the unethical practice of research. Institutions have attempted to prevent
such misconduct through the development of regulatory policy and formal review
mechanisms (e.g., Human Subjects Institutional Review Boards). In spite of
opportunities to engage in research misconduct, the vast majority of scientists
conduct research with the highest level of integrity. However, little is known
about the decision processes that characterize those scientists whose research
conforms to the highest ethical standards and presumably separate them from
scientists in training or those who engage in questionable or unethical research
practices.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to examine and describe how
scientists make ethical decisions in the research context--to discern patterns
and principles in that practice--and to design education and potential
regulatory checks around those principles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The methods for
studying decision-making are based on "protocol analysis" a cognitive science
methodology that has been applied to study expert performance in a range of
skill areas. In this method, experts are identified and then asked to solve
realistic ethical challenges (scenarios) that might be encountered in the
research process. The experts discuss the normally unexpressed thought processes
they follow in analyzing and "solving" a challenging scenario and plotting a
course of action regarding the problem. Those expressions provide data
(evidence, clues) through which, over multiple scenarios and experts, common
approaches can be discerned. In this project the experts will be practicing
scientists and trained ethicists who are recognized for the quality of their
ethical judgment. The decision-making processes for the experts will be
contrasted with those of beginning graduate students in social and behavioral
sciences in an effort to identify and benchmark crucial analytic and decision-
making skills that might be incorporated into research training curricula.