* 0924371
* Collaborative Research:  Market Design in Public Procurement:  Theory and Evidence
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Gregory Lewis, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2012
* USD 239,608.00

Experts have estimated that approximately 15% of world output is accounted for
by public sector procurement. Careful design of the procedures and methods used
by the public sector in purchasing goods and services is therefore of primary
importance for ensuring the efficient allocation of goods and services in the
economy. This project investigates ways in which the public procurement process
could be improved. The methodological approach is both theoretical and
empirical, suggesting changes that in principle should yield better outcomes,
and then analyzing the available data to analyze whether and by how much these
proposals actually work in practice.

The goals of this project are threefold: first, to characterize efficient award
procedures and contract forms, and compare these to those used in practice;
second, to develop and test models of contractor behavior under commonly used
incentive structures; and third, to propose market design improvements, and to
quantify the welfare gains from switching to these more efficient awarding and
contracting procedures.

The PIs conduct a detailed investigation of road construction projects in
Minnesota, where detailed data is available from the Minnesota Department of
Transportation. Minnesota has been experimenting with different award procedures
that give contractors incentives for timely project completion, but there is
little guidance from the academic literature on how best to specify the details
of these procedures. This project will outline the requirements for efficient
provision of time incentives and test whether the outcomes of the theory are
observed in practice. It will also quantify how much commuters benefit from
accelerated road construction - and thus smaller delays on the road - versus how
much it will cost contractors in overtime and additional capital to accelerate
the pace of construction.

Broader impacts of this project include not just new empirical methods and
graduate student training, but much better information to guide public
procurement methods.