* 0924269
* A CCLI Proposal Preparation Workshop for Two-Year College Chemistry Faculty
* EHR,DUE
* 03/15/2009,07/31/2012
* David Brown, Southwestern College
* Standard Grant
* Pamela Brown
* 07/31/2012
* USD 49,999.00

Chemistry (12)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two-year colleges (2YCs) educate a
considerable portion of the nation's undergraduates, including those in
chemistry and other STEM majors. Furthermore, a substantial proportion of
underrepresented ethnic minorities commence their post-secondary education in
2YCs, along with a significant number of future K-12 teachers who complete their
science courses in 2YCs. Considering the contribution of 2YCs to the education
of the future STEM workforce, it is imperative that 2YCs students receive
exceptional science education. The CCLI program is one of the most important NSF
program to support innovation in undergraduate chemical education. More than
one-third of undergraduates are educated in 2YCs, yet the number of CCLI awards
granted to chemistry departments in 2YCs is exceedingly disproportionate. This
project is providing 2YC chemistry faculty opportunities to enhance their
ability to prepare quality grant proposals intended for submission to the CCLI
program. Chemical educators from both 2YCs and four-year institutions who have
been successful in acquiring CCLI funding and managing CCLI-funded projects are
leading this project. A one and half day workshop, offering 2YC chemistry
faculty comprehensive training in grant proposal preparation, is being followed
with post-workshop support to assist the participants in CCLI proposal
preparation. The project is including no less than twenty percent of
participants from underrepresented groups. Furthermore, this project is
catalyzing collaboration between the community of 2YC chemistry educators and
the leadership within the Chemical Education Research (CER) group, fostering
dissemination of the valuable discoveries and methodologies uncovered by the CER
leaders, enhancing the capacity of chemists in 2YCs to educate their students.