* 0924324
* Internat'l Collaboration in Chemistry: NHC-Pd Catalytic Systems (NHC = N-Heterocyclic Carbene) for the Synthesis of Novel Triarylamine Polymers Containing Fused Heterocyclic Rings
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Oscar Navarro, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2012
* USD 346,167.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). A new era in displays, lighting and electronics is opening
with the introduction of devices fabricated using high performance organic
semiconductors. Opportunities include low power consumption, large area
lighting, intelligent data tags for supply chain monitoring and ubiquitous,
personalised devices that can be wearable, printable and fabricated in large
numbers using lower cost facilities than conventional silicon fabs. Scaleable
synthetic routes need to be developed that preferably lead to a diversity of
material structures and products of the desired purity and performance. In
general, commercial polymerization catalysts or precursors are employed that are
not necessarily optimized for the reactions required to assemble conjugated
oligomers and polymers, hence high loadings of catalysts are used that can lead
to significant levels of impurities in the products that are difficult to
remove.

With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting
the work of Professor Oscar Navarro's group of the University of Hawaii in a
collaborative program with Professor Mike Turner's group of the University of
Manchester, UK. Professor Navarro's group is developing new transition metal-
based catalytic systems for C-C and C-X bond formation (X = N, O, S) and
Professor Turner's group has complementary interests in the synthesis of
conjugated oligomers and polymers, the characterization of these materials,
their formulation for solution processing and the fabrication of OFET and
photovoltaic devices using these materials. This collaborative work focusses on
optimizing catalyst systems for the preparation of arylamine and carbazole based
polymers and investigating the performance of the resulting materials.