* 0924621
* Microphysical and Kinematic Storm Properties Affecting Electrification and Lightning Production
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* W. David Rust, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* A. Gannet Hallar
* 08/31/2013
* USD 521,579.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Under this award
the Principal Investigator (PI) will continue investigating how microphysics and
kinematics affect storm electrification and lightning production by using
lightning mapping, electric field, radar, and other storm observations acquired
in Oklahoma since 2003. The Oklahoma Lightning Mapping Array, the local National
Weather Service 11-cm polarimetric radar, and a rapid-scanning 10 cm phased
array radar have operated for several years. During the Thunderstorm
Electrification and Lightning Experiment (TELEX) 2003 and 2004 and on other
occasions since then, additional observations, including in situ storm soundings
of the electric field, environmental soundings, and mobile 5-cm wavelength dual
Doppler radar data, also were collected for select cases. These cases include
various types of mesoscale convective systems (MCSs), supercell storms, and
other isolated storms. The PI will focus analysis on two broad topics:
&lt;br/&gt;1. Analyze the microphysical and kinematic conditions inferred from
polarimetric radar in regions surrounding where lightning is initiated, to
provide clues concerning electrification mechanisms and the processes
responsible for producing electric field magnitudes large enough to initiate
lightning. Besides analyzing the microphysical conditions surrounding regions of
initiation in typical storms and in storms with inverted polarity electrical
structure, the PI will analyze cases in which lightning is initiated in anvils
50-100 km downshear from the main body of the storm and cases with steady rates
of 1-4 VHF sources per second in the overshooting tops of strong isolated
storms. These behaviors have been observed only recently and little is known
about their characteristics and the cause of their occurrence. &lt;br/&gt;2.
Analyze how lightning in the stratiform precipitation region of MCSs is affected
by variations in the kinematics and microphysics of systems having different
modes of organization. Thus far, all published studies of in-cloud lightning
structure in the stratiform region have examined leading-line, trailing-
stratiform MCSs. The PI plans to analyze strongly asymmetric MCSs having a
northern stratiform region formed by a mesovortex and to analyze systems with
other forms of organization, to ascertain the effect of the mode of organization
on lightning and charge structure. One would expect, for example, that
asymmetric MCSs, which often have weaker convective cells to their north, would
tend to have less lightning in the stratiform region, and that a strong
mesovortex would be reflected in the structure of any lightning in the
stratiform region. Data for both asymmetric and complex MCSs are ready for
analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project will provide
research experience for three graduate students and two undergraduate students.
The participation of females and under-represented minorities will be
encouraged. Field programs are planned in Oklahoma during the period in which
students will have the opportunity to participate and to learn skills involved
in making storm observations. Much of the knowledge gained from the research
will help efforts to develop applications of lightning data for weather
operations, in preparation for the launch of an optical lightning mapper on the
GOES-R satellite.