* 0924046
* Fifth USA-China Chemical Engineering Conference, Beijing, China, October 13-16, 2009
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2010
* Norman Li, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
*  Ashok S. Sangani
* 07/31/2010
* USD 30,000.00

0924046&lt;br/&gt;Yang&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant supports partial travel
expenses of US participants in the Fifth USA-China Chemical Engineering
Conference, to be held October 13-16 in Beijing, China (http://
http://www.sinouschemeng.com/), sponsored by the American Institute of Chemical
Engineers (AIChE) and its Chinese counterpart, the Chemical Industry and
Engineering Society of China (CIESC). The 2009 meeting follows previous
successful meetings including one that took place with NSF support in 1997
(CBET-9613827). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of the conference is to
provide a forum for U.S. chemical engineers to meet their counterparts in China
about the latest advancements, exchange research ideas, and opportunities for
collaboration. Its stated theme is Chemical Engineering for Sustainable
Development, a core topic of interest for ENG/CBET research involving issues
such as new and renewable energy sources, clean fuels, and environmental
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chemical engineering is a key discipline in
energy, resources, and environment, and the USA and China are two countries that
can lead worldwide efforts in these areas. By bringing together scientists and
engineers from these two countries, as well as other countries, to discuss these
challenges and possible solutions, the conference will be able to address the
key roles to be played by chemical engineers in developing processes, products
and services that are needed by humanity in a sustainable way. In a still
broader sense, the conference will provide a focal point of contact for the
chemical engineering researchers of the two countries, as well as from other
countries and regions. It should provide an excellent opportunity for exchanging
information and developing future collaboration.