* 0924461
* Richard Dedekind and the Structuralist Transformation of Modern Mathematics
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2010
* Erich Reck, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 09/30/2010
* USD 142,922.00

This research project in the history of mathematics is supported by the Science,
Technology and Society program at NSF and jointly by the SBE and MPS
directorates by way of a Dear Colleague Letter, Research on Mathematical and
Physical Sciences and Society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of main tasks in the
philosophy of science is to study the significance of revolutionary scientific
developments such as the birth of theoretical mathematics in Ancient Greece, the
rise of experimental natural science in the early modern period, and the
emer¬gence of relativity theory and quantum mechanics in the twentieth century.
Another case in point is the radical transformation of mathematics that took
place in the nineteenth and early twentieth cen¬turies, a shift from the study
of "quantity" as it had been under¬stood for millennia to the much more general
study of "relational structures" (groups, rings, fields, geometric manifolds,
topological spaces, etc.). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A central figure in the
transformation in mathematics noted above was Richard Dedekind, who is generally
recognized as one of the most influential mathematicians of the nineteenth
century, as well as one of the most important contributors to algebra, number
theory, and the foundations of mathematics of all time. Yet there is no book-
length treatment of Dedekind and his work. The main goal of this project is to
engage in research that will eventually result in such a book. The book will
have a special focus on the "structuralist" approach to mathe¬matics that
Dedekind, more than anyone else, helped to inaugurate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research will build on the results of several historians and
philosophers of mathe¬matics. It will be to synthesize the insights already
achieved, and it will be to expand the corresponding investigations into new
sub-fields of mathematics. In addition, the project will assess the conceptual
tools commonly used in charac¬terizing Dedekind's works and sharpen those tools.
Finally, because the centrality and the continuing relevance of them remain
underestimated, another goal will be to make Dedekind's ideas fruit¬ful by
relating them directly to current philo¬sophy of mathe¬mat¬ics.