* 0924622
* Synergistic Studies of Raindrop Shapes, Oscillations and Orientations Using 2D-Video Disdrometer, Advanced Radar and Wind Tunnel
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* V. Bringi, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley F. Smull
* 09/30/2013
* USD 450,846.00

This research addresses a number of key science questions related to rain
microstructure defined herein as the size, shape and orientation distributions
of raindrops in a wide range of rain types and climatologies. Whilst great
progress has been made in the understanding of drop size distribution
variability, and there has been modest success in the use of "bulk" assumptions
on mean drop shapes and orientation distributions, there are still variations in
the raindrop shape distribution parameters and oscillation modes that are not
fully understood. There are even fewer observations of the variability of the
drop canting angle distribution. Knowledge of these rain microstructure
characteristics is key to developing accurate polarimetric radar-based drop-size
distribution and rain rate retrievals, and for electromagnetic wave attenuation-
correction algorithms.

This research is observationally-driven and makes use of multiple 2D-video
disdrometers in different locations (Huntsville, AL and Brisbane, AU) and
advanced radars including the dual-polarized ARMOR radar in Huntsville, AL; the
dual-wavelength/dual-polarized CP2 radar in Brisbane, and the dual-polarized
CSU-CHILL radar near Greeley, CO. The world class vertical wind tunnel facility
at the Johannes Gutenberg-Universit√§t in Mainz, Germany will be used for
specialized observation of the time varying shapes and oscillation modes of
freely "floating" drops, as well as an investigation into the time varying
shapes of moderate-to-large drops after coalescing collisions with sub-
millimetric sized drops.

The broader impacts of the study are: (a) better use of new observing capability
resulting from the imminent polarimetric upgrade of the National Weather Service
operational weather radar network and "gap-filler" X band radars for short range
hydrological applications; (b) incorporation of new results to improve radar
displays used by many TV stations in the US that are planning to upgrade their
C-band systems to dual-polarization to improve severe weather forecasting, and
(c) use of results on drop shapes and orientations by the national and
international radiowave propagation community.