* 0925976
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Identification and Investigation of Genes Involved in Indigenous American Pigmentation.
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2010
* Mark Shriver, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 08/31/2010
* USD 9,285.00

This study seeks to identify genes causing darkening of skin pigmentation in
Indigenous Americans following expansion into the New World. As populations
migrated from northern into southern latitudes, darker skin was more adaptive as
protection against damage from ultra-violet radiation. The search for these
genes will be conducted in individuals of admixed European and Indigenous
American ancestry from New Mexico, Colorado, Mexico and Colombia where ultra-
violet radiation is at high levels. 82 genes associated with variation in skin
pigmentation were investigated for evidence of natural selection. In the 12
genes showing the strongest evidence of selection, 48 single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) representing the overall variation in the selection
nominated candidate genes will be genotyped in individuals of admixed ancestry.
These SNPs show substantial allele frequency differences between the parental
populations so the genes responsible for variation in skin pigmentation can be
identified by an excess of Indigenous American alleles at that gene in
individuals with darker skin. This admixture linkage analysis is especially
powerful for studying traits like skin pigmentation which vary substantially
between the parental populations because this methodology requires fewer total
markers than a standard association study.&lt;br/&gt; There is substantial
intellectual merit in this study because skin pigmentation is an ideal model for
the evolution of complex traits in the fluctuating environments encountered by
Indigenous Americans dispersing into the New World. However, previous
researchers have largely ignored these populations. An increased understanding
of the evolution of skin pigmentation also has broader impacts including
understanding the selective pressures causing continuous skin color variation
which is often mistakenly thought of as a 'racial' trait. Additionally, forensic
researchers are interested in the ability to predict skin color from an unknown
DNA sample. Finally, this grant will contribute to the training of a female
graduate student, an under-represented group in this field.