* 0925992
* Gain-Guiding in All-Solid-State Bragg Fibers for High-Power Laser Amplifiers with Robust Single-Transverse Mode and Ultra-Large Mode Area
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2009,01/31/2014
* Tsing-Hua Her, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* John Zavada
* 01/31/2014
* USD 350,000.00

The objective of this proposed research is to design, fabricate, and demonstrate
gain guiding in photonic Bragg fibers with high pumping efficiency, ultra-large
mode area, and robust single-transverse mode. Intensive research efforts have
been devoted to designing novel fiber configuration to meet the challenges of
next-generation high-power fiber laser oscillators and amplifiers. One promising
approach is to use gain guiding in an index-antiguide fiber, and single-mode
laser oscillation has been observed in such systems. This configuration,
however, prevents the pump from being confined in the core, resulting in low
gain when the fiber is end-pumped.

To mitigate this problem, this project will pursue a new idea exploiting gain
guiding in optical Bragg fibers in which the signal is confined via gain guiding
and index antiguiding in the core of the fibers, while the pump is guided via
the photonic bandgap effect in the same core. This configuration has the
potential to yield large mode area, single transverse mode, and high gain.
Proposed activities include the design, fabrication, and characterization of
Bragg fibers, optimization of pump coupling, demonstration of gain guiding in
the end-pumped fiber amplifier scheme, and study of the saturation of gain
guiding in index antiguided fibers. All of these efforts involve close
interaction between experiments, numerical simulation, and theory.

The intellectual merits of this proposed research have two folds. Firstly, it
represents the first theoretical and experimental study of gain guiding in
photonic bandgap fibers. Such endeavor will increase our knowledge base of gain
guiding in optical waveguides. Secondly, this project also represents the first
theoretical and experimental investigation of the saturation of gain guiding in
index antiguided waveguides, which complements the study of gain saturation in
unstable resonators.

There are several broader impacts of this proposed research. Firstly, the
realization of such fibers and the demonstration of gain guiding in them pave
the way towards next-generation high-power fiber laser oscillators and
amplifiers. These systems will help address critical issues confronting our
defense, national security, and the growing energy crisis. Secondly, fiber
amplifiers based on this proposed scheme can also be used for linear
amplification of ultrashort laser pulses by suppressing optical nonlinearity.
Thirdly, this program will integrate research findings into undergraduate and
graduate education by developing course and lab modules in existing courses, as
well as offering excellent research opportunities for undergraduates to
complement their learning experience outside of classrooms. Lastly, K-12
outreach will be facilitated with local SPIE and OSA student chapter. All of
these activities will ensure that the US sustains its technological leadership
in this area while providing excellent education and training for students to
produce an enthusiastic, well qualified workforce for the next generation.