* 0925532
* Single-electron-level ballistic transport devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Hong Koo Kim, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 07/31/2013
* USD 305,115.00

This project deals with developing a new class of electronic devices that offer
femtosecond transit time operating at a single-electron level in room-
temperature air ambient. The operating principle of the proposed device
structure involves ballistic transport of electrons in a nanoscale void channel
that will be formed in the oxide layer of a metal-oxide-semiconductor structure.
A metal-oxide-semiconductor structure will be driven into a breakdown regime of
operation (that is, the electric field is set greater than the oxide breakdown
field strength) in order to form nanoscale leakage channels in the oxide layer.
The oxide thickness (channel length) will be designed to be smaller than the
mean free collision path in air so that the thus-formed void channels
essentially serve as a medium for nanoscale vacuum electronics. In this quasi-
vacuum-mode operation in air, the ballistic transport of electrons is expected
to demonstrate a space-charge-limited current over a broad range of voltage,
following the Child-Langmuir's [voltage]3/2 power law. The electron transit time
is calculated to be 10-100 femtosecond, potentially offering over 10-100
terahertz operation. The space-charge-limited transport in the nano-channel is
expected to be of single electron level. The single-electron transport with
femtosecond transit time can result in the channel current of ~microampere
level, potentially offering high signal-to-noise ratio operation of
optoelectronic devices at room temperature. This study aims at developing a
fundamental understanding of the charge transport process occurring in the
localized nanochannels and its application to ultrafast (down to femtosecond
level) photodetection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;Electron transport in a nanometer-scale-confined space is a
fundamental process, whose understanding is critically important in developing
advanced electronic/optoelectronic devices. The proposed nanoelectronic
structure (~10-nm-scale void channels formed in the oxide of a silicon metal-
oxide-semiconductor structure) offers the advantage of vacuum in transporting
electrons, but does not require any vacuum medium in its operation.
Understanding the mechanisms of nanochannel formation and their extreme
transport properties (~10 femtosecond transit time) is expected to bring a major
advancement to the science and technology of nanoscale
electronics/optoelectronics. This study addresses the scientific and engineering
challenges in advancing the silicon-metal-oxide-semiconductor-based structure
into a new device technology that offers a great promise for ultimate operation
at single-electron, single-photon level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;This study will make major impacts on various fields such as
telecommunications, information processing, instrumentation/metrology, and
defense. The multidisciplinary nature of this project will provide an
educational paradigm for training future scientists and engineers for the
emerging fields of nanoelectronics, nanophotonics and nanoscale vacuum
electronics. Students from underrepresented groups will be recruited at various
levels and scopes such as graduate research (masters and doctoral degrees),
undergraduate research experience, and summer enrichment programs for high
school students. These students will gain hands-on-experience through a variety
of instrumentation available at the Nanoscale Fabrication and Characterization
Facility (a user facility at the PI's institution) mentored by graduate student
researchers from the PI's lab.