* 0925964
* GOALI: Models, Metrics and Control Strategies for Energy Efficient Data Centers
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Niraj Tolia, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2014
* USD 496,000.00

Project Title: &lt;br/&gt;GOALI: Models, Metrics, and Control Strategies for
Energy Efficient Data Centers&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PIs: Bruno Sinopoli and Bruce
H. Krogh&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objective: This project aims to improve
the energy efficiency of data centers significantly by introducing coordinated
control of the cooling systems and the information technology. This requires new
integrated, control-oriented models of data center dynamics representing thermal
interactions between the computational system and the cooling system as a
function of the control inputs to each system. New metrics will also be
developed to capture effectively the impact of control decisions on
computational performance in the context of service level agreements (SLAs) and
other objectives and constraints that arise in practice. Multi-level,
distributed control strategies will be developed to deal with the wide range of
time-scales and spatial distributions that characterize data center
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This transformative research will lead
to the first data center control strategies that explicitly coordinate cooling
system actions with workload and power state allocations to achieve effective
tradeoffs between computational performance and energy consumption. These
strategies will also leverage new degrees of freedom by relaxing performance
requirements as allowed by SLAs. The control hierarchy is based on abstractions
that reflect the range of spatial and temporal scales common in many large-scale
cyber-physical systems. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The academic-industry
collaboration in this GOALI project assures the results will be implementable in
future data centers. This will lead to significant reductions in the energy
required to meet the demands for computation and storage in the U.S. for years
to come. Through courses and internships, engineering students will be
introduced emerging concepts in cyber-physical systems research. &lt;br/&gt;