* 0925498
* Single molecule light emitting device
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Nongjian Tao, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* john zavada
* 07/31/2013
* USD 350,000.00

Intellectual Merit: Organic optoelectronics is a rapidly advancing field, but
most studies to date are focused on measurements of thin films involving a large
ensemble of molecules. The present project aims at studying how the
optoelectronic properties of these systems change when the device is decreased
to nano- and molecular-scales, and exploring single molecule light
emitting&lt;br/&gt;device and optical sensing applications. Such studies will
lead to new insights into charge transport mechanisms, carrier energy
dissipation processes and electrode-molecule contact effects in molecular-scale
junctions, determine the interplay between the charge transport and optical
properties, and provide the basic knowledge and necessary skills to develop
novel device&lt;br/&gt;applications.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The project will
also have an important impact on a variety of other fields, including
biophotonics and photosynthesis, as well as thin film-based optoelectronic
devices, such as organic photovoltaics and organic light emitting diodes. In
addition, it will expose engineering undergraduates to research opportunities in
emerging fields. To this end the PIs will work together with the outreach
program at Fulton School of Engineering and Biodesign Institute to recruit
minority students. The proposed research and training activities will also help
graduate students develop important teaching, management and communication
skills. As part of the outreach plan, international collaborations with research
groups in Germany and Japan will be&lt;br/&gt;developed to provide students with
international experience. The interdisciplinary research has potential
transformational impacts on the next-generation of scientists and engineers, and
on the next-generation organic optoelectronics.