* 0925571
* DDIG:  Analysis of Faunal Remains from the Middle Pleistocene Site of Orgnac 3, France
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2010
* Richard Klein, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2010
* USD 6,000.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Richard Klein, Jason Lewis will analyze faunal
remains from archaeological excavations of the French cave site of Orgnac 3.
This site, dating from between ~350,000to ~290 000 years ago, has yielded very
large stone artifact and animal bone assemblages and seven fossil human teeth.
For part of its depositional history, Orgnac 3 was a cave, and for another, it
was a sink-hole. The site preserves large samples from short time periods within
the long Middle Pleistocene interval. It contains charcoal/sooty lenses with
burnt bones that have been interpreted as hearths and accumulations of artifacts
and bones surrounded by natural rocks that may represent the bases of dwelling
structures. For these reasons the Orgnac 3 materials lend themselves to
answering many questions about human paleoecology during the middle and late
Middle Pleistocene.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much work in paleoanthropology has
focused on one particular aspect of human paleoecology, that of subsistence
strategy. When people started acquiring meat and other animal tissues, whether
through scavenging or hunting, and how human subsistence strategies have changed
over time, remain hotly debated topics. How different human populations might
have foraged differently, and the evolutionary import of those differences, are
important questions to ask of the archaeological and paleontological records.
This is especially true when considering the Middle and Late Pleistocene, when
different human species lived on different continents, but by the end of the
Pleistocene, only one species remained: Homo sapiens. To reach the ultimate goal
of understanding changes in subsistence strategy throughout human history, one
must begin with a robust, scientific reconstruction of how a sample faunal
assemblage passed through several stages in which hominid activity or natural
processes could have altered its composition. This project adopts such a
holistic approach to document the carcass acquisition and processing behaviors
of the human inhabitants of Orgnac 3 and to examine how these behaviors have
changed throughout the evolution of the human species. Once the carcass
acquisition and processing behaviors of the Orgnac 3 people have been
characterized, these can be compared to other Middle Pleistocene sites in Europe
and Africa in order to elucidate how these behaviors have changed through time
and across space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond research questions of interest to
prehistoric archaeologists, this project will have a broader impact by providing
assistance in graduate student training and strengthening collaborative
relationships between institutions in US and France, specifically those between
Stanford University and the Centre Européen de Recherches Préhistoriques in
Tautavel and Institut de Paléontologie Humaine in Paris. This work will increase
awareness of one of the oldest and largest fossil human sites in France.
Furthermore, the primary data generated here will be made available to the
Centre Européen de Recherches Préhistoiriques, for them to use in their own
research, curation planning, and pedagogical development (in their educational
materials and in the adjoining Centre Européen de Préhistoire ).