* 0925085
* GOALI: Laminate Holographic Filters for Planar Optic Concentrators and Light Trapping in Thin Film Photovoltaic Cells
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2014
* Scott Weideman, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 07/31/2014
* USD 329,611.00

Objectives of the proposed research is to develop and demonstrate a design
methodology for integrating advanced holographic spectral filtering,
concentrating, and light trapping properties in holographic components that
increase the efficiency and energy collection properties of thin film
photovoltaic systems. Another objective is to realize candidate holograms film
layers on flexible substrates that can be laminated with either standard
photovoltaic module components or in non-traditional conformal geometries. This
approach does not add complexity to the thin film PV cell structure. Instead the
hologram is used as a design option to improve the performance of thin film PV
cells. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit consists of advancing the state of non-
imaging holographic element design to realize low cost planar concentrators and
light trapping techniques. Holographic element design methodologies will be
integrated with thin film photovoltaic cell properties to improve thin film PV
cell efficiency. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The proposed work addresses one of
the most important issues of our time ?reducing the cost of renewable solar
energy. If successful the proposed work will impact the cost of photovoltaic
energy in the near future (5-10 years) when it is most needed to mitigate global
warming.&lt;br/&gt;The realization of low cost PV systems will also allow
electrical energy to be available in rural and remote areas not served by a
power grid. This will allow lighting, irrigation, and desalination in many
underserved communities bringing more opportunity to third world populations.
&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work offers students the opportunity to participate in a
range of photovoltaic energy problems. This will provide them with the necessary
background to transition to industry or to pursue academic careers in solar
energy related fields. &lt;br/&gt;