* 0925438
* Quartz Resonator Array for calorimetric (bio)chemical Sensing Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Srinivas Tadigadapa, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Massood Tabib-Azar
* 07/31/2013
* USD 350,000.00

Quartz Resonator Array for Calorimetric (Bio)Chemical Sensing Applications



This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The objective of this research to design, and demonstrate a versatile, high
pixel density, calorimetric (bio)chemical sensor array from temperature
sensitive micromachined quartz crystal resonators. The approach is to locate
micromachined biochemical reaction chambers in close proximity to the quartz
resonator array and couple the heat from the reaction chamber to the quartz
resonator via radiation and conduction through ambient gas in the narrow gap.
The close proximity and the extremely high infrared absorption coefficient of
quartz renders this system into a very sensitive calorimeter design. The
proposed QCM array will be unique new demonstration of a planar calorimetric
biosensor array integrated with reaction chamber. The unprecedented temperature
sensitivity of 10-5 °C at array level is only possible due to recent
developments in quartz micromachining processes and offers a unique opportunity
for array level (bio)chemical sensing applications. The ultimate aim of this
work is to create a handheld or desktop multianalyte sensor system in which the
quartz resonator arrays with the integrated bioreactors can be dropped in as
disposable, easy to swap cartridges. The proposed sensing system will find
applications in biochemical assays, clinical diagnostics, laboratory
instrumentation, and homeland security. In addition, it will be used for
fundamental real-time investigations of biochemical processes and phenomena
relating to biomolecular growth, conformations, and reaction thermodynamics.
Interdisciplinary courses and research activities on biosensors and biomaterials
will be developed at undergraduate and graduate levels. The various NSF-REU and
Summer Research Opportunity Program (SROP) on campus will be used to attract
under-represented groups.