* 0925147
* Collaborative Research: Stacked Controlled-Cell Power Conversion Architecture for Grid-Connected Photovoltaic Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* David Perreault, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* George Maracas
* 08/31/2012
* USD 226,379.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The objective of this research is to develop a new architecture for photovoltaic
power conversion that provides substantial improvements over existing
technology, including greater energy extraction; improved robustness to partial
shading, cell mismatch and aging; and improved system reliability and reduced
cost. The approach is to use integrated CMOS power conversion and control
circuits to create ?controlled PV cells? that can be stacked in series strings
for connection to a high-power grid-tie inverter.

Intellectual Merit

The work is an interdisciplinary effort that will develop and merge advances in
nanomaterials, IC circuit design, power topologies, and nonlinear dynamics to
achieve greatly improved levels of performance in PV systems.

Broader Impacts

The approach developed by this project can provide major improvements in PV
power yield, system cost, reliability, and system efficiency. This will
accelerate application of PV technologies and allow greater power yield,
providing society with clean energy at lower cost. Undergraduate and graduate
students will contribute to the research and will be provided with opportunities
to develop their research skills. Participation of underrepresented groups will
be encouraged, and individuals in these groups will be provided with careful
mentoring. A cross-university research collaboration will be strengthened and
extended to include educational activities, such as development of curricula and
educational media linked to the research. Partnerships with the MIT Solar Car
Team and an elementary school will be used to develop outreach to K-12 students
to promote science and engineering.

