* 0925607
* Doctoral Diss. Research Imp. Grant: Chasing the Climate Cure in the American West: Geographies of Health and Nation in Late Nineteenth- and Early Twentieth-Century American Culture
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Kathryn Oberdeck, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2011
* USD 9,286.00

Health seeking is typically associated with specific climates and landscapes; in
the history of the United States, it has been most closely identified with the
unique environments of the West. This project explores both scientific and lay
discourses about medical climatology, meteorology, and health that are
associated with the American West; it aims to understand how they intersect and
interact with popular culture. In addition to assessing these broader
intellectual trends, it is also concerned with the lived experience of health
seekers from the indigent settlers of transient tent colonies to the wealthy
tourists at fashionable health resorts. In doing so, it places these health
seekers in the framework of contested racial, class, and gender ideologies
informing turn-of-the-century society. It also seeks to establish whether and in
what ways efforts to promote intangible qualities of health and climate helped
to justify and encourage internal expansion in the American West, as well as the
social and natural impacts of health seeking. Though perceptions of aridity,
altitude, temperature, and sunshine often motivated western development and
shaped its narratives, attitudes about health and landscape have been largely
neglected in previous historical treatments of the settlement of this region.

This project draws from the methodologies and perspectives of environmental
history, history of science, and social and cultural history. It utilizes
archival and organizational records of various booster organizations and health
colonies, personal and family papers, popular periodicals, as well as journals,
monographs, and records of medical and scientific groups, particularly in the
field of medical climatology. It places these varied sources in dialogue with
one another across three uniquely western landscapes?the desert Southwest, Rocky
Mountains, and Southern California Coast. The resulting dissertation will
establish why multiple discourses depicted certain western environments as
healthful and beneficial to the body, and how these beliefs were shaped by
diverse populations and contributed to fashioning an American identity.

