* 0925132
* CAREER: Origins of high Indo-West Pacific marine biodiversity: the role of allopatric divergence in marine environments.
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2010
* Paul Barber, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* David Garrison
* 06/30/2010
* USD 91,938.00

The Indo-West Pacific (IWP) has the highest marine biodiversity in the world.
Diversity gradients suggest that this region is a Center of Origin, yet this
theory lacks a convincing mechanism to explain the creation of this
biodiversity. Although terrestrial biologists rely heavily on allopatric models
to explain speciation and the creation of biodiversity, the appropriateness of
allopatric divergence is questionable in marine ecosystems where pelagic larval
dispersal is assumed to facilitate gene flow and limit genetic differentiation
among geographically isolated populations. Previous work Dr. Barber and others
has challenged this assumption by identifying sharp regional genetic breaks in
stomatopod populations throughout the IWP, suggesting that the Malucca and
Flores Seas may act as barriers to pelagic larval dispersal.

This project integrates physical oceanography, population genetics, and
geography in a comparative phylgeographic framework to explicitly test the role
of allopatric divergence in marine species with pelagic larval dispersal. By
examining geographic, temporal, and genealogical concordance in multiple reef-
dwelling species, allopatric divergence across the Malucca and Flores Seas (by
vicariance or isolation of peripheral populations) will be explicitly tested,
significantly advancing our understanding of the origins of high marine
biodiversity in the IWP and of evolutionary processes in marine environments.

This work will form the foundation of undergraduate/graduate education efforts
in The form of courses that integrate marine biology and modern molecular
genetics through the study of larval dispersal/recruitment and evolutionary
processes in marine environments. Course work will be extended and enhanced by
undergraduate research experiences that provide training in field and laboratory
techniques through independent mentored research. The research will form a
conduit for a scientific exchange, training, and mentoring graduate students and
Indonesian scientists to prepare the next generation of marine scientists for
active careers studying the marine environments of the IWP.

Undergraduate educational efforts will blur traditional boundaries separating
marine and molecular biology and will increase interest in marine research by
providing cohesive and integrated research experiences. Aggressive recruitment
efforts targeting underrepresented minorities for these opportunities will
increase diversity within the marine science community. The combination of these
undergraduate research activities with new and existing courses in a research
emphasis track will serve as a model for expanding the curriculum in the Boston
University Marine Program and will increase undergraduate educational and
research opportunities within the Woods Hole community. Graduate education and
international scientific exchanges will expand the community of marine
scientists that are proficient in the theory and application of molecular
techniques to marine science, and will fertilize an increase in marine research
focused in the IWP. The results produced through these combined efforts are
essential to the management of marine resources. Identification of regionally
isolated faunas and the processes that create them will aid in identifying
regional management units, helping marine conservation strategies in the highly
threaten reefs of the IWP to be framed in a biologically meaningful fashion.
Combining these activities will provide the foundation for a career integrating
research and education in the pursuit of understanding dispersal and
evolutionary processes in marine environments.