* 0925637
* Stability theory for set-valued stochastic hybrid systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Andrew Teel, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 09/30/2012
* USD 321,053.00

Intellectual merit:

Hybrid systems model dynamic behavior that combines continuous evolution and
instantaneous change. A wide class of naturally occurring and engineered systems
exhibit hybrid dynamics. Examples include air traffic management systems,
impulsively coupled biological oscillators, and networked and logic-based
control systems. Over the last decade, significant progress has been made on
characterizing worst-case, robust asymptotic stability in hybrid dynamical
systems. General invariance principles, converse Lyapunov theorems, reduction
principles, and linearization-based results have been established. Worst-case
refers to the fact that these results pertain to hybrid systems that may admit
non-unique solutions, a situation that is common in hybrid systems modeling. The
aim of the current proposal is to extend these recent insights about worst-case
asymptotic stability in hybrid systems to the stochastic setting. We propose to
develop a robust, asymptotic stability theory for hybrid systems that feature
some effects of a worst-case nature and some effects that are stochastic, a
common occurrence in many naturally occurring and engineered hybrid systems,
including networked control systems, air traffic management systems, biological
systems, and financial systems. The proposed contributions to stability theory
for stochastic hybrid systems will help pave the way for advances in control
design for stochastic hybrid systems.

Broader impact:

The proposed effort will contribute to the engineering education base by
furthering the available graduate curriculum on hybrid systems, and by training
graduate students in UCSB?s Center for Control, Dynamical Systems, and
Computation. Tutorial workshops at the main control conferences will be
delivered to interested graduate students, faculty, and industry personnel. All
work will be documented in acclaimed international conferences and prestigious
control and dynamical systems journals. Collaboration with international
researchers will be fostered, including student exchange programs, most notably
with the University of Melbourne, and the University of Rome, Tor Vergata. The
theoretical results of the proposed work will be applied to areas that are
significant to the broad population, including problems like the efficient
management of air traffic to enhance throughput in the nation?s aviation system.
Most notably, we will continue our work with UCSB?s summer internship program
aimed at undergraduate students, which has led to recent successful mentoring
experiences for our control graduate students who have supervised undergraduate
students from various underrepresented student populations.