* 0925238
* Architectural Robotics - An International Workshop
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2010
* Keith Green, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 04/30/2010
* USD 32,062.00

This is funding to support a one-day international workshop of researchers from
academia and industry, along with graduate students, to be held in conjunction
with the 11th International Conference on Ubiquitous Computing (Ubicomp 2009),
which will take place September 30-October 3, 2009, in Orlando, Florida, and
which is sponsored by the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM). Ubicomp is
the premier outlet for novel research contributions that advance the state of
the art in the design, development, deployment, evaluation and understanding of
ubiquitous computing systems. Ubicomp is an interdisciplinary field of research
and development that utilizes and integrates pervasive, wireless, embedded,
wearable and/or mobile technologies to bridge the gaps between the digital and
physical worlds. More information about the conference is available online at
http://www.ubicomp.org/ubicomp2009. This interdisciplinary workshop, the first
of its kind in the United States, will bring together researchers from a variety
of scientific domains, from engineering, and from architecture, to identify
opportunities and challenges in the emerging field of architectural robotics,
that is to say robotics technologies embedded in the built environment.
Throughout history the emergence of new technologies has reshaped our built
environment and so, society. Workshop participants, about 20 of them supported
under this award, will share their research and teaching, and explore issues
relating to the design of complex engineered systems that respond to human needs
and wants. They will wrestle with questions such as: What new vocabularies of
design need to be cultivated, and what theories of self-reconfigurability
defined, in order to lay the foundation for sophisticated algorithms that will
sense and infer the occupancy, activities, and external conditions of a building
so as to trigger change that improves life, enhances existing places, and
supports human interaction? And: How can we educate students from different
academic backgrounds to collaborate productively in teams, and what tools could
further teaching and learning in the design and implementation of architectural
robotics? The PIs expect the workshop to launch a viable new research community,
by serving as a catalyst for future knowledge exchange, collaboration and
growth. To these ends, event outcomes will include publication of a collection
of position papers and set of references (including academic papers), as well as
Web sites and other media that pertain to this new field of research.

Broader Impacts: The gradual embedding of robotics throughout the built
environment will have a broad impact on society as these technologies support
and, in some cases, augment everyday work, school, entertainment, and leisure.
Early applications will likely be in health care, in support for persons with
physical disabilities, in the empowerment of a growing populating wishing to age
in place, and in intelligent work spaces that are responsive to changing needs,
that consume less floor space, and that reduce energy costs. The educational
activities in the workshop will explore methods of teaching multidisciplinary
classes that bridge the academic cultural gaps that separate engineering, human-
centered design, and architecture and its allied design and art practices. The
PIs will make every effort to ensure a diverse group of participants including
representatives of underrepresented groups in science and engineering such as
minorities, women, and persons with disabilities.