* 0925706
* Collaborative Research: Multichannel All-Optical Signal-Processing  Devices Based on a Group-Delay-Managed Nonlinear Medium
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Taras Lakoba, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Continuing Grant
* john zavada
* 08/31/2013
* USD 99,708.00

Objective&lt;br/&gt;We propose to design and build a suite of multichannel
nonlinear-optical signal-processing devices (2R regenerator for phase-shift-
keying transmission formats, switch/gate, and wavelength converter) based on
nonlinear-optical loop mirror (NOLM), in which the key and novel component
enabling the simultaneous processing of multiple wavelength-division-
multiplexing (WDM) channels is a group-delay-managed (GDM) nonlinear medium.
Such a GDM-medium differs from conventional dispersion-managed media in that its
dispersion map is not only spatially, but also spectrally periodic, which
eliminates nonlinear inter-channel interaction by ensuring large dispersive
walk-off among different WDM channels, while preserving the integrity of each
channel's pulses. &lt;br/&gt;The project consists of three key efforts:
&lt;br/&gt;a) development and testing of multi-functional multichannel
nonlinear-optical signal processor based on GDM-medium-enabled NOLM;
&lt;br/&gt;b) design/fabrication of ultra-low-loss GDM-medium implementing novel
multiport periodic-group-delay-device on a chip; &lt;br/&gt;c) theoretical
modeling of GDM-based NOLM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
merit&lt;br/&gt;The proposed first realization of devices that utilize large
intra-channel optical nonlinearity while suppressing the inter-channel
nonlinearity will overturn the accepted paradigms of all-optical processing,
making transformative impact on optical communications, networking, and
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact&lt;br/&gt;This project will
dramatically reduce complexity and cost of nonlinear-optical signal processing
systems, expediting the roll-out of all-optical networking and increasing the
bandwidth availability. The reduced, compared to electronic processing, power
consumption will contribute to better environment. The compatibility of this
approach with silicon and chalcogenide-glass waveguides makes it potentially
beneficial for board-to-board and chip-to-chip networking.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This funding will support three graduate students who will
get synergetic experience in optical communications systems, device fabrication,
and applied mathematics.