* 0925861
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement:  Human Growth Evolving: Integrating Skeletal, Dental, and Cranial Proxies of Growth to Understand Ontogeny in Pleistocene Genus Homo
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Susan Anton, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 08/31/2011
* USD 9,940.00

Modern humans are characterized by a very slow pattern of growth and development
(i.e. ontogeny) compared to the closest living relatives, the chimpanzees. In
hard tissues this trend is evident in late eruption of teeth and late attainment
of skeletal maturity. This delayed maturation is necessary for the development
of large brains, and mastering bipedal locomotion and language, but it is still
uncertain when this pattern arose during the evolution of the human lineage.
Most studies of modern human and fossil ontogeny have focused on either dental
or skeletal development, using the other developmental system as an age proxy.
However, for a proper understanding of the origins of the modern human
ontogenetic pattern, and its implications for human evolution, it is critical to
understand not only the relationship between dental and skeletal growth, but
also the timing of developmental events.&lt;br/&gt;This study will address this
issue by combining data on dental and skeletal growth and development in modern
human skeletal samples from different geographic regions. It will include data
on dental formation and eruption, several cranial maturity indicators,
epiphyseal fusion, and long bone lengths and diameters, and relate them to
chronological age wherever possible. Several Pleistocene fossils belonging to H.
erectus, Neanderthals, and early H. sapiens, whose age-at-death will be
estimated from dental microstructure, will be compared to modern humans of
similar age to see whether they share a common pattern and timing of dental
and/or skeletal growth and development.&lt;br/&gt;The broader implications of
this study include the first attempt to compare dental and skeletal growth and
development in fossils to a large and diverse modern human sample, and to relate
it to chronological age. Furthermore, the large modern human sample will be
useful for re-evaluation and refinement of osteological standards. This research
will contribute to the doctoral dissertation and training of a female graduate
student. Finally, this project will foster international collaboration between
the United States and institutions in Africa, Asia, and Europe.