* 0925071
* RCN:   Establishment of an Epigenomics of Plants International Consortium (EPIC)
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2010,08/31/2016
* Robert Martienssen, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* thomas okita
* 08/31/2016
* USD 634,846.00

PI: Doris Wagner (University of Pennsylvania)

CoPIs: Craig S. Pikaard (Indiana University) and Robert Martienssen (Cold Spring
Harbor Laboratory)

An ever-expanding community of researchers is exploiting the many advantages of
plants for epigenetics and epigenomics research. The overall goal of this
Research Collaborative Network (RCN) is to organize the US and international
plant epigenomics research communities in order to prioritize goals and research
needs aimed at efficiently deciphering how chromatin and epigenetic regulation
at the genome level controls plant form and function. Aims of the RCN include
identifying the intellectual, technological and bioinformatics needs that
currently limit progress of the field, promoting data sharing, and developing
community standards for data collection, data deposition and data dissemination.
Achievement of these aims will be catalyzed by a steering committee of
epigenomics experts who will organize discussion workshops on specific topics
and design online surveys that will solicit input and suggestions from self-
registered members of the plant epigenomics community. The efforts of the RCN
will include formation of an Epigneomics of Plants International Consortium
(EPIC) and the drafting of a document outlining recommendations for future
funding priorities.

Broader Impacts:

The EPIC RCN initiative will include development and maintenance of an EPIC
website that will serve as a "one-stop portal" for community input and
information sharing, which will be accessible via
http://www.bio.upenn.edu/faculty/wagner/#research. This website will also
contain information about the activities of the RCN and educational information
about epigenetics and epigenomics as areas of investigation. In addition, the
EPIC initiative will work towards the establishment of a central epigenomics
data repository and a user-friendly browser tool that will allow unified display
of different types of epigenomics data. Finally, the RCN initiative will
actively seek to identify ways to improve participation of young scientists,
underrepresented minorities, and students at both large universities and small
colleges in plant epigenomic research.