* 0925844
* US-Ireland collaborative research on Future Oxides and Channel materials for Ultimate Scaling (FOCUS)
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Yves Chabal, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 08/31/2013
* USD 329,999.00

Abstract: Proposal #0925844&lt;br/&gt;Robert M. Wallace, University of Texas at
Dallas&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This award is funded under the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5)"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An
international collaboration project ?Future Oxides and Channel materials for
Ultimate Scaling (FOCUS)? between US, Ireland and Northern Ireland investigators
is established. The project will investigate the chemical, structural, and
electrical properties of advanced materials for high performance integrated
circuits. The project will employ the unique expertise and capabilities of
researchers at Dublin City University (DCU), Queen?s University Belfast (QUB),
the Tyndall National Institute at University College Cork (Tyndall), and the
University of Texas at Dallas (UTD). &lt;br/&gt;The research focuses on the
heart of advanced, high performance integrated circuits ? the transistor gate
stack ? and examines the fundamental impact of three key device components: (1)
surface passivation, (2) fabrication of Ge and III-V high-k MOS gate stacks, and
(3) carrier mobility measurements in Ge and III-V surface channel MOSFETs. The
investigators will examine high-Z chalcogenides (Se and Te) using a combination
of unique, state-of-the-art in-situ and ex-situ characterization techniques,
resulting in a fundamental understanding of the device surfaces and interfaces
at the sub-nanometer scale. In addition to physicochemical investigations of
these passivated surfaces, the performance for device applications will be
evaluated electrically through the fabrication of capacitor and transistor
devices. These investigators will also contribute to various activities aimed at
articulating the excitement of the research to students in the science and
technology pipeline.