* 0925993
* Dual-Layer Cooperative Error Control for Reliable Nanoscale On-Chip Interconnection Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2015
* Paul Ampadu, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* GEORGE HADDAD
* 07/31/2015
* USD 290,095.00

&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to investigate energy-efficient
cooperative dual-layer (data link and network layers) error control methods for
nanoscale networks-on-chip. The approach is to combine hop-to-hop error
detection at the data link layer with adaptive routing and end-to-end forward
error correction at the network layer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With respect to
intellectual merit, this research addresses the problem that, with aggressive
technology scaling, interconnects become increasingly susceptible to noise and
they emerge as the critical bottleneck in meeting reliability and energy
constraints in nanoscale systems-on-chip. Research in reliable interconnects has
typically investigated solutions at a single layer, e.g. physical or electrical.
This research considers the hardware efficiency of switch-level error detection
combined with the reliability performance of network-layer forward error
correction, with the goal of simultaneously improving reliability and energy
use. In particular, this research seeks to: (i) create new efficient codes for
error detection and correction across layers in a network-on-chip; (ii) devise
innovative methods, using configurable spare wires and adaptive routing, to
manage intermittent and permanent errors; and (iii) examine and develop methods
to mitigate the impact of faults in the encoder/decoder circuits
themselves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With respect to broader impact, this research
has the potential to create a new reliable interconnect design approach that can
accelerate advances in scalable multi-core systems-on-chip. This breakthrough
could have significant societal and economic impact with the realization of
reliable energy-efficient integrated systems for numerous applications, ranging
from infrastructure monitoring to health care. Knowledge generated is
disseminated through workshops, lectures and a public website. This research
actively engages underrepresented minority and female students and extends
outreach through international collaborations to broaden the global perspectives
of U.S. students.