* 0925783
* Collaborative Research: Single walled nanotubes and Graphene based multiplexed sensors for hypergolic fuel detection
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Ahalapitiya Jayatissa, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2013
* USD 157,144.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Objective: &lt;br/&gt;Accurate
and reliable detection of hypergolic fuels such as hydrazine and its derivatives
is vital in missile defense agency, aviation, homeland security, and chemical
industry. More importantly these sensors need to be operated at low temperatures
though most of the widely used chemical sensors operate at moderately high
temperatures. Single walled carbon nanotubes and monolayer graphene are known to
exhibit extreme sensitivity towards the changes in the local chemical
environment at room temperatures. This proposal presents a methodology to
fabricate a sensor platform consisting of arrays of carbon nanotubes and
graphene with systematically modified surface properties.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The proposed novel sensor
mechanism is based on the transduction of thermoelectric voltage of carbon
nanotubes and graphene. Integration of nanotubes and graphene in tandem can
complement for the limitations of each structure. Thermoelectric power is
believed to be more informative and sensitive compared to conventional resistive
response. A common heater provides the necessary temperature gradient for the
transduction of thermoelectric voltage for all the sensor elements providing
easy means for multiplexing. The main thrust of this proposal is to improve the
sensing properties of carbon nanotube and graphene based gas sensors by
understanding the mechanism underpinning the selectivity and sensing properties.
Thermoelectric voltage measurement would enable the use of simple interface to
standard electronics without need of an excitation current through each sensor
filament. The proposed research will lead to fabrication of superior
gas/chemical sensors based on (i) a novel platform of multiplexing of carbon
nanotube networks and graphene (ii) a sensing technique based on the
transduction of thermoelectric voltage. Also the proposed research is
transformative in many ways such as controlled formation of Graphene Nano-
ribbons and controlled depositions of graphene by a simple pick and place
technique onto test platforms. The key component of the proposed method includes
manipulation of graphene by electrostatic tools. The knowledge obtained from
this research will be beneficial in future nanoelectronics and nanoscience
beyond this project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project will have both scientific and educational impact. The
scientific impact is associated with the furthering of the fundamental
understanding of principles underpinning the fabrication techniques towards high
performance, interaction of gases and chemicals at surfaces, and surface
modification effects on sensitivity of carbon nanotubes and graphene. Combining
the efforts at The University of Louisville and The University of Toledo, new
education programs for research training and outreach activities will be
initiated. Two graduate students will be sponsored to exchange research
knowledge/facilities between the two research laboratories. The outreach
programs include involvement of high school communities in research, workshops,
and preparation for scholarships. These outreach activities will provide every
opportunity for underrepresented and female student communities in
Louisville/Kentucky and Toledo/Ohio. The investigators plan to develop a text
book and a popular book in progressive nanoscience that can be highly beneficial
resources for future generation. These activities will enhance the public
awareness about nanotechnology and current nanomaterials technology. The
research outcomes will be integrated into the undergraduate and graduate
curriculum by sharing the course materials at both institutions. &lt;br/&gt;