* 0925345
* Numerical Simulations and Observations
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Deirdre Shoemaker, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2011
* USD 107,156.00

This award supports a number of projects related to computer simulation of
binary black holes, the gravitational waves they produce, and the interface of
these waveforms with LIGO data analysis. Projects include modeling binary black
hole systems of unequal-mass, spinning and eccentric binaries, providing
waveforms including assessments of their quality based on measures used in
gravitational-wave data analysis, providing crucial information about black-hole
kick velocities and spins to astrophysicists, estimating the template space for
numerically generated, binary-black-hole waveforms, and exploring the physics
behind the waveforms through reduced experiments like distorted black holes and
black holes evolved in the presence of a strong gravitational wave. An
additional goal is to enhance and accelerate the connection between numerical
relativity and data analysis and build stronger ties to the general public
through research. The interdisciplinary projects supported by this award,
applying numerical relativity to astrophysics and data analysis, form an ideal
ground for training the next generation of gravitational-wave physicists. The
project includes an outreach plan that capitalizes on the excitement the public
has for black holes---publishing the images and movies that are generated in the
pursuit of binary-black-hole mergers on the web in a format accessible to the
general public, with links to other resources for the public on this
topic.&lt;br/&gt;The imminent detection of gravitational waves will open a new
window on the universe. Facilities such as the Laser Interferometer
Gravitational-Wave Observatory (LIGO) are now operational and searching the sky.
Fundamental to the success of the search for gravitational waves is the
theoretical modeling of the sources that produce them. Over the past year,
numerical relativity has begun to successfully solve Einstein's equations
governing gravity for the strongest source of gravitational waves, the final few
orbits and plunge of two black holes. Taken together with gravitational wave
detection, these models probe the mysteries of general relativity by
interpreting what nature is telling us about gravity. Given the time and
computational cost necessary to evolve the black hole binaries, a cost that will
increase as more of the parameter space is explored, the coupling of numerical
relativity and data analysis becomes increasingly important.