* 0925809
* GOALI: Sensorless condition monitoring and prognostics for automotive alternators
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* James Mayor, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2014
* USD 349,887.00

The objective of this research is to develop a combination of physics-, model-,
and data-based diagnostic and prognostic algorithms for clawpole synchronous
alternators that are widely used in automotive applications. The approach is to
meet this objective using only voltage and current sensors. This is accomplished
by creating detailed electromagnetic and mechanical models of alternators. Next,
diagnostic rules are developed by relating the features of the output current to
failure modes. Then, prognostic techniques are developed to predict RUL and
fault severity based on test bench data, heuristic progression models, and a
comparison to developed models for faulty machines.

Intellectual Merit

The intellectual merit of this research includes an improved understanding of
alternator failure mechanisms, and their manifestation in features of the output
current, new algorithms for sensorless data-based diagnostics, and new
techniques for prognostics which involve the inclusion of heuristic, model-based
and experimentally-derived information. These concepts will be proven on actual
hardware test platforms and using design data from the manufacturer.

Broader Impacts

Research benefits include the timely and accurate detection of alternator
problems which will decrease stranded motorist incidences and significantly
decrease misdiagnoses, thereby resulting in warranty cost savings. Also, the
project results will improved automotive reliability affects the entire economy,
and reduce maintenance costs and warranty costs which directly affect consumer
prices. This represents many millions of dollars per year. This technology
applied in US cars will improve our countrys competitiveness. Finally, the work
on prognostics will benefit all types and applications of electric machines. The
research will also contribute to new graduate course content as well as to
training of undergraduate and graduate students. Building on existing
collaboration with the institution's Opportunity Scholars Program, an effort
will be made to recruit students from underrepresented groups.