* 0925177
* Mapping, Modeling and Understanding the Magnetic Chromosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 11/05/2008,11/30/2011
* Scott McIntosh, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Bellaire
* 11/30/2011
* USD 285,384.00

The solar chromosphere contains the Sun's "magnetic transition region," a thin
layer where hydrodynamic and magnetic forces come into balance. In the magnetic
transition region, linear theories break down and, in principle, the mechanical
restoring force from subphotospheric convective turbulence can be converted into
a dissipative form to provide energetic input to the outer solar atmosphere. The
PI's team proposes to obtain better understanding of the physics of the magnetic
transition region and to investigate the flow of mass and energy through the
solar chromosphere. This will represent an important step toward discovering the
physical processes that heat the Sun's corona to over one million degrees Kelvin
and accelerate the solar wind, the two most outstanding puzzles in solar
physics. The PI and his collaborators plan to determine the properties of the
magnetic transition region through observational and theoretical studies of the
seismic response of the chromospheric plasma to the passage of acoustic/magneto-
acoustic waves through it. These waves are generated by a variety of sources in
the solar interior, many of which are related to convective phenomena. The
strength of the proposed research program lies in the synthesis between
interpretation and diagnosis of observations and advanced simulations of the
chromospheric plasma by a team that consists of experts in each area.

The proposers believe that the proposed research will increase our understanding
of the changing flow of mass and energy through the chromosphere at the very
beginning of the Solar-Terrestrial Connection. This effort will offer insight
into a broad range of fundamental physical processes in the solar chromosphere
and point to their potential impact within the solar system. The proposed
research will exploit data from both existing and planned NSF and NASA funded
observing platforms. The PI expected that this project, based on its interplay
of instrumentation, observation, data analysis, and simulation, would provide a
potentially exciting basis for an excellent Ph.D. thesis research program.