* 0925454
* Research Starter Grant:   VIRAL INDUCTION OF GROWTH ANOMALIES IN CORAL
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2009,01/31/2011
* Rebecca Vega, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Beth Saffo
* 01/31/2011
* USD 50,000.00

Corals are important components of reefs, providing food and habitat to
thousands of tropical species. In the last few decades, disease outbreaks have
led to significant reductions in coral populations worldwide, yet almost nothing
is known about the viruses that infect corals. This project will collect new
data on the types of viruses in corals and evaluate the effects of viral
infection on reefs. Specifically, the investigators will address the hypothesis
that viruses (most notably herpes-like viruses) infect and cause tumors or
growth anomalies (GAs) on Pacific reef building corals. Using next generation
genomic technology, investigators will use gene sequences to compare and
contrast the viral types found in healthy corals to those contained within
tumors. This novel approach will not only determine if these diseases are the
result of viral infection and transformation, but will also generate new data on
a group of unknown viruses and provide insight into viral evolution. The project
is will also provide data that can better inform policy makers about how to
control viral outbreaks including limiting the spread of infection and disease
on coral. Additionally, previously identified coral viruses are distantly
related to human herpesviruses, and this continued project will help further
evaluate the function and mechanism of herpes viral infection, including how
they infect tissues and cause tumor formation in animals. Finally, this project
will begin the training of several young female scientists as part of their
graduate education; providing them funds to conduct their research and allowing
them to present their work at international and domestic conferences.