* 0925755
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: A Histomorphometric Analysis of Muscular Insertion Regions: Understanding Enthesis Etiology
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,05/31/2011
* Stephen Schlecht, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 05/31/2011
* USD 5,743.00

An enthesis is the interface where tendon meets bone, providing both muscle
anchorage and stress dissipation. Previous anthropological research suggests
size and complexity of entheses observable in skeletal material, are indicative
of the strain magnitude resulting from repetitive muscle contractions during the
performance of daily routines. However, enthesial expression has never
explicitly been linked to activity intensity. This study investigates the
relationship between enthesis location and mechanical loading (via muscle
contraction) in non-weight bearing human radii, quantifying histological
evidence of remodeled bone resulting from strain-induced fatigue damage.

Methods employed in this study follow the principle that fatigue damage
accumulated over time weakens bone, initiating cellular units to remove damaged
matrix and replace it with new bone bundles referred to as osteons. Newly formed
osteons are considered intact, while those partially removed over time following
additional remodeling events are considered fragments. With this theoretical
understanding, thin sections from three regions of the radial shaft associated
with seven muscle bodies responsible for forearm movement are harvested from 30
human cadavers and prepared for histologic analysis. Osteon population densities
(OPD), or number of intact and fragmentary osteons per unit area, reflect the
visible remodeling history of bone compacta. Osteon area reflects strain level.
Both variables are quantified in eight zones derived from the anterioposterior
and mediolateral axes, and their intersecting planes; encompassing all potential
regions of tendon insertion. Thus, zones of high strain are reflected by an
elevation in mechanically-induced remodeling (OPD), and a presence of smaller
osteons for increased fatigue resistance. Presence of considerable remodeling
histories along axes associated with entheses will suggest stress concentrated
in these regions potentially results from direct tendon pull, bolstering
assertions that mechanical strain primarily influences enthesial development.

Intellectually, this study potentially furthers our biomechanical understanding
of entheses, while offering a preliminary investigation into the utility of
enthesial measures in anthropologically-based behavioral reconstructions. In
broader terms, understanding the unique intricacies and variances of human
radial bone remodeling in response to strain, may help clarify understanding of
skeletal responses to habitual activity in the locomotive-free human upper limb.
Additionally, results will expand the theoretical core of mechanically-induced
bone remodeling; which is paramount to paleoanthropologists, skeletal
biologists, primatologists, and orthopaedic surgeons alike. This doctoral
dissertation research project will contribute to the academic training of a
graduate student.