* 0925688
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: The Effects of Food Processing on Mechanical Properties and Masticatory (Chewing) Performance
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Daniel Lieberman, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 08/31/2012
* USD 9,150.00

Processing food is a universal human behavior. The effects of food modification
on hominin biology are poorly understood, however, and most research focuses on
thermal processing (cooking), leaving non-thermal, mechanical processing methods
largely unstudied. To address these gaps in understanding, this research tests
the effects of simple mechanical processing (pounding and slicing) and cooking
(roasting) on masticatory (chewing) performance. The general hypothesis tested
is that the effects of mechanical processing on food material properties may
help account for dental size reductions within the genus Homo prior to the
adoption of cooking. To test this hypothesis, 14 subjects will chew size-
standardized samples of raw or processed food. EMG (electromyographic)
recordings of muscle activity and correlated bite-force data will be collected
from masticatory muscles and a predictive model used to determine whether
mechanical processing can account for tooth size decreases prior to the Middle
Paleolithic, when archeological evidence for cooking first becomes abundant. The
efficiency of food breakdown in the mouth (rate of food fragmentation per chew)
and data on the foods' mechanical properties will also be collected.

Intellectual merits- This study is among the first to assess how cooking and
mechanical processing of representative foods affect key biomechanical
properties of mastication such as chew number, force production and food
fragmentation efficiency. There has been much debate concerning cooking in human
evolution, but while this study experimentally tests the masticatory performance
effects on roasted foods, it also tests other potentially important forms of
food processing that probably predate cooking, notably mechanical tenderization
and slicing. Broader Impacts- This research promotes graduate education and will
result in a Ph.D. for a female graduate student. Additionally, the data
generated will increase knowledge on hominin diets, food mechanical properties,
processing effects and chewing performance. Given interest in cooking and other
food processing techniques, the results are relevant to a wide variety of fields
including anthropology, food science, evolutionary biology and anatomy.