* 0925469
* Information Theoretical Approach to Data Converters Design: Turbo-code A/D Converters
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2009,02/28/2014
* Zeljko Ignjatovic, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* GEORGE HADDAD
* 02/28/2014
* USD 325,083.00

The objective of this research is to develop a new class of high performance
analog-to-digital converters. The approach is to treat an analog-to-digital
converter as a communication channel and to employ concepts from information and
communications theory in its analysis and design. Existing architectures fall
far short of the theoretical "conversion capacity," the maximum bit resolution -
bandwidth product achievable for a given device technology. However, by
employing turbo-coding principles and other near-capacity achieving coding
schemes, converter architectures that approach theoretical conversion capacity
are possible.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This research
synthesizes two previously disconnected fields, information theory and analog
integrated circuit design, to give new insights into analog-to-digital converter
performance limits and to lead to architectures that will enable the theoretical
performance limits to be reached by employing advanced coding strategies to
overcome practical limitations such as device switching speed and
noise.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Improved analog-to-digital
converters will enable applications such as software-defined radio to improve
the telecommunications infrastructure, digital radar receivers to improve the
safety of air travel and benefit the defense industry, high precision seismic
sensing applications used in the exploration for oil and natural gas, and
numerous other applications. Working with the University of Rochester's Kearns
Center for Leadership and Diversity in Science and Engineering a diverse group
of students at all levels, from high school through doctoral level, will be
recruited for the project. New pedagogical material also will be created and
widely disseminated.