* 0925466
* Exact Modeling of Power and Energy Transduction for Optimum Design of Structurally-Integrated Thin-Film Active Sensors
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Victor Giurgiutiu, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Massimo Ruzzene
* 08/31/2014
* USD 239,997.00

The research objective of this project is to develop fundamental understanding
and predictive modeling of power and energy transduction in structurally
integrated thin-film active sensors for autonomous structural health monitoring
(SHM). The educational objective is to address active sensors education and
outreach with involvement of underrepresented minorities.&lt;br/&gt;The adequate
modeling of power and energy transduction in structurally integrated thin-film
sensors and actuators is of prime importance in the design of energy-efficient
autonomous systems because it affects battery life and energy harvesting needs.
The approach will consist of fast and efficient analytical modeling, numerical
simulation, and experimental validation. The focus will be on exact analytical
modeling of the shear-lag interaction between a thin-film active sensor and the
multi-modal ultrasonic waves present in the structure. The methodology will be
first developed for isotropic metallic plates and then extended to generic
multi-layer anisotropic systems (e.g., adhesive bonding, composites, or hybrid
structures).&lt;br/&gt;The outcome will be an advanced methodology for modeling
of power and energy transduction in structurally integrated thin-film active
sensors. This methodology will allow rapid and accurate exploration of the
design space to achieve optimum transduction efficiency for long-term operation
of autonomous SHM systems and other autonomous active sensing
devices.&lt;br/&gt;