* 0925664
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Kelsey Needham Dancause: Health Transition in Vanuatu
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2010
* J. Koji Lum, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 08/31/2010
* USD 9,217.00

This project will examine the effects of the health transition in Vanuatu, a
South Pacific archipelago. The health transition is the shift from infectious to
noncommunicable diseases, such as obesity, Type II Diabetes Mellitus, and
hypertension. Populations in Vanuatu are experiencing the health transition at
varying rates. This transition is associated with changing diet and physical
activity levels occurring with modernization, and with decreasing infectious
disease burdens. These factors influence growth, development, and energy
balance. In 2007, the researchers surveyed populations experiencing the health
transition in Vanuatu. They collected measurements useful for predicting chronic
disease risk, such as height, weight, percent body fat, and blood pressure. They
also analyzed diet and activity patterns. These data show how diet and activity
influence body composition. To complement these data, in this project the
researchers will analyze how decreasing malaria rates influence body
composition. They will analyze health records from the National Statistics
Office, growth surveys from national screenings, and malaria transmission rates
from the 1950s to the present. Decreasing malaria burdens are expected to be
associated with better growth and changing body composition. Understanding how
malaria control influences body composition will assist the researchers in
distinguishing the effects of infectious disease control from the effects of
changing diet and activity patterns. The health transition is a global
phenomenon, and this project holds intellectual merit because it will inform our
understanding of a widespread health concern. It will increase our knowledge
about how body composition changes with infectious disease control, and which
factors contribute to increased chronic disease risk during the health
transition. Broader impacts include applying these findings in predicting future
population health outcomes and in chronic disease prevention efforts. This
project will contribute to the doctoral dissertation and training of a female
graduate student and to continued collaboration with international health
officials.

