* 0925545
* Collaborative Research: Active Plasmonics for Mid-Infrared Sensing
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Mohamed Diagne, Connecticut College
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2012
* USD 118,200.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

Objective: This program will demonstrate semiconductor-based tuning mechanisms
for active control of mid-infrared (mid-IR) plasmonic structures and the
integration of these mechanisms with surface-plasmon based devices for sensing
applications. This includes 1) development of semiconductor-based tuning
mechanisms to control the spectral properties of plasmonic structures with
optical resonances in the mid-infrared, 2) investigation of the enhanced mid-IR
absorption of materials on planar plasmonic surfaces and finally 3) integration
of tunable plasmonic materials into prototype mid-IR sensing systems.

Intellectual Merit: The field of plasmonics is of significant current interest
for applications in display technology, sensing, and optical interconnects, to
name only a few. The vast majority of the research in plasmonics has been in the
visible/near-IR or terahertz wavelength ranges, and has focused on passive
devices. The mid-infrared, however, is a technologically important wavelength
range for sensing applications, and offers the possibility of integrating
plasmonic devices with traditional semiconductor materials. The proposed
research is transformative in nature as it will 1) advance the understanding of
surface-plasmon enhanced absorption in the mid-IR, 2) lead to actively tunable
plasmonic materials with broad tuning ranges, and 3) demonstrate novel compact
systems for optical sensing applications.

Broader Impacts: The development of active plasmonic devices will lead to new
compact sensor systems, with environmental, medical, and industrial sensing
applications. In addition, the proposed work contains a significant education
and outreach component, which will lead to laboratory-based research
opportunities for undergraduates at UMass Lowell and Connecticut College, as
well as K-12 students in the Lowell public school system.