* 0925370
* Collaborative Research: Austral Portals Workshop: Tectonics, Paleogeography and Biogeography
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* David Barbeau, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Isern
* 08/31/2011
* USD 7,500.00

This award supports a workshop at the American Museum of Natural History in May
2010 with the explicit goal of charting a path towards rectifying apparent
incongruities in the paleobiogeographic and plate tectonic histories of peri-
Antarctic Gondwana. The "Austral Portals" workshop is designed to bring together
investigators from a broad swath of geological and biological disciplines whose
interests converge on sorting out the manifold consequences of the breakup of
Gondwana, with the primary goal of focusing on the newest research on the
paleogeography and paleobiogeography of Antarctica and the western parts of the
supercontinent (South America and Africa/India/Madagascar). One prominent reason
for bringing together this group at this time is that there are several specific
instances of disagreement concerning how the paleogeography of Antarctica may or
may not have influenced the distribution of terrestrial biotas in the interval
140-40 Ma. Much of the relevant work has been published only in the last few
years, yet largely remains unfamiliar to investigators who may be working in
very different areas of scientific inquiry. Another major issue concerns the
timing of the opening of para-Antarctic oceanic gateways, such as the Drake
Passage, and how these seaways may have affected climate and, indirectly, the
evolution of austral biotas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;