* 0925671
* A Multi-Sited Social Science Analysis of African Diaspora Engagement in Homeland Health
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Joyce Millen, Willamette University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2013
* USD 446,100.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Dr. Joyce V. Millen of Willamette University will undertake a three-year
research and educational program to advance understanding of African diaspora-
driven health philanthropy in the context of Africa's acute shortage of medical
personnel. She will compare two migratory linkages: (1) between Senegal and
France and (2) between Ghana and the United States. The research is designed to
follow the circulatory trajectories of Senegalese and Ghanaian associations and
health professionals from host countries of employment to countries of origin.

The researcher and her colleagaues will conduct ethnographic research among a
select sample of Senegalese and Ghanaian diaspora associations in France and the
United States. They will document the networks and processes through which these
associations articulate with state and multilateral agencies in their efforts to
transfer medical skills and health resources to their countries of origin. They
will collect life history interviews among individual Senegalese and Ghanaian
medical providers in the diaspora to ascertain on migration, work, and
philanthropic efforts. The histories will provide data to assess whether class,
duration away from homeland, and level of connectivity with homeland, among
other variables, are predictive of diaspora philanthropic engagement. The last
year of the study will culminate with ethnographic research in the Senegalese
and Ghanaian towns identified in the first phases of research as recipient
communities of diaspora-led efforts. The aim of this last phase of research is
to ascertain how the medical philanthropic projects are being implemented and
received locally.

The educational component of the program employs a novel collaborative model
that enables select American students to conduct ethnographic research in direct
collaboration with African counterpart students from universities in Senegal and
Ghana. The findings of this research will bring needed critical analysis to bear
on current received wisdom regarding the potentials of "diasporas for
development." The study will also bring empirically-grounded anthropological
insights to broader disciplinary debates on transnationalism and
deterritorialized citizenries.

