* 0925505
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science:  Center-Right
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Jennifer Miller, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2011
* USD 10,504.00

When do European center-right political parties make appeals to visible minority
voters? What are the consequences of these strategies on the contours of
national identity? Traditionally, European center-right parties portrayed
themselves as defenders of the nation and have been willing to stoke fears of
growing minority populations for electoral gain. Yet in the past twenty years,
many of these parties have increasingly reached out to visible ethnic minority
voters through organizational, programmatic, and symbolic means.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To explain this shift, the literature invokes two
rationales: outreach is either an attempt to siphon off a portion of a sizable
constituency or it is a tactic to garner the support of centrist white voters.
These analyses are lacking because they do not consider outreach in proportional
systems nor do they identify the conditions under which one type of outreach
predominates. Moreover, scholars ignore the trade-offs inherent in reaching out
to a constituency that a political party previously
marginalized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project fills the gap in this literature
by adjudicating between the rationales for outreach and gauging the effects of
these strategies on national identity. Identifying the determinants for outreach
merits an explanation as it has implications for the representation of minority
interests: Outreach pursued to soften the party's image will not further the
interests of visible minorities, whereas outreach targeted toward visible
minorities will. To gain leverage on party rationale, outreach is disaggregated
outreach into substantive and symbolic appeals. This project argues that to be
credible and acceptable to conservative constituencies, center-right parties
couple outreach with tough rhetoric on immigration, and recast national identity
to include visible minorities without distorting its preexisting form. This
project uses computational linguistics to help create the dependent variable of
outreach from media reports, and employs a multinomial multilevel model to test
its hypotheses regarding the determinants of outreach. It also includes
interviews with party elites and community leaders in Denmark, France, Great
Britain, and the Netherlands to gauge establish the mechanisms behind the
correlations, as well as gauge how preexisting notions of national identity
influence how parties cast "the nation" in their
appeals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project are two-fold.
First, it provides a much needed comparative analysis of parties and visible
minorities. Previous studies have either focused on local politics in a handful
of cities or explained the integration of visible minorities into a single
country's political party system. This study takes a decidedly comparative view,
explaining when visible minorities become the object of party competition.
Second, it generates insights on the dynamics of national identity and the
interplay between identity and institutions. Large-scale immigration in the
post-war era has disrupted the European myth of the homogeneous nation-state,
forcing Europeans to rethink what it means to be a member of the national
community. This fundamental question regarding the substance of national
identity can be best explored through the lens of political parties. Through
their positions on ethnic relations and immigration policies, we observe elite
and popular debates over identity, and how identity builders handle these trade-
offs in the context of varying electoral institutions. Consequently, the project
analyzes the interplay of identity and institutions.