* 0925717
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Gene Loss During Catarrhine Evolution With Possible Implications for the Evolution of Resistance to Viral Infections
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Idalia Rodriguez, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 08/31/2011
* USD 15,000.00

Certain pathogens, including viruses, appear to utilize the alpha1-3GT gene, its
enzymatic pathway, or its product gal-alpha1-3Gal in their infection cycles.
This study investigates how the alpha1-3GT gene and its product, gal-alpha1-3Gal
(present on host cells), affect viral infectivity in primates. Among mammals,
catarrhines (Old World monkeys and apes) are the only ones that do not express
the alpha1-3GT gene which was inactivated ~28 million years ago. If it can be
established that these pathogens do indeed use the gene, its enzymatic pathway,
or its product, in their infection cycles, then the selective advantage of this
gene inactivation becomes clear. To test this possibility, experiments will
probe the mechanisms by which viruses can (or cannot) utilize the gene or gene
product. In vitro experiments on parallel mouse and primate cell lines,
genetically modified to express the alpha1-3GT gene, will test the differential
infectivity of viruses. Additionally, genetically modified mouse lines, one
expressing the alpha1-3GT gene and the other with the gene "knockedout" will be
used to corroborate in vitro work and to test pathogenesis.&lt;br/&gt;This
research elucidates how different viruses use glycosylation pathways or
carbohydrates as binding sites or receptors. This has biomedical implications by
contributing to understanding how the immune system responses to infection. It
also elucidates variation in viral virulence in catarrhines and other species
including its contribution to selective pressures and species survival. The
broader impacts of this study include primate conservation, as conservation
biologists are increasingly aware of the threat of emerging diseases in primate
communities. Understanding which viruses are likely to be most dangerous to
particular hosts may be critical in making informed policy decisions. This
doctoral dissertation research project will contribute to the academic training
of a female graduate student who is a member of the American Hispanic community.
This research will broaden her ability to contribute to the growing discipline
of global disease ecology.