* 0925994
* Rapid Fabrication of Three-Dimensional Structures Using Magnetically-Responsive Low-Melting-Point Alloys
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,02/28/2013
* Ainissa Ramirez, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 02/28/2013
* USD 345,000.00

The research objective of this award is to develop magnetically-responsive, low-
melting-point metal alloys (consisting of magnetic particles in a metal matrix)
that can be manipulated remotely using a magnetic field. These materials will
enable the movement of metal into vertical geometries and hard-to-reach
locations to create three-dimensional small-scale assemblies. With a systematic
study, this program will provide an understanding of reliable methods for
synthesis and the effect of dispersions on the mechanical and electrical
properties as well as the wetting and viscosity behavior. Lastly, this work will
also investigate various 3D geometries that can be generated with these
materials and explore magnetic-induction heating conditions best suited for
these alloys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research
will provide an opportunity to rapidly fabricate three-dimensional metallic
structures. These alloys will display enhanced mechanical strength, by
dispersion hardening, for strong interconnects and allow direct heating by
magnetic induction. Such materials will benefit the fabrication and packaging of
small-scaled devices. In addition to this research pursuit, this program will
also seek opportunities to mentor and train future scientists and will make an
effort to get schoolchildren engaged in science, with a fun science lecture
series called, Science Saturdays (www.sciencesaturdays.org).&lt;br/&gt;