* 0925818
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Neandertal Behavior as Inferred from Incisor Microwear Texture Analysis
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Peter Ungar, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 08/31/2011
* USD 15,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Neandertal fossils from Europe and the Near East provide a rich
source of data for the investigation of this hominin's behavior. Their teeth are
especially important, although much about them remains unexplained. Perhaps the
most distinctive enigma is the unusual wear pattern found on the incisors. The
most commonly accepted explanation for the excessive gross wear and labio-
lingual (cheek-tongue) rounding is non-dietary use of the anterior teeth. This
was inferred by analogy from ethnographic accounts of Alaskan Eskimo and
Canadian and Greenland Inuit populations that used their front teeth as tools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this study is to investigate the possible
causes of Neandertal anterior tooth wear using dental microwear texture
analysis. Point clouds of microscopic wear surfaces of anterior teeth of
Neandertals, early anatomically modern humans that overlapped these extinct
hominins in time, and comparative bioarcheological human groups with documented
subsistence behaviors will be created using a white-light scanning confocal
profiler. These will be analyzed using the scale-sensitive fractal analysis
computer software packages Toothfrax and SFrax. Five variables will be measured,
each describing different aspects of microwear surface textures. Climatic models
and stable isotope data will then be integrated with the microwear data to
reconstruct anterior tooth use behaviors of Neandertals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Studies of dental microwear on the anterior teeth of
Neandertals and early anatomically modern humans will facilitate the
reconstruction of tooth use behaviors, and help identify differences and
similarities between these groups. The baseline series used to relate patterns
of incisor wear to use will be the most comprehensive of its type to date, and
will allow for the inference of diet and anterior tooth use in other fossil
hominins as well as other bioarcheological populations. The broader impacts of
this study include: This doctoral dissertation research project will contribute
to the academic training of a female graduate student in an EPSCoR state.
Research experience will be provided for undergraduates and minority high school
students in an Upward Bound pre-college advancement program.