* 0925151
* The Role of Information-Communication Technologies in Enterprise Development and Industrial Change in Africa:  Evidence from South Africa and Tanzania
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Padraig Carmody, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2013
* USD 230,000.00

Can new information and communication technologies (ICTs) enable African firms
to significantly improve their performance and upgrade their technological
capabilities in line with global industrial standards? The changing structure of
international trade offers significant opportunities for African firms and some
believe that ICTs can rapidly accelerate Africa's global market integration by
helping small, medium, and micro-scale enterprises (SMMEs) become significantly
more productive, innovative, and competitive. While there is general agreement
about ICTs' importance, substantive questions remain regarding if and how they
can dramatically improve SMME performance and whether investments in these
should take precedence over other priorities such as the development of roads.

Dr. James Murphy at Clark University and Dr. Padraig R Carmody at Trinity
College will address questions about ICTs and their significance through an in-
depth examination of 'if' and 'how' mobile phone, computer, and internet use are
influencing SMME development in South Africa and in Tanzania's tourism and wood
products industries. The investigators will apply four distinct yet interrelated
conceptual approaches: resource-based views on enterprise development; time-
geography perspectives on the contribution of technology to mobility and
accessibility constraints; conceptualizations of upgrading from the global value
chain literature; and theories on socio-technical regime transitions from
science and technology studies. This four-pillared approach will enable the
research team to detail the contributions of ICTs from three vantage points:
intra-firm development, industrial transformation in particular industries and
countries, and their implications for global market integration. The
investigators will employ a mixture of surveys and in-depth interviews to obtain
data on the extent, intensity, and cost of ICT use; SMME performance since ICT
adoption; the specific contributions of ICTs to production, marketing, and
innovation; changes in the time-space characteristics of everyday business
activities since ICT adoption; and the contribution of ICTs to changes in the
technological capabilities of SMMEs. The study will yield findings that
contribute significantly to theories of technological change and industrial
development. Moreover, the project will have significant comparative
implications as the investigators analyze two different kinds of industry (wood
products, tourism) in two different African countries (South Africa, Tanzania).
In a broader sense, the study will help policy makers more effectively target
and weigh ICT investments against other development priorities, such as public
health and education, and will improve our understandings of what ICTs mean for
the everyday lives of Africans. The study will also demonstrate how empirical
research in Africa can contribute significantly to general theories on
technology and industrial development. The project will also have significant
educational impacts as research assistants and students in Ireland, the USA,
South Africa, and Tanzania are supported and trained throughout its duration.