* 0925034
* Integrated Space-time Strategies for Imaging and Communication in Complex Environments
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Akira Ishimaru, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2012
* USD 238,615.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The objective of this research is the development of new generalized integrated
imaging and communication technologies making use of recent studies on several
techniques such as time-reversal imaging, correlation imaging, and array
coherence tomographic imaging. These integrated techniques offer new areas of
research with a potential for practical applications. The approach is the
combined use of analytical, numerical and experimental studies for the specific
topics of: (i) information fusion of multiple imaging sensors; (ii) coherent
passive radars making use of angle-of-arrival estimation and ambiguity function;
and (iii) research on communications through complex environments unifying
propagation research and signal processing. Theories and computations are often
based on assumptions and approximations and it is important to verify the
results by experiments. This research includes experiments using the proposed
methods to verify the theories and to point to new improvement of theories.

The intellectual merit of this research is new theoretical foundations which
unify propagation and scattering theories and signal processing research. These
two areas are largely separately developed. This research, therefore, intends to
focus on the unified treatment of space-time wave propagation and scattering,
multiple imaging sensors, and signal processing.

The broader impacts are the creation of new technologies which should help
expand wireless communication and imaging in complex environments. The training
and education of students is a priority. The dissemination of the results
through classes helps students to understand new areas of integrated theories
and measurement, statistical considerations, fusion of multiple imaging sensors,
and signal processing.