* 0925734
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Morphological Integration and Evolution of the Hominoid Vertebral Column
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,02/28/2011
* John Polk, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 02/28/2011
* USD 11,235.00

The living apes share a number of derived skeletal morphologies of the trunk and
limbs, features that distinguish them from many other primates and mammals in
general. Traditionally, many of these morphologies have been associated with the
use of upright trunk posture. Whether this fundamental shift occurred once in
the common ancestor of all apes or whether it evolved independently in multiple
lineages remains contentious. Parallelism, independent evolution through
identical genetic or developmental pathways, is complicated and notoriously
difficult to detect. The problem of parallelism in understanding locomotor
evolution amongst apes is profound because it underlies the understanding of
when major changes in locomotion occurred and which behaviors were the necessary
precursors to human bipedalism. This problem is also encountered in the fossil
record where certain fossils confound the understanding of hominoid evolution
and the number of times that upright trunk posture has evolved. The vertebral
column plays a central role in posture and locomotion and its orientation
characterizes the main types of body plans among mammals. This study seeks to
test the hypothesis of parallel evolution by employing quantitative evolutionary
methods to identify patterns of integration and potential constraints on
evolvable morphologies. These methods will be used to resolve longstanding
controversies concerning the number of times that orthogrady has evolved in
living and fossil hominoids. The intellectual merit of this study includes its
contribution toward a synthesis of models and theories in the fields of
evolutionary and developmental biology. This work is part of a larger research
project that aims to quantify patterns of morphological integration in the
entire primate postcranial skeleton. Broader impacts of this work include
facilitation of graduate research training for one student, and collaboration
among faculty and graduate students at the University of Illinois as well as at
other academic institutions.