* 0925229
* Distributed Optimization, Estimation, and Control of Networked Systems through Event-triggered Message Passing
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/15/2009,09/30/2013
* Michael Lemmon, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 09/30/2013
* USD 298,899.00

The objective of this program is to develop event-triggered methods for message
passing in the optimization, estimation, and control of networked dynamical
systems. Prior work has demonstrated experimentally that event-triggering can
greatly reduce communication usage while maintaining high levels of networked
system performance. The main goal of this project is to develop formalisms that
better explain the reason for these benefits and to develop a more systematic
approach to designing event-triggered networked
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The project's intellectual merit is
that event-triggering provides a solid theoretical basis for the discretization
of networks of dynamical systems. This basis is based upon the simple idea that
messages between subsystems should only exchanged when there is novel
information relevant to the&lt;br/&gt;performance of the overall system. This
event-triggered approach therefore has subsystems transmit information when some
internal measure of that information's novelty exceeds a time-varying and state-
dependent threshold. The design of these thresholds is accomplished by enforcing
stability concepts &lt;br/&gt;(such as input-to-state stability or input-output
stability) subject to constraints on the frequency with which information can be
passed within the overall system. The transformative nature of this approach
lies in its potential to provide a systematic approach to the discretization of
systems in a manner that goes well beyond conventional Nyquist sampling.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The project's impact will be broadened
through interactions with industrial partners EmNet LLC and Odyssian LLC. EmNet
LLC is interested in using event-triggered message passing on the CSOnet system,
a wireless sensor-actuator network being used to control the frequency of
combined sewer&lt;br/&gt;overflow (CSO) events. Odyssian LLC is interested in
using event-triggered methods for the intelligent control of event-triggered
microgrids. The project's impact will also be broadened through
interactions&lt;br/&gt;with middle school students interested in robotic
systems. The project's impacts will be broadened further through interactions
with European researchers.