* 0925061
* Research in Linear and Nonlinear Instability and Ocean Circulation Theory
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Joseph Pedlosky, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2013
* USD 323,534.00

The project consists of two themes: (1) Ocean Circulation Theory, in particular
the flow around planetary scale islands including the effects of topographic
"skirts" to the island, and (2) the linear and nonlinear dynamics of
instabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the context of the first theme the
investigator, Dr. Pedlosky, will examine the nature of the circulation around
islands and similar topographic features when topography produces closed,
ambient, geostrophic contours of potential vorticity around the island.
Preliminary investigation has demonstrated the strong influence of the
topography in trapping fluid in a recirculation around the island and hence
altering the measure of the interchange of fluid from one sub basin to another
on each side of the island. This issue is of oceanographic and climatic
relevance for flows as the Indonesian Throughflow. The process will be studied
analytically, numerically and in the laboratory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the
second theme, the investigator will be guiding the research of a graduate
student in a study of the instability of the frontal system produced by
downwelling favorable wind stress on a coastal shelf. Preliminary results
indicate that the resulting eddies can play a significant role in the cross
shelf heat and mass transport. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
proposed work takes up the study of novel and fundamental fluid mechanical
processes of direct oceanographic relevance. The results of the research
proposed here on the coastal instability problem will have applications to
transport of tracers in the coastal zone and thus have ecological as well as
dynamical consequences. The research associated with the flow around islands and
through narrow gaps, in the context of the Indonesian Throughflow, has relevance
to the planetary overturning circulation and hence pertinence to the problem of
climate. Part of the research involves the guidance of a Ph.D. graduate student
participating in the research (funded on another project) and will serve as a
central element in his training and intellectual development. The interaction
with Italian colleagues aids in the international exchange of scientific
expertise.