* 0925386
* Printed Ag-Zn batteries with high energy density and air stability for ubiquitous electronics applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Vivek Subramanian, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 12/31/2012
* USD 300,000.00

Printed electronics has received attention in recent years as a technology for
the realization of ultra-low-cost electronic systems, and also for the
realization of electronics on flexible substrates. Proposed applications include
RFID tags and embedded sensors. Given the interest in low-cost tags and sensors,
there has been an upsurge in interest in printed batteries. Unfortunately, the
cost of integrating conventional batteries into such systems is unacceptably
high. What is needed, therefore, is a printed battery technology that is
implementable at low cost and meets the performance needs of these applications.
Conventional printed alkaline batteries do not provide the energy density
required, while lithium cells are too expensive to integrate due their strong
oxygen sensitivity. A battery technology that addresses these tradeoffs is
required. In this work, the investigators are developing a novel printed battery
technology based on a Zn/Ag-based silver oxide chemistry. Nanoparticle inks of
the various metals and metal oxides required to fabricate a Zn/Ag battery are
synthesized and printed using gravure printing and pneumatic dispensing. A
printable cellulosic / polymer KOH electrolyte is printed as an electrolyte /
separator layer. Based on promising initial results, extensive optimization of
materials and printing processes are being used to realize a primary cell with
energy density on par with state of the art lithium cells, but with the
manufacturability and low cost of more conventional alkaline cells. The entire
cell is printed on plastic, thus enabling direct integration into low-cost
printed electronic systems.