* 0925366
* GOALI: Sub-Resolution Magnetic Recording at 10 Terrabits/inch2
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Fatih Erden, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2013
* USD 281,660.00

GOALI: Sub Resolution Magnetic Recording at 10
Terrabit/inch2&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Research
employing write and read heads operating below resolution is proposed. The
original user data will be reconstructed using two dimensional (cross-track and
down-track directions) signal processing as proposed by Roger Wood and
coworkers. Numerous channel bits will be employed, e.g., 40 Terrabits/inch2 of
channel bits to represent 10 Terabits/inch2 of user data. The proposed research
includes searching for a workable arrangement of read sensors and exploring
write head designs suitable for this very high density. The use of dual
magnetoresistive sense heads with lateral extent considerably exceeding the
track width is proposed. They will be arranged in a linear array tilted at a
skew angle to the track, thus allowing each head to be sensitive to a different
set of read tracks and the signal from each track to be extracted. A variety of
approaches for the write head will be examined using two micromagnetic codes. A
particularly interesting idea is the use of an antiferromagnetically coupled
secondary pole to maximize gradient. The ultimate goal is to test this idea of
two dimensional magnetic recording using magnetic heads and media that are
designed to optimize its performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
represents a collaborative effort between University of Minnesota Professor
Randall Victora (magnetics), and Seagate engineer Fatih Erden (signal
processing). The plan involves multiple iterations, each including an encoded
signal (provided by Dr. Erden) written micromagnetically on composite media
using a novel write head architecture. The two dimensional signal will then be
obtained by the read head array and the waveforms will be sent to Seagate for
decoding. The iteration will end with feedback from Seagate about the
performance and causes of failure. This will lead to a new magnetic design
and/or signal processing algorithm, and a new iteration.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The proposed research will impact three
important constituencies: undergraduate students who want to learn about
research, graduate students who are beginning their research careers, and fellow
researchers with particular emphasis towards industry. Graduate students will
benefit from extensive contact with industry including joint optimization of
magnetic and signal processing constraints with Seagate and through industrial
internships. The interdisciplinary environment of the Center for Micromagnetics
and Information Technology (MINT) will also expose them to students from other
disciplines and a large number of industrial visitors, particularly at the
Annual Review. Undergraduates will be included within the proposed research
through the Research Experience for Undergraduates program at the University of
Minnesota and, for exceptional students, Senior Honors Theses. In an effort to
reach industries beyond Seagate, a visit to multiple U.S. based recording
companies is proposed for each year. This, together with the Annual MINT Review
will allow industrial researchers an opportunity to discuss detailed research
results with the investigators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;