* 0925929
* GOALI/Collaborative Research:  Passive, Diamagnetic Inertial Sensing Integrated with High-Sensitivity Telemetry
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Weidong Wang, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* GEORGE HADDAD
* 08/31/2013
* USD 269,740.00

GOALI: COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: PASSIVE, DIAMAGNETIC INERTIAL SENSING INTEGRATED
WITH HIGH-SENSITIVITY TELEMETRY &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is
funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to advance
inertial sensing in combination with remote RF interrogation technologies. This
work will leverage developments in wireless devices, inertial sensors and system
design to realize a new class of wireless sensors that are near-passive in
energy needs. Synergistic design practices will be used to achieve sufficient
activation/communication range and sensitivity in order to enable numerous
embedded sensing applications. The approach is to employ less damped, more
compliant, and self-reinforced diamagnetic levitation in inertial sensors to
obtain superior performance while implementing high-efficiency transceivers
based on narrowband harmonic re-radiation. The frequency discrimination and
narrowband filtering avoids interference while enhancing the ability to detect
lower power signals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much of the intellectual merit is
devoted to the development of ultra-sensitive and robust inertial sensors, the
employment of high-efficiency near-passive harmonic-coupled transceivers, and
the investigation of a new wireless telemetry methodology that permits operation
under harsh channel conditions by capitalizing on narrowband filtering and
frequency discrimination. As a result, this work will enable a transformative
change in embedded wireless inertial sensing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcomes
of the project will benefit wireless sensor system design, advance current
state-of-the-art inertial sensing technology and yield fundamentally new
approaches to remote sensing. The industry partnership will enable the research
team to broadly disseminate results beyond the academic community. At both
institutions there are synergistic center activities which will benefit from the
results of the investigation. The project will also impact curriculum at both
universities, while leveraging ongoing programs that attract underrepresented
students to engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;