* 0925396
* Decadal Modulation of El Niño Southern Oscillation and Its Interactions with Tropical Pacific Climate
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Jin-Yi Yu, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 07/31/2012
* USD 370,823.00

Properties of the El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) undergo decadal
variations, but the causes of these variations are not yet understood. This
study explores a self-modulation mechanism that suggests extreme ENSO events
should occur on decadal timescales. The mechanism depends on a two-way
interaction between ENSO activity and the mean state of the tropical Pacific, in
which the spatial asymmetry between El Niño and La Niña is responsible for
transitions between weak and strong ENSO states. Analyses of observational data
and numerical experiments using coupled general circulation models (CGCM), an
intermediate coupled model, and an ocean only model, will be carried out to
examine this mechanism and to understand decadal ENSO variability and its
interaction with the tropical Pacific
climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Investigations will focus on the following issues:
&lt;br/&gt;(1) How do ENSO and Pacific climate interact under various types of
ENSO dynamics?&lt;br/&gt;(2) What is the cause of the spatial asymmetry between
El Niño and La Niña and why does it reverse between a strong ENSO state and a
weak ENSO state? &lt;br/&gt;(3) What roles do the Indian Ocean and monsoons play
in the decadal ENSO variability? Does the hypothesized ENSO-Pacific climate
interaction mechanism need to be modified to include the effects of the Indian
Ocean and monsoons? &lt;br/&gt;(4) Are there any linkages between decadal ENSO
variability, the proposed mechanism, and the 1976/77 rapid climate shift?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will make use of the unprecedented collection
of high-quality CGCM integrations that were produced for the Fourth Assessment
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. The variety of ENSO
behaviors simulated by these models implies that they have different ENSO
dynamics and so comprise a test bed for examining ENSO-Pacific climate
interaction under different ENSO dynamics and different greenhouse gas forcings.
Numerical experiments that limit ocean-atmosphere coupling to individual ocean
basins or constrain the Pacific basic state will be performed with the two CGCMs
and an intermediate coupled model. Model results will be verified using
observational data and simulations with an ocean
model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this study include the potential
to improve long-term predictions of extreme ENSO events and to improve the
simulation of ENSO in CGCMs. Ph.D. students will be trained, and undergraduate
Earth System Science majors will be involved in the research.