* 0925373
* Haptic Perceptual Instruments
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Michael Turvey, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Anne Cleary
* 09/30/2013
* USD 408,759.00

Haptic Perceptual Instruments&lt;br/&gt;Claudia Carello, Till Frank, and M. T.
Turvey&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although it is common to think of haptics -- the
sense of touch -- chiefly as a skin sense, its role as a muscle sense allows
moment-to-moment control of the body that is crucial to moving in and
interacting with the environment. Maneuvering tools with the hands and
traversing surfaces with the legs involve the deformation of muscles and
connective tissues. Such maneuvering is accomplished by what the research team
of Claudia Carello, Till Frank, and Michael Turvey at the University of
Connecticut have called "haptic perceptual instruments." Their NSF-funded
research addresses the contribution of this muscle sense to the perception of
distances traveled by legged locomotion (e.g., walking, skipping, galloping,
etc.) in the absence of visual input. Preventing participants in the research
from looking where they are going allows for the "pure" measurement of haptic
perception. Humans, other mammals, insects, and arachnids can measure distance
traveled strictly by the motions and forces generated by walking and running.
Such perceptions are examples of the possibly universal ability of "mechanical
intelligence." Experiments with humans suggest parallels between mechanical
intelligence and certain basic memory principles. Just as memory is commonly
evaluated via study and test so, too, is legged locomotion: judging distance on
an outbound excursion from point A to point B is likened to the study phase and
matching that distance on the return excursion from point B to point A is
likened to the test phase. Typically memory performance is better the more
similarities there are between study and test on a wide variety of factors, such
as external environment (e.g., physical location), internal mental state (e.g.,
mood), and the mental strategy used to process the information during study and
test (e.g., use of mental imagery as a mnemonic). For blindfolded legged
locomotion, it is proposed that the crucial common factor is provided by a
mathematical classification of locomotion patterns (technically called "symmetry
groups") . In the planned research, when the outbound and return gaits belong to
the same category (such as walking and jogging), return distances are expected
to accurately match the outbound distances and to be independent of a variety of
important variables -- speed, direction, inertial load, step size, and delay of
measurement. On the other hand, the two distances should not match when the two
gaits are from different categories (such as walking and skipping). In technical
terms, Carello, Frank, and Turvey propose a nonlinear dynamical model which
treats the outbound and return gaits as a single coupled haptic perceptual
instrument, with a method for identifying and quantifying the instrument's
attractors (stable patterns that the movements tend towards) and "noise"
(variability around the attractor patterns). The use of such a formal
mathematical model for studying the psychology of perception and action is an
important development. The researchers hope to provide a theoretical and
experimental foundation for understanding, at both behavioral and
neurobiological levels, the process of path integration based on movement-
generated information. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planned research will introduce
new ideas for studying perceptual capabilities grounded in muscle sensibility.
Uncovering commonalities between using the muscle sense to perceive objects (the
team's previous research) and using the muscle sense to perceive environments
(the planned research) promises to lay a foundation for a deeper and broader
understanding of the role mechanical contact plays in the perception and memory
functions of the haptic system. The project will expand and enhance the training
typically received by psychology students by combining courses in physics and
mathematics and courses in cognition and neuroscience. Importantly, identifying
conditions under which the motions and forces generated by legged locomotion
lead to successful or unsuccessful perception of distance traveled will provide
novel hypotheses about the nature of locomotion disorders and their
rehabilitation.