* 0925696
* Monographic Studies in the Nectriaceae, Hypocreales:  Nectria, Cosmospora, and Neonectria
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2008,12/31/2013
* Priscila Chaverri, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 12/31/2013
* USD 697,089.00

The Nectriaceae (Hypocreales, Ascomycota) includes some of the most conspicuous
and ubiquitous microfungi in natural ecosystems. These fungi are common in
soils, decaying plant material, insects, and other fungi. While most species are
saprobes, others are pathogenic on plants and insects or endophytes living in
the leaves and trunks of living trees. This study will define the taxonomy of
three major genera: Nectria, Cosmospora, and Neonectria. These genera are
significant because they include several species that are widespread plant
pathogens and potential biological control agents. Even though these genera are
ubiquitous and diverse in natural and agricultural ecosystems, none of them have
received modern monographic treatment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
also increase the participation of minorities in biological sciences and advance
graduate research at Howard University. In addition, this project will increase
the available germplasm of fungi as cultures deposited in public institutions;
increase biodiversity data available through digital databases; produce web-
based identification keys for those using these fungi as indicators of tropical
forest disturbance and working to control the diseases caused by these fungi;
deposit into GenBank diagnostic DNA sequences of reliably identified fungi; and
provide the basis for studies on the population biology of species of interest
to plant pathologists.&lt;br/&gt;