* 0925968
* GOALI: Integrated Microwave Microneedle-Electrode System For Fine Scale Material and Device Characterization
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2009,12/31/2011
* Thomas Weller, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 12/31/2011
* USD 495,271.00

The goal of this research is to make possible the accurate mapping of the high-
frequency dielectric (or impedance) properties of materials ranging from device
wafers and polymeric substrates (in-line process control) to biological
materials, such as human skin, at multiple depths on a fine scale. The
conductive coaxial needles will be configured on a fixed-grid array and be of
lengths varying from ~50-250 microns. The resulting constructs also provide a
new technology to affordably produce RF probes with small separations. The
reduction of probe costs (from few thousand dollars per probe to few dollars per
probe) has the potential to transform RF-test protocols and enable affordable
wafer level probing at a fine scale. Local integration of the electronics
provides a low-noise measurement solution, but requires significant
miniaturization and therefore motivates a transmission line approach with
minimum leakage and cross-talk. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit -
Existing methods for high-frequency material characterization will be refined in
scale and sample density by the proposed microsystem. Unlike current techniques
that provide single point measurement in the range of 100's of microns, the
proposed MEMS-based approach will enable a large number of measurements (while
enabling multi-point sampling via the fixed needle matrix). This research
represents a new merging of MEMS and microwave-suitable sensing techniques for
impedance measurements. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts - The technology
addressed in this research will impact several areas of test, measurement and
systems design ranging from materials characterization to detection of
impurities in wafer scale processing. The probe architectures will be suitable
for high frequency metrological characterization of micron-scale devices, such
as emerging mm- and sub-mm-wave transistor technologies. The fabrication
techniques for producing integrated micro coaxial transmission lines will
facilitate the development of 3-D microwave and mm-wave systems for sensing and
communications, while simultaneously integrating sensing and packaging functions
of the material. Finally, the ability for fine-scale material characterization
will aid research in many materials-related areas including nano-particle thin-
films, lubricants, fuels and other fluids. The research provides new
opportunities for research fellows in our active training programs (Bridge to
Doctorate and Alfred P. Sloan Foundation Doctoral Fellowship Program). The
research outcomes will also be integrated into a new graduate level sequence at
the University of South Florida that forms the core curriculum for our training
grants.