* 0925716
* Collaborative Research:  High Temperature Acoustic Wave Sensors Based on the Oxyborate Crystals
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Qing-Ming Wang, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2013
* USD 263,753.00

NSF Proposal ECCS-0925716 and ECCS-0925586&lt;br/&gt;Proposal title:
"Collaborative Research: High Temperature Acoustic Wave Sensors Based on the
Oxyborate Crystals"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ECCS-0925716, PI: Qing-Ming Wang,
qmwang@engr.pitt.edu&lt;br/&gt;University Pittsburgh&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ECCS-
0925586, PIs: Shujun Zhang and Thomas R. Shrout&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project
Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is the
development of acoustic wave sensors based on a high temperature piezoelectric
crystal for in situ measurement of temperature, heat-flux, and pressure in
severe environments. The increasing demand to enhance the performance and
reliability of microsensors, particularly for those operating at high
temperatures and harsh environments, results in an urgent need for advanced
materials that can outperform silicon. The project includes 1) design,
fabrication and characterization of high temperature surface acoustic wave (SAW)
resonators and thickness shear bulk acoustic wave (BAW) resonators; 2) high
temperature characterization of SAW and BAW sensors; 3) design, fabrication, and
characterization of SAW sensors based heat flux sensor, and BAW sensor based
pressure sensor; 4) sensor performance and stability study at high temperatures.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits: The current acoustic wave sensors are
limited to applications from room temperature to 300oC. This research project
aims to develop robust ultrahigh-temperature (~1000oC) acoustic wave sensors for
intelligent control of advanced power generation systems. Two types of sensors
will be fabricated and tested based on high temperature piezoelectric crystal
SAW and BAW resonators with desirable thermal, electrical and electromechanical
properties at high temperature and harsh
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Development of sensor system
for high temperature and harsh environments has attracted extensive research
activities in the past few years but with limited success. The proposed research
will advance the sensor technologies for applications in harsh and ultrahigh
temperature environments by providing novel high temperature acoustic wave
temperature and pressure sensors. The project will provide research and training
opportunity to two graduate students and up to three undergraduate students.
Emphasis will be given on recruiting minorities and women engineering students.
Class lectures will be prepared based on the research activities and results of
this project, and included in the existing graduate courses. Hands-on research
training opportunities will be developed and provided for some talented high
school students each summer through an on-going program at the University of
Pittsburgh, the Pitt Engineering Career Access Program (PECAP).