* 0925156
* Cladding-Pumped Silicon Raman Amplifiers Integrated with In(Ga)As Quantum Dot Laser Pumps
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Pallab Bhattacharya, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2012
* USD 400,000.00

Objective: The objective of this program is to demonstrate InGaAs/GaAs quantum
dot laser grown on dislocation filters on silicon substrates that will be used
as a pump source for cladding-pumped Si Raman amplifiers integrated on the same
chip. Planarization via etching the substrates and regrowth inside the formed
trenches will make it possible to couple the laser pump directly into Si
waveguides. The upper cladding of Si waveguides will be formed using silicon-
oxynitride. The core Si waveguide will be fabricated by shrinking the cross-
section dimensions of patterned waveguides via thermal oxidation.
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The intellectual merit is the first demonstration
of high-performance hybrid III-V on Si lasers and their integration with Si
Raman amplifiers. High-performance hybrid Si lasers have been elusive and their
demonstration is transformative. Demonstration of a high-gain silicon optical
amplifier integrated with a pump source is also transformative and is considered
a milestone in integrated photonics. The proposed waveguide fabrication
technique avoids the difficulties of electron-beam lithography for submicron
waveguide fabrication.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The broader impacts are the
interdisciplinary nature of the program, its undergraduate and underrepresented
minorities and K-12 outreach. The proposed program provides a broader impact to
science and society beyond technical merits. It combines optoelectronics with
microelectronics, physics, and materials science and engineering, thereby
extends optoelectronics to real applications. The proposed program outlines
interdisciplinary research for graduate and undergraduate students. Outreach
projects for women and underrepresented minorities are highlighted. The program
proposes to expose middle- and high-school students to scientific and
engineering disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;