* 0925098
* Workshop on Research Directions in Simulation-Based Engineering and Science, held Spring 2009
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2011
* Robert Shelton, World Technology Evaluation Center, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 07/31/2011
* USD 130,000.00

The research objective of this award is to identify and critically evaluate the
most promising research areas and research themes in the field of simulation-
based engineering and science. Ideas and data will be gathered in a workshop
from some of the nation's leading researchers in the field. These will be
supplemented by the results from a recently completed report from a predecessor
study, which gathered similar data from 59 leading labs abroad. Deliverables
include a conference proceedings report to be available as a bound volume at the
meeting on April 22, an updated version posed on the Web when all presentations
are finalized by the participants, a draft version of a final synthesis report
of the workshop findings, and a bound volume of the final report when all
editing has been completed. Both the proceedings and final report will be
maintained on the Web for at least five years.

The results of this research will enable researchers and research managers to
focus their efforts on the areas: (1) that need the most work to overcome
barriers to progress, and (2) that offer the greatest potential for progress.
This methodology is emerging as an equal partner to the long established
mathematical and experimental methodologies for scientific and engineering
investigation. The advent of vastly more powerful computers at affordable costs,
and recent quantum improvements in software algorithms allow researchers to use
simulation and modeling techniques to investigate problems that were never
tractable before. New simulation techniques allow the researcher to explore
situations in materials, biomedical, energy, the environment, and many other
domains that offer the promise of greatly improved predictions. Examples of
application areas include global warming, earthquakes, tsunamis, volcano
eruptions, terrorist attacks and their aftermath, nanotechnology safety,
financial crises, and many others --almost anything can be modeled and simulated
with useful results. Further, this emerging discipline offers means of
attracting young people into science and engineering because of its wide
application to important, but easily understood, situations, its attractive
visualization outputs, and its accessibility to even beginning students.

