* 0925333
* Interdisciplinary Transport Phenomena VI: Fluid, Thermal, Biological, Materials and Space Conference in Voltera, Italy - October 4-9, 2009
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Satwindar Sadhal, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 06/30/2010
* USD 12,500.00

0925333&lt;br/&gt;Sadhal&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objective of the
conference is to exchange technical information and ideas among the various
scientists and engineers working in Science and Technology within the Fluid,
Thermal, Biological, Materials and Space Sciences, and focusing on Transport
Phenomena. These areas are of importance to various disciplines within the
broader realm of Transport Phenomena. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit.
Under the preceding common theme, the conference will provide for the exchange
of information on new scientific results, particularly results involving
interdisciplinary aspects. In previous conferences in this series, the cross-
cutting aspects of space science and technology were addressed, and forums were
provided for the synthesis of knowledge that has been acquired over the last
several years, and for exploration of opportunities for collaborative research
activities. Transport Phenomena encompassing both heat and mass transfer are
indeed ubiquitous to many areas in the natural sciences, as well as engineering.
While research over the last two decades has provided significant new insight
into various physical phenomena, the new and upcoming scientific problems have
brought about the interdisciplinary dimension to modern scientific research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. There is at present a need to provide
direction for research in which fluid flow and other transport processes form a
common basis for many investigations. For example, in physiology and medicine as
well as in materials processing, fluid, thermal and mass-transport aspects have
gained primacy among various researchers, and the sharing of expertise has
become a necessity for technical progress. The conference will therefore provide
for the free flow of ideas under the common theme of Transport Phenomena to
promote healthful new research programs. The conference will include the active
participation of a diverse cadre of researchers including students and
individuals from underrepresented groups. As in previous conferences, the
proceedings will be published after a peer-review process.