* 0925672
* Biodiversity of Fungal Endophytes in Rubber Trees: Towards Understanding their Role as Plant Protection Agents
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2008,05/31/2010
* Priscila Chaverri, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 05/31/2010
* USD 120,295.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the role of fungi in ecosystems has
been hampered by little sampling and characterization of fungal diversity.
Fungal endophytes reside inside living plant tissues and form beneficial or
harmful relationships with plants. Studies suggest that beneficial endophytes
have evolved to protect plants from diseases. Trees in the wild have less
disease incidence than trees in plantations, and endophytes may play a role in
their protection. This project will characterize fungal endophytes in rubber
trees (Hevea brasiliensis) to evaluate their potential role as plant protectors.
Endophyte diversity will be evaluated in trees in native forests (Peru) and
plantations (Brazil) through fieldwork and laboratory work. The ability of these
endophytes to protect plants will be evaluated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Disease
has limited the production of rubber trees in the Americas. Many fear that the
spread of this disease to plantations throughout the world could have severe
economic and social implications. Findings from this study will uncover new
endophytic species and potential protectors against rubber diseases. The study
of fungi needs to be undertaken in remaining forests, or many species that are
important to humans and natural ecosystems may disappear before they are
discovered. This project will also provide training to students at Howard
University.&lt;br/&gt;