* 0925445
* Multi-functional analytical and sensing devices based on graphene encapsulated noble metal nanoparticles and their nanowire-based heterostructures
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Nitin Chopra, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 08/31/2013
* USD 342,625.00

Multi-functional analytical and sensing devices based on graphene encapsulated
noble&lt;br/&gt;metal nanoparticles and their nanowire-based
heterostructures&lt;br/&gt;PI: Nitin Chopra, Metallurgical and Materials
Engineering, The University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa.&lt;br/&gt;This research
endeavor focuses on novel multi-functional and multi-component analytical and
detection&lt;br/&gt;devices based on graphene encapsulated noble metal
nanoparticles (GE-NMPs). Fabrication of a&lt;br/&gt;continuous and non-porous
graphene shell offers a unique way to stabilize noble metal
nanoparticles&lt;br/&gt;(NMPs) lending multi-functionality and unique properties
to these hybrid nanomaterials. Such&lt;br/&gt;nanomaterials are of enormous
importance for homeland and border security, sensor industry,
and&lt;br/&gt;analytical device technology.&lt;br/&gt;The research involves
studies on the growth of GE-NMPs and their nanowire-based
heterostructures&lt;br/&gt;using a chemical vapor deposition (CVD) process. The
information will be broadly applicable to many&lt;br/&gt;materials systems that
have an ability to catalyze carbon growth and will be a notable advancement in
the&lt;br/&gt;area of novel graphene-based nanomaterials and devices. These
materials are highly robust and can be&lt;br/&gt;readily functionalized for
further applications. The approach is to fully utilize the functions of the
individual&lt;br/&gt;components (graphene and noble metal nanoparticle) to
locate, detect, separate, and assemble chemical&lt;br/&gt;species with enhanced
signals. In addition, hybrid nanomaterials will be vital in realizing
advanced&lt;br/&gt;engineering applications, including, chemical and biological
sensors and novel spectroscopy substrates&lt;br/&gt;that integrate a uniquely
heterostructured nano-electromechanical system (NEMS). These devices
will&lt;br/&gt;have high resolution, chemical selectivity, improved sensitivity
and detection limits, reversibility, and&lt;br/&gt;robustness. The research
program is multidisciplinary and has strong fundamental and
technological&lt;br/&gt;components allowing students to work and gain experience
in cutting edge nanotechnology research.