* 0925446
* Collaborative research:  Room-temperature terahertz semiconductor Raman lasers
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Alexey Belyanin, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2012
* USD 90,000.00

The objective of this program is to develop room-temperature terahertz
semiconductor Raman lasers based on giant Raman nonlinearities associated with
intersubband transitions in semiconductor superlattices. The new devices are
expected to operate at room temperature because the Raman gain does require
population inversion across the low-energy terahertz transition. Giant values of
Raman nonlinearity will allow using midinfrared quantum cascade laser butt-
joined to the Raman section for pumping. Such device configuration will result
in millimeter-sized electrically-pumped terahertz semiconductor laser sources.

The intellectual merit of this research is to explore a novel and highly
promising approach to produce the first room-temperature terahertz semiconductor
laser source. This work will enhance our understanding of optical nonlinearities
and intersubband electron dynamics in semiconductor nanostructures. This project
promises significant advances in state of the art terahertz sources, yielding
compact semiconductor devices operating at room temperature, at higher power,
and with new functionalities such as broadband electric tunability.

The broader impacts are also significant. The proposed research lies at the
intersection of the optoelectronics, nonlinear optics, and physics of
semiconductors. This combination of disciplines offers a unique educational
environment for the students involved in the project. Knowledge and techniques
developed during research will be incorporated into graduate- and undergraduate-
level courses, disseminated through publications, technology transfer, and the
research groups, websites. Room-temperature terahertz semiconductor lasers
developed as a result of this program are expected to transform existing
terahertz instrumentation with applications ranging from high-resolution
spectroscopy and local oscillators for radio astronomy to terahertz remote
sensing and imaging.