* 0925636
* Hybrid Electromagnetic Near-Field Probing for Sub-surface Inhomogeneous Material Characterization
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Zoya Popovic, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* George Haddad
* 08/31/2013
* USD 299,416.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The objective of this research is to develop a low-cost non-destructive, non-
contact probing method for surface and sub-surface characterization of
inhomogeneous materials and devices. New artificial and nano-material
development requires fast, low-complexity and ultra-sensitive high-resolution
characterization of materials, as well as defect detection during fabrication
processes, with sub-micron spatial resolution. The approach focuses on combining
a near-field microwave probing system with optical interferometry for topology
sensing and correction.

The intellectual merit of the research stems from new electronic designs through
investigation of fundamental limitations, and miniaturization through
integration, enabling a scalable solution. Electromagnetic and noise analysis,
design of calibration test structures, and related metrology, are used to
understand the fundamental limitations on sensitivity and design miniaturized
active probes. Different penetration depths enable sub-surface probing by using
different frequencies.

The broader impacts of the proposed research are to provide a fast and
inexpensive tool for detection of defects for new material technologies and
rapid classification of samples into batches for yield and uniformity analysis.
Such a tool can impact material manufacturing technology and maintain the
nation?s leadership in this area. An impact on the institution will be
development of core competency in the field and interactions with existing
research projects and multidisciplinary education. A new module will be added to
existing K-12 outreach, entitled Electromagnetic Eyes, where children ?see? a
coin through an opaque cover. A successful recruiting effort which focuses on
under-represented groups will expand, and the international collaboration with
one of the top engineering universities in Germany, Technische Universität
München, developed.