* 0925152
* Creating and probing graphene based devices using scanning probe microscopy
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Brian LeRoy, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Nadia El-Masry
* 08/31/2013
* USD 310,000.00

The objective of this research is to understand the fundamental transport and
scattering phenomena in graphene based electronic devices. The approach is to
combine scanning probe microscopy and electrical transport measurements to both
create and probe the local electronic properties of these
devices.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Graphene has shown promise to augment
silicon in future semiconductor technologies. However, as a gapless
semiconductor it is not directly useable in digital electronics. This limitation
can be overcome by opening a controlled bandgap by patterning the graphene into
narrow strips. This research will explore ways of creating these nanoribbons
with atomic control using scanning probe microscopy. Beyond creating these
devices, the research will also examine the role of defects, edge roughness,
surface morphology and charged impurities on the electronic properties of the
nanoribbons. Furthermore, the scanning probe microscopy techniques developed in
this proposal may be extended to study other low-dimensional
systems.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This research may lead to entirely new types
of electronics devices made from graphene rather than silicon. These devices may
significantly extend the capabilities of current semiconductor devices. A
concurrent education and outreach program will involve the training of both
undergraduate and graduate students and well as outreach to local K-12 schools
through the creation of a set of demonstrations based on the research. The
outreach to local schools will primarily reach under-represented groups and
excite them about nanoscience at a young age.