* 0925104
* Uncooled, High-Efficiency Mid-Infrared Lasers by Using Intersubband Quantum-Box Structures
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Thomas Kuech, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* john zavada
* 07/31/2013
* USD 399,886.00

The objective of the proposed work is to demonstrate devices that utilize
intersubband transitions in arrays of quantum boxes (QBs), to achieve room-
temperature, continuous-wave (CW) oscillation in the mid-infrared (IR)
wavelength range, with low heat-dissipation powers.

Intellectual Merit: The novel approaches proposed are: 1) the use of block-
copolymer lithography for the realization of arrays of 20-25 nm-diameter QBs; 2)
the use of deep quantum wells for the QB active material for strong carrier
confinement; 3) the use of selective regrowth of high-bandgap barriers to
confine carriers in the plane of the QBs..

Broader Impacts: The realization of uncooled, CW mid-IR sources will make
possible hand-held, real-time sensors for a wide range of noninvasive medical
diagnostics and enable exciting developments such as practical sensing of
chemical agents and explosives. A central goal and natural outcome of this
project is the research-based education of both undergraduate and graduate
students. The students will be involved in all aspects of the research within an
established collaborative team-based environment. The proposed program provides
opportunities for outreach to underrepresented groups through our ongoing
partnering with the existing college and NSF Center-based programs at the
University of Wisconsin. The realization of the proposed QB lasers will have a
transformational impact on both the science and technology of mid-IR lasers
because reducing the heat dissipation by two orders of magnitude will lead to
uncooled devices, which in turn will revolutionize the mid-IR sensors industry
since hand-held sensors would become available for a vast array of applications.

