* 0925272
* NEW PHYSICS-BASED INVERSE-SCATTERING TECHNIQUES FOR ULTRAWIDEBAND DISTRIBUTED SENSING
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Fernando Teixeira, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* GEORGE HADDAD
* 09/30/2013
* USD 269,231.00

The objective of this research is to develop robust physics-based time-domain
ultra-wideband inverse scattering techniques to detect obscured targets in
random media using radio-frequency and microwave signals. The approach is based
on an information-theoretic, Bayesian paradigm where the inverse scattering
problem of detecting, imaging, and classifying obscured targets is treated as a
conjunction of states of information that combine (1) a-priori information data
with (2) (physics-based) forward problem solution and sensor data acquisition,
to produce (3) the a posteriori state of information.

The intellectual contributions of the proposed ultra-wideband inversion
methodology involve (1) exploitation of super-resolution effects provided by
spatial decorrelation of ultra-wideband signals in disordered media to yield
imaging resolution beyond the classical diffraction limit (super-resolution) and
(2) harnessing of time-reversal based synthetic back-propagation of ultra-
wideband waves to provide frequency decorrelation in random media and, hence,
statistically stable detection/imaging algorithms.

The proposed physics-based inversion techniques will provide new capabilities
for ultra-wideband sensors aimed at improving the way detection and imaging
systems are employed at microwaves and radio-frequencies. The proposed research
has the potential to benefit search-and-rescue operations where rescue teams
must be able to locate hidden survivors under collapsed buildings, landslides,
and other debris. It can also benefit surveillance systems for detecting objects
and personnel behind walls (thru-wall imaging), under roofs, or around corners,
and ground penetrating radar systems for humanitarian demining. The proposed
research objectives are integrated with an education component aimed at
providing a well-rounded training to students at The Ohio State University.