* 0925407
* Analysis and Design of Cultured Neuronal Networks for Adaptive and Reconfigurable Control
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2014
* Craig Henriquez, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 09/30/2014
* USD 349,789.00

Analysis and Design of Cultured Neuronal Networks for Adaptive and
Reconfigurable Control&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Silvia Ferrari, Craig Henriquez, and
Antonius M.J. VanDongen&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Duke
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed activity is to develop
a methodology for training cultured neuronal networks to solve challenging
problems in optimal control and prediction. Engineering systems, such as
aerospace and robotic systems, already benefit from feedback controllers and
estimators that are man-designed to handle normal operating conditions for which
system dynamics are known a priori. However, these designs are not yet capable
of handling unforeseen damages and failures involving highly nonlinear and
unmodeled dynamics that are unknown a priori. Biological systems are capable of
operating optimally, subject to a variety of constraints, and to learn and adapt
in real time when new and challenging situations arise. Neurodynamic programming
can solve stochastic optimal control and estimation problems in real time, for
any form of nonlinear dynamics and performance functions. But, the current
formalisms for artificial neural networks and gradient-based learning are far
removed from the mechanisms found in biological brains. By integrating theory
and experiments, this project will develop neurodynamic programming algorithms
that are physiologically plausible and testable on light-sensitive hippocampal
and cortical neurons growing in culture. In this experimental setup, the
cultured neurons can be trained by light patterns, and it is possible to make
defined lesions in the network and evaluate how memory retention is restored, as
well as control the connectivity between isolated networks of neurons. By
overcoming the complexities that are known to limit such system-level studies in
in vitro or in vivo experiments on animals, it is expected that we will uncover
the abilities of neuronal networks to store and retrieve sensory information, as
well as understand the effect that reward pathways have on this process. The
broader impact of this project is to reverse-engineer dopamine and cortical
neuronal cultures on a chip, and to help uncover the mechanisms underlying
sensorimotor learning in the mammalian brain&lt;br/&gt;