* 0925663
* Supporting Students Attending the International Conference on User Modeling, Adaptation, and Personalization
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2009,09/30/2009
* Mary Carberry, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 09/30/2009
* USD 14,800.00

This is funding to support travel by 6-9 students currently enrolled in PhD
programs in the United States to present their accepted papers and posters, and
to take part in the Doctoral Consortium, at the First International Conference
on User Modeling, Adaptation, and Personalization (UMAP 2009), to be held in
Trento, Italy, on June 22-26, 2009. UMAP, the premier user modeling conference
in the world, is a merger of the long-running and successful biennial conference
series on User Modeling (UM, 1986-2007) and the Adaptive Hypermedia and Adaptive
Web-Based Systems (AH, 2000-2008); the former provided a forum in which academic
and industrial researchers from the many fields involved in user modeling
research (artificial intelligence, education, psychology, linguistics, human-
computer interaction, and information science) could exchange their
complementary insights on user modeling issues, while the latter provided a
forum for dissemination of adaptive technology for hypermedia and other web-
based systems. User modeling has been found to significantly enhance the
effectiveness and usability of software systems in a variety of areas. A user
model is an explicit representation of properties of a particular user; a system
that constructs and consults user models can adapt diverse aspects of its
performance to individual users. Applications for user modeling range from
electronic commerce and intelligent learning environments to health care and
assistive technologies. Relevant platforms for user modeling include mobile and
wearable systems, and smart environments, as well as individual desktop systems,
groupware, adaptive hypermedia, and other web-based systems. The UMAP 2009
Doctoral Consortium will provide a unique opportunity for PhD students partway
through their dissertation research to receive valuable feedback from top
researchers in the field. Participants will present their work to the conference
(15 minutes, which may include a short demo if appropriate), with additional
time allocated to questions and for discussion (15 minutes). Both during the
question/discussion period and in subsequent informal interactions, committee
members and other conference participants will provide constructive comments on
the student's work and attempt to address the aspects of the work on which s/he
requested advice. Student papers will be published in the adjunct proceedings of
the conference, while summaries will be included in the proceedings. In
allocating NSF funds to participants, the Doctoral Consortium Co-chairs will
give preference to students who can reasonably prove financial hardship, and
they will also strive for diversity (gender, racial, ethnic, disabilities,
institutional, etc.) among the selected students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: Bringing young and creative researchers to UMAP 2009 will help advance
an important and socially valuable research field. NSF funding will
significantly impact the careers of the next generation of User Modeling
researchers, by enabling a number of them to take part in an important event
they would otherwise have to miss. The students will have an opportunity to gain
wider exposure in the community for their innovative work, and to obtain
feedback and guidance from senior members of the research community.
Participation will also help foster a sense of community among these young
researchers, by allowing them to create a social network both among themselves
and with senior researchers at a critical stage in their professional
development.