* 0925467
* Hygroscopic Phase Transitions of Atmospheric Particles
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Scot Martin, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 08/31/2012
* USD 582,832.00

The objective of the work is to understand the connections between chemistry and
hygroscopic phase transitions for complex organic materials mixed with sulfate.
The complex organic materials will include both those produced by different
types of secondary organic aerosol (SOA) in the laboratory and those naturally
present in the Southern Great Plains, Oklahoma (i.e., field campaign). The first
goal is to measure the values of the deliquescence relative humidity (DRH) and
crystallization relative humidity (CRH) of mixed SOA organic-sulfate particles.
The second goal is to connect the variability of the organic composition to the
variability in the phase-transition behavior of the mixed particles. Hygroscopic
phase transitions switch aerosol particles between states of lower and higher
heterogeneous chemical reactivity and between states of lower and higher light
scattering. These effects are becoming increasingly quantified as a result of a
combination of recent ambient measurements, modeling, and laboratory studies.
What emerges is that the sulfate content of atmospheric particles is the anchor
point for understanding and predicting the hygroscopic phase transitions. Other
chemical components such as acidity, nitrate, or organic material have a
modulating influence. A key challenge for further progress is a better
understanding of the effects of organic material on sulfate phase transitions;
previous laboratory work has largely focused on sulfate mixed with a single up
to several types of organic molecules. Atmospheric particles, however, consist
of a mixture of sulfate with a multitude of different types of organic
molecules. Such mixtures are expected to behave quite differently than simpler
compositions, especially in regard to phase transitions, because the entropy of
the multitude implies that crystal-aqueous phase transitions, when present, will
be those solely of sulfate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A summer undergraduate project
will broaden the participation of underrepresented groups in the sciences. A
program is in place for recruitment from Historically Black Colleges and
Universities and the University of Puerto Rico. He has also developed an
AerosolCalculator website, and in this project the principal investigator will
continue with its development. The motivation is to create a site useful for new
students (as well as professionals) to develop a careful and thorough
understanding of the complexities of aerosol science and technology. The website
provides a ready interface (i.e., a web browser such as Internet Explorer) for
the learning and exploration of the properties of aerosols. The use of a website
and a web browser makes the site accessible worldwide, allowing for broad
dissemination of this educational tool.