* 0925890
* Scalable Bilinear Algorithms and Architectures for Convolutions and Transforms
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Zhiyuan Yan, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Zhi Tian
* 08/31/2013
* USD 350,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The objective of this research is to develop and implement scalable bilinear
algorithms for convolutions and transforms over the real field and finite
fields. The approach is to first obtain bilinear algorithms by identifying
cyclic structures and combining relevant cyclic convolution algorithms
algebraically, and then reduce their additive complexities significantly.

The intellectual merit of this project lies in scalable bilinear algorithms for
convolutions and transforms, which are suitable for efficient hardware
implementations, and a novel common sub-expression elimination algorithm that
greatly reduces the additive complexities of a wide range of bilinear
algorithms. The research is organized under four themes: (1) scalable bilinear
algorithms for convolutions and transforms over the real field; (2) scalable
bilinear algorithms for convolutions and discrete Fourier transform over finite
fields; (3) reduction of additive complexities; and (4) hardware implementation
under the algorithm/architecture co-design methodology.

With respect to broader impacts, scalable bilinear algorithms have significant
potential for impact on a wide range of applications, such as signal processing,
telecommunications, and multimedia systems. The project integrates research with
education and outreach activities to educate a wide spectrum of students in the
interdisciplinary area of very large-scale integrated (VLSI) signal processing,
which links integrated circuit hardware design with signal processing. The
project also provides research opportunities and hands-on system design
experience to graduate and undergraduate students and motivates local high
school students to pursue higher education in science and engineering.