* 0925875
* Optimal Control for the Analysis of Image Sequences
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Marc Niethammer, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2015
* USD 253,994.00

0925875-Niethammer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will focus on an
optimal control approach for the analysis of dynamically changing image
sequences, by treating image evolution as a dynamical system. We will develop
methods for longitudinal, cross-sectional, and random designs. Specifically, we
will explore (1) the dynamic modeling of time-varying image data, (2) their
optimal interpolation, (3) their optimal approximation and smoothing, (4) their
optimal filtering, (5) as well as image regression, (6) image extrapolation, and
(7) efficient solution approaches based on optimal control
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; While the
type of methods we will develop are already very advanced for example for
scalar-valued data, the theory and methodology is much less developed, but of
equal importance, for the case of time-varying images, which we will focus on.
Several novel methods for the analysis of time-varying images will be explored
and developed within the proposed research. They have general applicability. The
research will have immediate impact on current imaging studies and will form the
basis for future applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The developed methods will have broad applicability, from
natural image tracking, to video processing and medical image analysis. Example
uses will range from the analysis of microscopy images to monitor spatio-
temporal phenomena in individual cells, to the study of structural brain changes
by magnetic resonance imaging. In the context of biomedical imaging, the
techniques developed will ultimately lead to new insight into disease
progression through in vivo monitoring, will enable early disease detection, and
will also be a cornerstone to facilitate personalized medicine, which needs to
account for individual developmental differences and age effects. All developed
methods will be made available to the community in open-source form. This will
allow for easy adaptations and the creation of customized image analysis
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI?s pedagogical goal is to reduce the
communication barriers between research fields in the following ways: (1) by
offering image analysis courses which include student group collaborations with
research groups within biology and medicine, (2) by providing opportunities for
undergraduates and summer students for hands-on image analysis projects, (3) and
by teaching non computer-science majors about the fundamentals and practical
aspects of image analysis.