* 0925612
* Novel 3-Dimensional Biosensor for Rapid Detection and Accurate Identification of Salmonella in Food Products
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Majed El-Dweik, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 07/31/2013
* USD 306,118.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objectives:&lt;br/&gt;A novel
3-dimensional interdigitated microelectrode array based impedance biosensor will
be developed. This biosensor is unique in its increased sensing surface area to
volume ratio compared to a single 2-dimensional interdigitated microelectrode
sensor. This will enhance the sensitivity of impedance detection, and the
capability to confine a few live bacterial cells into a volume on the order of
nano liters for rapid detection and accurate identification of Salmonella. The
project goal is to provide significantly improved detection technology in a
simple, lightweight, portable and low-cost system that can detect Salmonella
within minutes, with high selectivity and sensitivity. The project objectives
are as follows: 1) to design and fabricate MEMS based impedance biosensor
system; 2) to immobilize the antibody using the Self-Assembled Multilayer
process; 3) to test the device using impedance measurements for the detection
and selective identification of Salmonella in peanut butter, cantaloupe, mango
and tomato when used in conjunction with immobilized
antibodies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
device represents a transformation in the field of biosensors. Detection with
conventional 2-dimensional biosensors requires a relatively large sample volume
with significantly large number of cells. With 3-dimensional interdigitated
microelectrode array based impedance biosensors, the sensitivity is
significantly enhanced and a few live cells can be easily detected in a small
sample volume. The proposed design uses two sets of 3-dimensional interdigitated
microelectrode arrays. The first set uses positive dielectrophoresis to divert
and concentrate the Salmonella into another narrower channel where the second
set of interdigitated microelectrode arrays-used to detect Salmonella-are
located. This interdigitated microelectrode array set increases the sensing
surface area to volume ratio compared to a single 2-dimensional interdigitated
microelectrode sensor. The array sets will be designed with spaces between the
interdigitated electrodes nearly the size of the bacteria in order to detect a
single or a few bacteria cells. This will enable a future generation of smaller,
lighter, inexpensive impedance biosensors for fast Salmonella
detection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: &lt;br/&gt;The research will
benefit US competitiveness in biosensor technology, educate the next generation
of scientists/engineers, and impact the economy though the protection of human
health, food and water supplies and prevention of product recalls. It will
introduce new basic science in the design and understanding of 3-dimensional
biosensors, resulting in a low cost, portable device. The range of applications
includes the food and packing industry, protection of crops, and bioterrorism
threat prevention. The same structure can be used for detection of other
pathogens (e.g., Escherichia coli O157:H7, Listeria) by changing the bio-
recognition layer and device adhesion layer. Graduate and undergraduate students
will be educated in state-of-the art micro/nano and bio technologies. The PI
(University of Missouri) and Co-PI (Lincoln University; HBCU) will integrate the
hardware and software generated by the research into their courses, enabling
students to receive hands-on experience relevant to 21st century science and
technology, and preparing them for employment in the growing fields of
microelectronics, biotechnology, semiconductor and microelectromechanical
systems (MEMS). Students-including those from underrepresented groups-will work
on the project and be co-advised.