* 0925468
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Obstetrical Adaptations in the Human Bony Pelvis: A Morphometric Approach
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2011
* Valerie DeLeon, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 08/31/2011
* USD 12,496.00

Pelvic morphological variation and sexual dimorphism is of interest to
anatomists, anthropologists, and OB/GYNs alike. Sexual differences in pelvic
morphology are assumed to relate to the demands of childbirth on females. Recent
work has identified these differences in specific areas of the pelvis. However,
little is known about how these differences are related to 3D shape changes, how
these changes influence the birthing process, and how body size and proportion
differences affect these shape changes. Questions addressed in this study
include: Are there varying patterns of sexual dimorphism within the pelvis, such
that certain areas are more obstetrically influenced than others? Do populations
of different body sizes display different patterns of sexual dimorphism? To
answer these questions, this study uses cutting-edge geometric morphometric
approaches to quantify pelvic morphology. Landmark data will be collected from
skeletal collections and from clinical imaging data. Quantitative analyses will
determine how pelvic shape varies within and between populations.

Intellectual Merit This is one of the first studies to examine obstetrical
adaptations within and between populations using geometric morphometrics.
Localizing specific areas of the pelvis that are directly influenced by
different selective pressures is important for insight into modern human
biological adaptation and the patterns and mechanisms of human evolution.

Broader Impact This study is relevant to a wide range of topics ranging from
interpretations of fossil hominins to clinical diagnoses and treatment
strategies for pelvic floor disorders. This project involves an
interdisciplinary team of anthropologists and clinicians, and will increase
dialogue regarding the functional significances of pelvic morphology.
Additionally, conclusions from this study will aid in the early identification
of women at risk for pelvic floor disorders, which have a negative impact on a
woman's quality of life. Funding supports the doctoral dissertation research for
a female graduate student