* 0925711
* Breaking and Runup of Transient Long Waves
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2015
* Philip Liu, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2015
* USD 563,970.00

After the 2004 Sumatra-Andaman earthquake and Indian Ocean tsunami, scientists
and engineers have been working together to improve our understanding of tsunami
hydrodynamics and to establish early tsunami warning systems and tsunami hazard
mitigation programs in the Indian Ocean and the South China Sea. A promising
approach to enhance tsunami data is to analyze the sediment deposits. If tsunami
deposits can be correlated with water depth, flow velocity, wave characteristics
and run-up heights, the dated sediment deposits will allow estimates of times
and recurrence intervals of past tsunamis. In order to establish the relation
between tsunami hydrodynamics and sediment transport processes on continental
shelf and coastal zones, the first step is to investigate the process of wave
breaking, turbulence production/dissipation, bottom stress evolution and run-
up/run-down flows of transient long waves. Based on observations during the 2004
Indian Ocean tsunami, it is evident that the leading tsunami waves consisted of
several (1 -3) breaking long waves. Therefore, this project will conduct a set
of comprehensive experiments in which a series of solitary waves is used as the
surrogate leading tsunami waves. The principle objectives are: 1. Identifying
the dependence of run-up processes on the number of waves in the group, the
incident wave heights, and beach slope. 2. Quantifying the wave breaking
processes involving single and multiple waves, primarily the turbulent energy
and the bottom shear stress and associated dissipation and exploring the
potential for statistically steady-state behavior. The Broader Impacts: This
research is at the interface between several fields of science and engineering ?
oceanography, fluid mechanics, and coastal engineering and will serve as a
bridge among them. The detailed experimental data will provide the necessary
information for the parameterization of wave breaking, bottom shear stress and
flow turbulence in the sediment suspension and transport models. Therefore, the
study will have a much broader impact on the establishment of tsunami hazard
mitigation programs. The results will also provide guidance for future direction
of experiments. The team will continue its long term collaborations with Prof.
H. Oumeraci of the Technical University of Braunschweig, Germany and Prof. H. H.
Hwang of the National Cheng Kung University, Taiwan. Certain aspects of scale
effects can be investigated by repeating some of the proposed experimental
conditions in the large wave flumes in their institutes. The project will train
one PhD student in experimental techniques, data analysis and numerical methods
so that he/she will be capable of performing model/data comparisons. The P.I.
has had a good record of involving engineering undergraduate students in
research and in publishing technical journal papers, and this project will
provide further opportunities along those lines. The project will also support a
postdoctoral researcher who will share the responsibility on supervising the
graduate student working on the project and will also teach an undergraduate
course.