* 0925160
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Sociocultural Effects of Psychiatric Practice in New Guinea
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Thomas Walton, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 08/31/2010
* USD 0.00

University of Minnesota graduate student Thomas Walton, under the guidance of
Dr. Karen Ho, will conduct anthropological research on the economic, social, and
political contexts of shifting psychiatric practice in Port Moresby, New Guinea.
He will investigate the relationship between the politics of public health,
psychiatric logic, and everyday experiences of self and mental illness. Disease
categories are known to affect perception; the case of New Guinea allows a
researcher to investigate these processes in new and dynamic situation while
they are developing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary research in New Guinea
found that psychiatric practitioners often reformulate diagnostic categories,
particularly those related to stress, to compete for resources with other,
better known, medical needs such as the treatment of communicable diseases. The
researcher will investigate the multiple effects of these efforts on the urban
poor. He will carry out the research at two hospitals and a mental health
rehabilitation center in Port Moresby. He will employ a combination of social
science research methods, including: long-term participant observation, semi-
structured and unstructured interviews, and the collection illness narratives.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will contribute to better understanding of
how limitations on healthcare resources in the developing world impact those
with less visible forms of disease, sometimes in ways that only become visible
through micro-level social science research and analysis. The project is timely
because it also can contribute to discussions about whether or not contemporary
global health initiatives adequately address mental illness prevalence in low
and middle-income countries. Funding this award also supports the education of a
social scientist.