* 0925851
* Distributed Error Detection and Diagnosis in Wireless Embedded Systems with Customized Hardware Support
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Saurabh Bagchi, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Zhi Tian
* 08/31/2014
* USD 317,233.00

&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to improve the reliability and
robustness of networked wireless embedded systems, thereby enabling their
widespread adoption in a range of mission-critical applications. The approach is
to synergistically combine fine-grained node-level error detection mechanisms
with a distributed network-level monitoring service to efficiently detect and
diagnose various hardware and software errors at
runtime.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With respect to intellectual merit, the research
has three major thrusts. The first thrust investigates the design of embedded
hardware platforms augmented with a dedicated reliability co-processor. Such a
co-processor based approach provides a logically and physically separate
foundation to monitor the behavior of hardware and software at an intra-node
level. The second thrust involves the design of a distributed, network-level
monitoring service that uses observed event streams from individual nodes to
perform error detection and root-cause diagnosis at runtime. By correlating
observations collected from different nodes, the monitoring service can detect
anomalies at the network-level that node-level monitoring mechanisms cannot. The
final thrust deals with the creation of customized, resource-efficient
communication primitives for the reliability co-processor to interact with the
network-level monitoring service to enable accurate error detection and
diagnosis in a cooperative manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With respect to broader
impacts, the research has the potential to positively impact the adoption of
networked embedded systems in a variety of consumer and mission-critical
applications. Research results are incorporated into graduate and undergraduate
courses. The systems developed will also directly impact the broader community
through programs at Purdue University including the Engineering Projects In
Community Service and the Vertically Integrated Projects.