* 0925008
* Reasoning processes underlying decision makers' use of expert forecasts
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Nathan Dieckmann, Decision Science Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 08/31/2012
* USD 279,541.00

Decision makers in fields as diverse as business, industry, law enforcement, and
military/political intelligence rely on expert forecasts to help make important
decisions. The purpose of these forecasts is to communicate information about a
target situation in a format that is useful for decision makers. Unfortunately,
many expert forecasts are probabilistic in nature and rife with analytic
uncertainty. For instance, an analyst may be uncertain about the accuracy and
reliability of available evidence, uncertain about how the evidence fits
together into a clear picture of the current situation, and uncertain about the
likelihood of future developments based on this situation assessment.
Surprisingly, there has been relatively little research focused on how best to
communicate these forecasts to decision makers. One issue of particular concern
is how experts should represent analytic uncertainty and how uncertainty
information is understood in the context of supporting narrative information. In
some contexts, decision makers have been found to rely heavily on numbers when
they should not and in other contexts they appear to be over reliant on verbal
or narrative information. In fact, warnings about the over-reliance on
particular information sources are captured in many popular sayings (e.g.,
"Don't believe everything you hear" and "Lies, damned lies, and statistics"). In
reality, decision makers rely on both numerical and verbal information to the
extent that they perceive the information to be diagnostic and
accurate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research implements nine experiments that
examine the best ways of presenting analytic uncertainty, to assess the
reasoning strategies used by decision makers, and to understand how individual
differences in numeracy and cognitive style affect the use of expert forecasts.
With a better understanding of how decision makers reason about and use expert
forecasts, we can identify ways to improve communication between experts to
decision makers. For instance, these findings will allow us to identify the best
ways of formatting narrative and numerical uncertainty so that decision makers
can make optimal use of this information. These findings will have broad
applications for communicating risk and probabilistic forecasts in many
different domains.