* 0925458
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant Research: The molecular Evolution of the Serotonin System in Rhesus Macaques
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2011
* Ripan Malhi, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 08/31/2011
* USD 13,977.00

Serotonin is a hormone that significantly influences aggressive and impulsive
behaviors and many psychiatric drugs work by targeting components of the
serotonin pathway. Moreover, several genetic variants that affect serotonin
regulation have been linked to a variety of behavioral conditions, such as
alcoholism and antisocialism. Because of the association between serotonin and
behavior, the study of its evolution may grant insight into how evolution acts
on a molecular level to shape behavior. This project examines the evolutionary
history of the serotonin system in rhesus macaques (Macaca mulatta). In this
study, genes related to serotonin functioning are sequenced in a sample of
rhesus macaques, as well as in ten other macaque species and a vervet monkey
(Chlorocebus aethiops). Tests designed to detect and distinguish multiple
evolutionary forces are applied to the sequence data. In this manner, the types
of evolutionary forces most likely to have shaped the serotonin system can be
inferred. The results of this study will deepen understanding of the biological
basis of behavioral evolution. It incorporates knowledge from a wide range of
fields and brings it together to study the evolution of behavior in a novel way.
In addition, the methods used in this study will provide detailed description of
the genetic variation found within macaque species and will build on knowledge
provided by the recent publication of the rhesus macaque genome. In terms of
broader impacts, this is a doctoral dissertation project that will complete the
training of a female Hispanic graduate student. This research also has
biomedical implications, as macaques are a common model used in studies of
psychiatric conditions and their treatment. Finally, there is some evidence of
parallel evolution in the serotonin system of both rhesus macaques and humans.
Future comparative studies between humans and macaques may highlight important
factors that influence behavioral evolution.