* 0925776
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Hometown Associations as Vehicles for Migrant Political Participation
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Jose Itzigsohn, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2010
* USD 10,000.00

SES-0925776 José Itzigsohn Daniela Villacrés Brown University

This research studies the conditions under which migrants deepen democracy in
their hometowns of origin through participation in transnational hometown
associations (HTAs). HTAs are expressions of migrant civil society around which
the research is framed theoretically and empirically. The study hypothesizes
that HTAs which foster high degrees of linkage with their local states and with
their communities more effectively deepen democracy than those which engender
low degrees of linkage. Using archives and semi-structured interviews, data are
collected from four Salvadoran HTAs on their linkages with their local states
and communities, as operationalized though projects and social ties. For the
municipalities served by each HTA, this study also gathers data on key
indicators of democratic deepening theorized in the literature: (i) robust civil
society, (ii) the active practice of politics, (iii) increased state
transparency and accountability, and (iv) reduced inequality and social
exclusion. Over the 10-15 years for which data are collected, this study maps
points of intersection between democratic indicators and the evolution of the
HTA's linkages to establish correlation between the HTA's intervention and
democratic deepening in each municipality.

Broader Impact

This study has important wide-ranging impacts. Ultimately, findings are
generalized beyond HTAs and El Salvador to uncover the mechanisms by which civil
society associations in the global south effectively deepen democracy at the
local level in order to transform individuals from subjects of the state into
high-intensity citizens. Findings further knowledge in the literature on
democratic deepening by going beyond issues of institutional design to highlight
the mechanisms which underlie civil society's engagement. Findings also add to
the sociological literature on transnationalism, illuminating how migrants
engage dynamically as transnational political actors, transferring values and
practices between the host country and hometown and transforming democratic
quality and notions of citizenship. In addition, HTAs are useful tools through
which to link micro-sociological variables to macro-sociological discourses
about the public sphere. Thus, this study develops a typology of citizenship
which allows for a nuanced analysis and theorizes how civil society is
positioned vis-à-vis the local state and community to deepen democracy.
Consequently, this study unpacks civil society as a relational concept which
engages dynamically with the local state and community. By introducing community
as an autonomous actor in the practice of politics, this study also moves the
discussion beyond the traditional dichotomy of state-civil society relations to
present a three-dimensional conceptualization of democracy and reachs across
disciplinary boundaries in the social sciences.