* 0925733
* Micro-scale power generators employing capacitive converters with switchable dielectric medium
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Mona Hella, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* GEORGE HADDAD
* 07/31/2013
* USD 378,154.00

&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act
of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this work is to
demonstrate a more efficient method for kinetic to electrical energy conversion
based on variable capacitors. The approach is to actively control the dielectric
medium of the capacitors and switch from air to liquid during each conversion
cycle. The proposed power generator will convert up to four orders of magnitude
more energy per cycle versus conventional electrostatic converters.
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit. Switching of the dielectric media is a novel and
efficient way to increase the difference between the minimum and maximum
capacitance and respectively the power output of electrostatic converters. The
control of the dielectric constant of the capacitors is achieved via
electromechanical force effect, which causes dielectric liquid to rise in a gap
formed between two parallel, electrically insulated electrodes subjected to a
potential difference. Moreover, this work simultaneously implements the micro-
power generator with the control loop circuitry enabling further gains in energy
conversion efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The proposed work may
revolutionize the area of wireless sensor networks by introducing chip-based
converters integrated with power harvesting control and conditioning circuitry.
The results from this research will be incorporated in a series of outreach
activities including ?Design Your Future Day? sessions for high school girls and
presentations given to students in the Questar III New Vision program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;