* 0925866
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement:   Labor and the Rise of the Tiwanaku State (AD 500-1100):  A Bioarchaeological Study of Activity Patterns.
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Sara Becker, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 08/31/2010
* USD 12,008.00

Sara K. Simon, Dale Hutchinson&lt;br/&gt;NSF Proposal - DDIG
0925866&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide a detailed
understanding of labor in various communities during the formation and expansion
of the Tiwanaku (AD 500-1100), the first Andean state. The study examines
biological indicators to infer how habitual activity varies with state formation
and the control and distribution of labor, essential topics for understanding
prehistoric state development. This project addresses issues of heterarchical or
hierarchical state formation and provides a comparative framework of specific
skeletal evidence to amplify the archaeological record for an innovative
perspective into prehistoric labor patterns during the formation and expansion
of the Tiwanaku state. This project is the first comprehensive study of
biomechanics and skeletal indicators of activity (musculoskeletal markers,
osteoarthritis, and cross-sectional bone geometry) in the Titicaca Basin area of
Bolivia and in Moquegua, Peru. It expands skeletal biology analysis through
original data collection and statistical methods, having the potential to
provide a new model for the study of activity patterns. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: The analysis of data from multiple lines of evidence will further
illuminate prehistoric political organization, political economy, and labor
changes during the formation of Andean states. The methods used can be applied
to similar studies around the world. Broader Impacts: This research has created
ties between the University of North Carolina (UNC), the Bolivian Department of
Archaeology, and Museo Contisuyo in Peru. This study also improves education for
a local Bolivian student interested in learning about human osteology. It
enhances the relationship between the Anthropology departments of University of
North Carolina and Duke University, and the University of North Carolina
Hospital Department of Radiology. This study contributes to the doctoral
dissertation and training of a future female scholar in the sciences.