* 0925441
* BioBolt: A Distributed Minimally-Invasive Neural Interface for Wireless Epidural Recording
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Euisik Yoon, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2013
* USD 449,999.00

The object of this research is to develop a new platform concept, BioBolt, as a
distributed wireless neural interface for minimally-invasive, fully-implantable
epidural recording. The approach is to implement a stand-alone wireless link for
a number of microelectrodes, which can be easily placed on the dura mater
through a small hole in the skull by simple operation procedure.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The technical challenge is to implement an extremely low-power
wireless link in a small form factor. The proposed system consists of multiple
BioBolts and MasterBolt. Spatially distributed BioBolts in the region of
interest record the neural activities and send signals to MasterBolt. We explore
the intra-skin wireless communication between BioBolt nodes and MasterBolt,
which allows extremely low power signal transmission under 5?ÝW. MasterBolt
transmits all the collected neural signals from the neighboring BioBolts using
single-channel FM modulation with a power budget of &lt;1mW. This system gives
flexibility and expandability for long-term chronic monitoring of neural
signals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fully-implanted distributed wireless microsystems
for epidural neural recording will provide a new tool to study and understand
the collective brain activities for practical interface with computer,
prosthetic devices and control of impaired body. The completed system developed
in this project will expand the potential applications for brain-to-computer
interfaces beyond simple cursor control and offer people with motor disabilities
a good alternative to natural communication and movement. This project will
train graduate and undergraduate students across the different disciplines to
implement an important interface between brain and electronics. &lt;br/&gt;