* 0925114
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Hydroclimate Reconstructions of the Potomac River Basin Using Tree Rings
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,02/28/2011
* Amy Hessl, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ezekiel Kalipeni
* 02/28/2011
* USD 11,983.00

Tree-ring analysis, the science that deals with study of annual tree rings,
allows scientists to develop precisely dated records of annually or seasonally
resolved data commonly extending 300 or more years into the past. In regions
with short records of instrumental data, tree growth can be used as a substitute
for streamflow because many of the same factors that affect streams, such as
precipitation and runoff, also influence the growth of trees. Unlike the western
and central United States, the eastern United States has limited tree-ring
records suitable for millennial-length reconstructions of streamflow and
climate. A new source of climate history for eastern United States may be
derived from isolated stands of old-growth eastern redcedar growing near the
headwaters of the Potomac River in West Virginia. Additionally, in the eastern
broadleaf forest tens of tree species grow together across a variety of sites,
each with a different response to climate, allowing for additional climate
information to be extracted. This research will utilize old-growth eastern
redcedar and the multitude of broadleaf tree species to learn more about the
history of streamflow and climate in the Basin. Current management and modeling
strategies in the Potomac River Basin are constrained by the limited length and
variability of the instrumental records of streamflow and precipitation. The
primary outcomes of the project will be 1) tree-ring reconstructions of the
streamflow and precipitation of the Potomac River Basin for the last 1000 years
using eastern redcedar tree-ring widths, 2) a multi-species tree-ring
reconstruction used to increase the seasonal knowledge of climate for the last
300 years, 3) an evaluation of the instrumental record of streamflow in the
context of the past 1000 years of the tree-ring record, and 4) the integration
of tree-ring data into water resource modeling efforts in the eastern United
States.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This Doctoral Dissertation Research will generate
one of the few ultra-long (1000 years) tree-ring chronologies for eastern North
America. The Potomac River is the primary water resource for the Washington, DC
metropolitan area, supplying approximately 75 percent of the water demand. The
climate reconstructions will aid water resource managers at the Interstate
Commission on the Potomac River Basin plan for future drought events by placing
the instrumental records of streamflow and precipitation within the context of
natural climatic variability of the past millennium. The tree-ring records of
precipitation and streamflow will be integrated into an existing water supply
and demand model to assess the ability of the water system to meet demand under
past drought conditions. The multi-species approach will aid tree-ring
scientists in climate reconstructions in other regions where multiple species
are present and will promote the use of existing tree-ring data to investigate
water resource management issues in locations with limited instrumental records.
As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will
provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent
research career.