* 0925561
* Collaborative Research:   Signals, Genes, and Metabolites in Defense Priming Mediated by 12-oxo-phytodienoate Reductases in Maize
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Michael Kolomiets, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 08/31/2013
* USD 469,677.00

Dr. Jurgen Engelberth Proposal number: IOS_0925615

Collaborative Research: Signals, genes, and metabolites in defense priming
mediated by maize 12-oxo-phytodienoate reductases in maize.

Green leafy volatiles (GLVs), the odor typically associated with wounded or cut
plants, are potent signaling molecules involved in the regulation of plant
defense against insect herbivores and pathogens. In addition to activating
direct responses, GLV exposure also prepares (or primes) even non-infested
plants for subsequent attack by pests and pathogens by allowing the plant to
respond faster and stronger to the actual infestation. Among the genes up-
regulated in maize in response to GLVs exposure were several members of the
12-oxo-phytodienoate reductase (OPR) gene family. This was accompanied by an
increase in total OPR enzyme activity at the time of priming. OPRs seem to play
a significant role not only in the regulation of the octadecanoid signaling
pathway with jasmonates as its end-product, but also in the regulation of other
important defense signals. The goal of this project is therefore to
comprehensively analyze the biochemical and physiological roles of six maize OPR
family members in the priming of defense responses to insect herbivores and
pathogens and in the regulation of direct defenses. The PIs will analyze this
class of proteins biochemically, molecularly, and genetically by using
transposon-insertional OPR mutants of maize and by testing the recombinant OPR
proteins in vitro. Defense priming to insect herbivory and diseases is an
emerging exciting but little understood area in plant biology. This project aims
to provide basic knowledge about potential molecular and biochemical mechanisms
of priming and will eventually help to develop environmentally sound pest and
pathogen management strategies. The results of this project will be broadly
disseminated through publications, incorporation into textbooks and coursework,
and press releases to local newspapers and web-based journals. The project is
multidisciplinary in nature and will provide participating students with a truly
integrative experience by combining such diverse areas as molecular biology,
biochemistry, entomology, plant pathology, chemical ecology and many more.