* 0925973
* Fundamentals and Applications of Thermoelectric Transport in Nanometer Scale Phase-Change Bridge Memory Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Helena Silva, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 08/31/2014
* USD 365,679.00

Fundamentals and Applications of Thermoelectric Transport in Nanometer Scale
Phase-Change Bridge Memory Devices&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Helena Silva (PI, University of Connecticut) and Chung Lam
(Co-PI, IBM Watson Research Center)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to investigate
thermoelectric transport in nanometer scale phase-change bridge memory devices
and to devise improved phase-change memories that utilize the asymmetries
introduced by thermoelectric effects such as multi-bit per cell
operation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phase-change memory has been the subject of
intensive research due to the continued need for higher capacity storage and
expectations of the end of current memory scaling in the near future. Our
findings point to the significance of Thomson Effect (thermoelectric effect in
uniform materials) in phase-change processes. A better understanding of
thermoelectric transport and phase-changes at the micrometer and nanometer
scales can be applied towards thermoelectric devices for clean power generation
and cooling, higher efficiency solar cells that combine photovoltaic with
thermoelectric generation and on-chip cooling for micro/nanoelectronics. This
project is carried out in partnership with IBM Watson Research Center.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research consists of detailed analysis of Thomson
Effect at nanometer scale using phase-change memory devices. The role of
electronic convective and electron-phonon scattering components in the
thermoelectric transport in these structures is investigated. Students learn
about nanoelectronic devices, phase changes, thermoelectric transport,
nanofabrication, electrical and physical characterization, instrumentation and
numerical modeling. This project allows investigation of basic physical
phenomena relevant to a promising memory device technology and offers a rich
program for educational and outreach activities at all levels. This
collaborative research strengthens an important relationship between University
of Connecticut faculty and students and IBM scientists.