* 0925298
* In Vitro Expression of Plant Ion Channels
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2009,12/31/2010
* Gerald Schoenknecht, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 12/31/2010
* USD 68,788.00

Ion channel proteins play important roles in the development and function of
cells, and remarkably, they are generally neither accessible in their native
membranes nor in heterologous expression systems. Thus, the characterization of
ion channels is severely limited. Biochemical purification and reconstitution of
ion channel proteins is tedious and time consuming, and not always successful. A
reliable expression system for ion channel proteins would allow characterization
of organelle ion channels, which are hardly accessible at the moment, and would
tremendously promote ion channel research in general. While cell-free (in vitro)
protein expression has become a routine technique for soluble proteins, cell-
free expression seemed impractical for membrane proteins, which precipitate in
an aqueous environment. Only very recently cell-free expression of functional
membrane proteins became feasible, by adding mild detergents or liposomes. This
approach opens up exciting new possibilities to develop a cell-free expression
system for ion channel proteins. The objective of this project is to develop a
set of protocols that will allow for the routine cell-free expression and
reconstitution of functional ion channels. Plant two-pore domain potassium-
channels will be used as a model in this project, because they are relatively
small (100 kDa) and they have a simple architecture; homodimers form a
functional channel. Cell-free expression of plant potassium-channels will be
performed in the presence of added liposomes. These small proteoliposomes will
be fused into giant liposomes, thus making the recombinantly expressed
potassium-channels accessible to characterization by the patch-clamp technique.
The most critical part of this approach, the cell-free expression, will be
developed in an international collaboration with Dr. Andreas Weber (University
of DÃ¼sseldorf, Germany) who is a leading expert in the functional analysis of
plant membrane transporters. Once experimental protocols are established for
cell-free expression and reconstitution of plant potassium-channels, these
protocols can very likely be adapted to other ion channels. The project has the
potential to transform the field of ion channel research. There is a certain
risk that the proposed expression and reconstitution of functional plant
potassium-channels might not work; this risk is acceptable, since each
experimental step (cell-free expression, liposome fusion, and patch-clamp) has
been shown to be viable in separate lines of experiments. This project combines
these techniques and its success will set the stage for adaptation of this
approach for studies of other ion channels, and could conceivably transform how
ion channels are studied. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is designed to engage undergraduate
students in the development of these techniques. In addition, this project will
allow the PI to extend his ongoing outreach activities at local schools, where
he routinely gives presentations covering different topics of plant science
("Meat Eating Plants", "Do Plants Move?", "Monocot/Dicot") in an age appropriate
manner.