* 0925626
* Nanowire Spin-Valves for Antiferromagnet Spintronics
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Kai Liu, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 07/31/2013
* USD 330,000.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The emerging field of spintronics has
already revolutionized information technology, particularly in the explosive
growth of the magnetic recording areal density over the past decade. At the
heart of spintronics are spin-valves that permits low magnetic field
applications and a spin-transfer torque (STT) effect that allows local
electrical manipulation of magnetic states. They enable a host of fascinating
spin-based electronics applications, from fast, scalable, non-volatile and
energy-efficient magnetic random access memory, to domain wall based logic and
tunable high frequency STT oscillators. The STT effect has so far been
exclusively studied in ferromagnets, until the recent theoretical proposals of
antiferromagnet (AF) based STT effect. The PI aims at investigating the novel
AF-STT effect in multilayered nanowires and building a novel type of nanowire
based spin-valves for AF spintronics explorations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
technical merits of the research are as follows. Spin-valves will be
incorporated into nanowires by electrochemical deposition. Crystal structures of
the nanowires, particularly those of the AF components, will be optimized. The
well-defined structure guarantees uniform current density and allows
quantitative measures of the exchange bias shift to gauge the AF-STT. The effect
of current density, direction, and temperature on the AF-STT will be
investigated, in both arrays of nanowires and a single nanowire. Correlation
between magnetization reversal mechanisms and irreversible resistance jumps will
be examined using a first order reversal curve method as well as ultrafast
dynamic study by time-resolved magneto-optical Kerr effect. Finally, direct
evidence on the modification of the AF interfacial magnetic microstructure will
be probed by x-ray magnetic circular and linear dichroism. These studies will
not only systematically and conclusively demonstrate the AF-STT effect, but also
advance the basic understanding of the STT effect and open up whole new classes
of materials and mechanisms for spintronics explorations. The multilayered spin-
valve nanowires also serve as prototype massively parallel arrays of MR sensors
and MRAM elements. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the research
include technological advances, student education and training, and outreach to
the general public. The proposed multilayered spin-valve nanowires for AF-STT
studies will have far reaching technological impacts since both spin-valve and
STT are at the heart of modern spintronic devices. The proposed project will
also have broad impacts on education and training. Graduate students involved
will receive excellent exposure to university and national laboratory research
environment. This project will also involve undergraduate students, especially
those aiming at a teaching career, as well as high school students. Presentation
skills will be emphasized in student training. The research efforts will be
integrated into curriculum development and help to expand an undergraduate lab
course and a graduate course. Outreach activities including active participation
in the Nanoscience Informal Science Education (NISE) network are planned.