* 0925832
* GI Bill Workshop
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/2009,09/30/2010
* Barry Horowitz, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Alan Cheville
* 09/30/2010
* USD 72,443.00

This award supports a workshop to explore the opportunities for engineering
students and schools which is presented by the new GI bill. The Post-9/11
Veterans Educational Assistance Act (June 30, 2008) authorizes a major expansion
of educational benefits for veterans who served post-9/11 (Ref 1). The
Department of Veterans Affairs (DVA) published proposed guidelines for
implementing the expanded entitlement in December 2008 (Ref 2). The new benefits
are scheduled to go into effect in August 2009. The VA anticipates as many as
125,000 new applicants for benefits in August 2009 (Ref 3).

Broader Impacts Recent trends in student interest in engineering and science,
the expected retirement of large numbers of engineers and scientists during the
coming decade, and the large proportion of science and engineering graduates who
are not U.S. citizens suggest serious problems for the American engineering and
science workforce in the future (Ref 4). The GI Bill provides an opportunity for
educational institutions to organize customized programs in engineering and
science that would be especially attractive to veterans interested in advancing
their education. For example, engineering schools could provide veterans with
supervised research or internship experiences for academic credit. In parallel,
if properly orchestrated, industrial and governmental organizations engaged in
science and engineering can address future work force needs while helping
veterans by developing programs to work with those educational institutions. The
National Science Foundation can play a special role in helping educational
institutions to innovate and organize themselves for providing attractive
programs tailored for veterans, and NSF can work with firms and government
organizations to facilitate the stablishment of guidelines and protocols for
working with the educational community.

Intellectual Merit The objective of this proposal is to conduct a work shop that
brings together appropriate representatives of academia, industry and government
to develop ideas for the ingredients of a GI Bill Engineering and Science
Enhancement Program. The program would be designed to direct more veterans
toward engineering and science, and to explore the possible roles that
government and industry can play in attracting veterans to the sector and
enriching the engineering and science education of veterans. The product of the
workshop would be a report that includes recommendations for a set of innovative
efforts by NSF, academic institutions, other government organizations, and
industry. In particular, the recommendations for NSF will be aimed at helping
educational institutions to develop their own tailored programs, including
partnerships with industrial and government organizations. The report will also
include estimates of cost for NSF and commitments needed from industrial firms
and government organizations that would participate in such a program.