* 0925597
* Promoting Inter/Multidisciplinary Education and Research, The International Joint Conference on Bioinformatics, Systems biology and intelligent computing
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2009,04/30/2010
* Chaoyang Zhang, Texas A&M University-Commerce
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 04/30/2010
* USD 10,000.00

Bioinformatics, Systems Biology and Intelligent Computing are synergistic
interactive research&lt;br/&gt;disciplines that hold great promise for the
advancement of research and development in complex&lt;br/&gt;biomedical systems,
agricultural, environmental, pharmaceutical and medical sciences as
well&lt;br/&gt;as public health, drug design, genomics and so on. Research and
development in these two are impacting the science and technology of fields such
as medicine, food production, forensics, agriculture, pharmacy, engineering and
bio-mathematical and biophysical sciences by advancing&lt;br/&gt;fundamental
concepts in molecular biology, in genomics and in medicine, by helping us
understand living organisms at multiple levels, by developing innovative
implants and prosthetics, by new medical image technologies, and by improving
tools and techniques for the detection, prevention and treatment of diseases.
The International Joint Conference on Bioinformatics, Systems Biology and
Intelligent Computing (IJCBS 2009) provides a common platform for the cross
fertilization of ideas, and to help shape knowledge and scientific achievements
by bridging these two very important and complementary disciplines into an
interactive and attractive forum. Keeping this objective in mind, IJCBS 2009 is
aimed at promoting inter/multidisciplinary education&lt;br/&gt;and research by
offering a number of keynote, tutorial and cutting-edge research lectures. IJCBS
2009 will host special sessions focusing on the interdisciplinary and
multidisciplinary education and research in order to foster collaboration
between the bioinformatics, systems biology and intelligent computing domains in
the USA and China. IJCBS09 will provide travel support for a number of selected
USA students and scholars to attend the event.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;