* 0925080
* RUI: Multilayer Neural Network With Multi-Valued Neurons, its Application to Image Recognition and Processing and Incorporation of the Research Results into the Educational Process
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Parag Lala, Texas A&M University-Texarkana
* Standard Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 08/31/2012
* USD 299,288.00

Abstract

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)"

The project focuses on the development of a new tool for solving pattern
recognition problems. This tool is based on the application of an original
artificial neural network ? multilayer neural network with multi-valued neurons.
This network has a simple and productive learning algorithm, which allows to
solve recognition and classification problems that are difficult to approach
using other techniques. An example is multiple-class classification problems.
The project involves solving multiple-class image recognition problems, such as
texture classification, textural segmentation, blurred images recognition, and
intelligent edge detection. The research involves study of nonlinear phenomena
of a multilayer neural network based on multi-valued neurons (MLMVN). A multi-
valued neuron (MVN) is a complex-valued neuron whose inputs and output are
located on the unit circle. A multilayer neural network based on this neuron has
a derivative-free self-adaptive learning algorithm. It outperforms other
techniques in terms of training speed and classification/prediction rates. The
following problems are considered in this project. The relationship between the
topology of MLMVN and the quality of multiple-class classification is
investigated. MLMVN is used for texture classification, textural segmentation,
and as an edge detector for noisy images. The Fourier phase spectrum is used as
a feature space for blurred images recognition using MLMVN. A hardware
implementation of MVN and MLMVN is also considered. These studies will involve
undergraduate students, who participate in scientific research as part of their
education at Texas A&M-Texarkana. Hence, in addition to obtaining answers to
fundamental questions related to artificial neural networks and pattern
recognition, this project also is closely tied to educating students who will
become scientists and engineers.