* 0925401
* Regulation of Viral RNA Replication
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2009,05/31/2010
* C. Cheng Kao, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Neocles Leontis
* 05/31/2010
* USD 188,159.00

Viruses must produce their gene products in the proper amounts and with the
appropriate timing. Failure to do so can activate innate defense responses from
the host. Perhaps in response to the challenges from the host, viruses have
adapted a number of regulatory mechanisms, many of which work either
synergistically or as molecular switches to shut down other processes. This
project will study how regulatory processes are integrated during the infection
of a model plus-strand RNA virus named Brome Mosaic Virus (BMV). The three
objectives of the project will: 1) examine the role of two cellular proteins
that compete for binding of the viral RNA motif that regulates minus-strand RNA
synthesis, 2) determine how the BMV capsid protein can regulate the transition
from RNA synthesis to RNA encapsidation, and 3) characterize also how a key BMV
replication protein plays a dual role in translation and the assembly of the
viral replication enzyme complex. The focus of this work represents a more
integrative approach to studies of the viral infection process the anticipated
result should be informative for all RNA viruses. In addition, the anticipated
results will contribute to our understanding of gene regulation, protein-RNA
interactions, and crosstalk between basic processes. This research will also
provide a forum to train students as problem solvers. Students will be trained
to use interdisciplinary approaches to study viral pathogens. Over two dozen
students, ranging from high schoolers to postdocs, including underrepresented
inorities, have been trained on this project with prior support. The next phase
of this research will continue this training tradition.