* 0925873
* Computationally Efficient Linear Transforms for Next-Generation Remote Sensing Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Mark Yeary, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Zhi Tian
* 09/30/2013
* USD 299,358.00

&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to develop a new technique for
finite bit representation to enable high-performance signal processing for
remote sensing systems. The technique for finite bit representation is based on
multidimensional continued fractions coupled with an architectural design
strategy that does not use multipliers. Multidimensional continued fractions
have been known within the mathematical community for some time, but have
largely been unexplored by the engineering community until recently.
Simultaneous rational representations are a member of the multidimensional
fraction family and are employed to create fixed integer transforms with
computationally optimal representations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
seeks to provide an approach that can decrease the size, weight, and cost of
sensor systems and increase their spatial and temporal resolution. Various
hardware platforms are to be explored during the project. Of these, field
programmable gate arrays and digital signal processors are likely the most
compelling for fast, low-power devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal
investigator is currently serving as the faculty advisor for the American
Indians in Science and Engineering Society chapter at the University of Oklahoma
and the co-principal investigator is currently serving as a mentor for two high-
school robotics teams near Oklahoma City. In addition, the students from the
Society of Women Engineers, and the 436 students in the university?s
Multicultural Engineering Program are encouraged to participate in this project.
Remote sensing systems include satellite, light detection and ranging (LIDAR),
infra-red, and radar. As such, this project helps students and researchers learn
more about the environment in which they live. Experiments utilize the National
Weather Radar Testbed that is located in Oklahoma.