* 0925357
* Workshop: Doctoral Consortium for ASSETS 2009
* CSE,IIS
* 03/15/2009,02/28/2011
* Richard Ladner, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 02/28/2011
* USD 34,235.00

This is funding to support a consortium (workshop) of approximately 12 promising
doctoral students from the United States and abroad, along with about 5
distinguished research faculty. The event will take place on Sunday, October 25,
immediately preceding and in conjunction with the Eleventh ACM SIGACCESS
Conference (ASSETS 2009), to be held Monday-Wednesday, October 26-28, 2009, in
Pittsburgh, and sponsored by the ACM Special Interest Group on Computers and
Accessibility. The ASSETS conference is the premier forum for presenting
research results and innovations in software and technology designed to address
the special needs of people with disabilities of all kinds. Researchers and
developers from both academia and industry around the world will meet to
exchange ideas and present reports on the latest work relating to speech, motor,
hearing, and vision impairments, cognitive limitations, emotional and learning
disabilities, and aging. A key component of building this community is through
its youth. The ASSETS 2009 doctoral consortium will provide an opportunity for
graduate students from diverse backgrounds (computing, engineering, psychology,
architecture, etc.) to come together and explore their research interests in an
interdisciplinary workshop, under the guidance of the PI and a panel of other
distinguished experts in the field, so that they can see the broader spectrum of
research and development approaches to assistive technologies and universal
usability, and also experience the community in which they can pursue their
endeavors. Student participants will make formal presentations of their work
during the consortium, and will receive constructive feedback from the faculty
panel. The feedback is designed to help students understand and articulate how
their work is positioned relative to related research, whether their topics are
adequately focused for thesis research projects, whether their methods are
correctly chosen and applied, and whether their results are appropriately
analyzed and presented. Thus, the consortium will help shape ongoing and future
research projects aimed at assistive technologies and universal access, will
promote scholarship and networking among new researchers in this emerging
interdisciplinary area, and will expose these promising young researchers to a
larger community. A session has been set aside during the main conference to
allow doctoral consortium participants to present to the entire conference, and
one student from the doctoral consortium will be selected to deliver the closing
plenary presentation. The organizers will take special steps to promote
participation from institutions with relatively large numbers of students from
underrepresented groups. More information is available online at
http://www.sigaccess.org/assets09. Evaluation of the consortium will be
conducted, and the results made available to the organizers of future such
events.

Broader Impacts: The doctoral consortium will help expand the participation of
young researchers pursuing graduate studies in this field, by providing them an
opportunity to gain wider exposure in the community for their innovative work
and to obtain feedback and guidance from senior members of the research
community. It will further help foster a sense of community among these young
researchers, by allowing them to create a social network both among themselves
and with senior researchers at a critical stage in their professional
development. Because the students and faculty constitute a diverse group across
a variety of dimensions, including nationality/cultural and scientific
discipline, the students' horizons are broadened to the future benefit of the
field.