* 0925043
* World Wide Views on Global Warming:  Process and Impact
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Richard Worthington, Pomona College
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 06/30/2012
* USD 234,955.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). This award supports experimental research on participation
in climate change policy. The experiment, World Wide Views on Global Warming, is
a day of deliberation by residents in 30 countries on climate change issues
(September 26, 2009), which culminates in the compilation of their views on and
prescriptions for policy. These results are shared with delegates to the UN
Framework Convention on Climate Change meeting in Copenhagen (COP 15) scheduled
for December 2009, as well as with other interested parties and the general
public.

This award supports research conducted by the United States WWViews affiliates
in collaboration with the global project organizer, the Danish Board of
Technology, and up to 5 additional partners at sites where WWViews deliberations
are being held. Each participating team conducts deliberations that generate the
experimental data for the research. The objectives of this research project are
(1) contribute to the first ever global citizen deliberation exercise by
conducting the U.S. deliberations in several regions of the country, introducing
the informed views of a broad cross-section of laypeople from around the world
into UN climate negotiations that are otherwise stakeholder driven; (2) assess
policy learning by participants and the direct and indirect outcomes of WWViews
in the COP 15 deliberations and its policy environment; (3) create an enduring
network of institutions and trained project managers able to organize future
WWViews deliberations on climate change or other global topics; and (4) expand
participation by diverse members of the US public in science and technology
policy. As the first-ever global citizen consultation, the project adds to
existing knowledge of deliberative democracy and participatory technology
assessment through a comparative analysis of experiences in different countries.

The methods used include documents and interview research on the policy context
in different U.S. states and foreign countries; analysis of the demographics of
participants in the deliberation; observations at the deliberations; a pre and
post event survey; action research at the Copenhagen UN meeting; interviews of
U.S. delegates to COP 15 after the UN meetings; media and documents content
analyses; and participatory assessment by WWViews local citizens, elected
officials, and other stakeholders.

The broader impacts of the project include training graduate and undergraduate
students in research and practice of participatory technology assessment and
deliberative democracy; expanding participation in science and technology by
creating space for informed citizen voices in technoscientific policies and
practices; building national and international networks of policy analysts,
scholars, elected officials, and everyday citizens, and increasing their
capacity for future participatory technology assessment; dissemination of
results through local workshops as well as a project report and scholarly
articles; and contributing to the development of a policy tool than can help
citizens world wide participate effectively in addressing urgent global
problems.