* 0925191
* GOALI: A Novel Field-Induced Charge-Separation Laser (FICSL) for Ultra High-Speed High-Efficiency Modulation
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Larry Coldren, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* john zavada
* 09/30/2012
* USD 480,000.00

Objective:&lt;br/&gt;An entirely new type of semiconductor laser modulation
process will be explored in this industry-university collaborative project. A
novel Field-Induced Charge Separation Laser (FICSL) structure will provide
direct modulation of the gain to enable much higher modulation speeds relative
to conventional diode lasers in which current modulation is employed.
Preliminary modeling suggests modulation speeds in the 100 GHz range.
Collaborations with Ziva Corp., our GOALI partner, will help guide these
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;The FICSL
involves new physics, that of separating holes and electrons with an applied
field via a gate structure placed above the active gain region in order to
directly modulate the gain. An enhanced understanding of laser dynamics in
multi-terminal configurations should result. The team brings high levels of
expertise in MBE growth (Palmstr√∏m), high-speed transistors (Rodwell) and
efficient, high-speed vertical-cavity lasers (Coldren) to uniquely address this
new problem area. The UCSB labs in MBE growth, III-V nanofabrication, and
materials and device characterization, are second to none for the VCSEL-like
laser studies to be doneS. Complementary skills exist at Ziva. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact:&lt;br/&gt;Such more-efficient, higher-speed devices
may revolutionize optical interconnect approaches and enable more efficient
computers and data centers. Interaction with Ziva greatly benefits the students
involved. New processes developed within NSF-NNIN facility, will be available to
future generations of students. Physics will be integrated into the ECE227
series, and it will be disseminated in journal and conference publications. The
co-PIs and graduate students will continue to participate in one or more of the
ten internship programs for under-represented minorities, high school, and
undergrad students that are sponsored by NSF-MRL, NNIN, &amp; COE.