* 0925660
* Workshop at the ACM CHI 2009 Conference: Human-centered Computing in International Development
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2009,09/30/2009
* Matthew Kam, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 09/30/2009
* USD 21,000.00

What does the desktop metaphor mean for communities that do not use or value
desks? How does the QWERTY keyboard perform in communities whose language has no
"Q", "W", "E", "R", "T", nor "Y"? What is the point of a personal computer in a
context where technologies are not held for a person but are shared by a whole
community? Computer applications and PC appliances have traditionally been
designed by and for Western high-income populations. But today the Internet and
internet-enabled computers have become a truly global phenomenon, reaching out
to many of the most remote and marginalized communities. This workshop will be
held on Saturday and Sunday, April 4-5, as an official part of the ACM 2009
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI 2009) in Boston. The
workshop will explore interaction design in the context of international
development, and in particular will address interaction design for parts of the
world that are often marginalized by current systems and applications designers.
The PI believes that to extend the boundaries of existing practice in designing
information and communication technologies, design should be with, for, and of
the marginalized communities he plans to set centre stage in the workshop
discussions. The workshop will provide a forum to exchange experiences, to
explore differences between developed and developing world contexts, to develop
new partnerships, and to learn from each other's experiences. NSF funding will
enable approximately ten international delegates to attend from low-income
countries, from which participation would otherwise be impossible; without the
active involvement of these participants, the outcomes of the workshop would be
far less useful and effective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The annual CHI conference,
sponsored by the Association for Computing Machinery's Special Interest Group on
Computer-Human Interaction (ACM SIGCHI), is a leading international forum for
the presentation and discussion of human-computer interaction (HCI) research and
practice. The conference is attended by over 2,000 professionals from around the
world. Research papers presented at the conference are heavily-refereed and
widely cited; they constitute some of the most scientifically respected research
publications in the field of HCI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: A review
of the HCI literature exposes the broad intellectual gap that exists between
problems of computer interaction and studies of the development impact of
computer technologies in low-income countries. The PI expects that this
workshop, building on the outcomes of two previous meetings at CHI 2007 (funded
in part by NSF) and CHI 2008 (which led to establishment of a website
http://hci4d.org that provides a platform for exchange of information, ideas,
and experiences in this domain), will be instrumental in developing additional
intellectual momentum around these topic areas. Position papers generated as
part of the workshop and summary articles will be published in a special issue
of the journal Information Technology and International Development, as well as
in ACM Interactions, Interfaces magazine, and Usability News. The PI is also
working on a story-based template, which will provide an online repository for
reporting findings and observations that can be easily searched and shared.