* 0925768
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Female Adolescent Energy Expenditure in The Gambia
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Peter Ellison, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 08/31/2012
* USD 19,000.00

Intellectual Merit: The proposed research has three objectives, each of which
makes timely and significant contributions to human biology. First, it develops
activity monitoring with accelerometers as an innovative and non-invasive method
for estimating energy expenditure in human ecology field studies. Second, it
explores the relationship of energy expenditure profiles in adolescent females
in a subsistence agricultural society to body composition and pubertal
maturation. Third, it investigates whether the relationship between energy
expenditure and adolescent development is modified by early life energy
availability.

The project takes advantage of a unique opportunity in The Gambia to directly
address the effects of early life factors in a human population where
differences in maternal energetic status during pregnancy are known. Between
1989 and 1994, the British Medical Research Council gave standardized
nutritional supplements to a sub-set of pregnant women in the West Kiang
District. This project follows up both the children of both supplemented and
unsupplemented individuals to investigate the interaction of developmental and
current energetic conditions on adolescent development.

Broader Impact: Populations in developing nations show evidence of a shift over
time toward sedentism and associated health problems, including obesity and
diabetes. This study will help to establish a field technique capable of
generating high-quality, comparative data on energy expenditure with minimal
invasiveness and low cost. It will quantify energy expenditure in activity in a
subsistence agricultural population and its relation to body composition and
pubertal progression, providing an important comparison for urban industrial
settings. It will constitute a rare randomized test of the impact of prenatal
conditions on adolescent physiology and development. Furthermore, it will build
capacity in an undergraduate research assistant, who will participate in data
collection and complete a senior thesis, and in three Gambian field assistants
in the West Kiang District, who will be learn accelerometer techniques. This
doctoral dissertation research project will also provide training and
development opportunities for a female graduate student.

