* 0925015
* Opening The "Black Box" of Science and Technology Policy Making in China: The Case of Biotechnology
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2010,05/31/2011
* Cong Cao, SUNY Levin Institute
* Standard Grant
* Kelly A. Joyce
* 05/31/2011
* USD 67,235.00

This project investigates the making of science policy in China around
genetically modified organisms. While science and technology (S&T) have become
increasingly important in China's innovation push, the process through which S&T
policies have been made is virtually unknown, even to scholars of Chinese S&T.
The proposed research reveals the complexity of making policies surrounding
biotechnology in China, focusing in particular on research on and the
commercialization of genetically modified (GM) crops.

GM related policy-making, in China as well as elsewhere, has involved a variety
of actors from the scientific community, the public and media, and non-
governmental organizations concerned with environmental protection.
Consideration of international trade and regulation has also been an important
dimension in the GM policy-making process. This research addresses the
complexity in formulating China's policy of research and commercialization of GM
crops by employing multiple methods of analysis and a variety of data sources.
The researcher will conduct a content analysis of documents published by the
Chinese government and other participants such as international environmental
groups, media coverage and other public discourse. The researcher will also
interview scientists, policy analysts, and other stakeholders in the policy-
making process. This project investigates factors that have prompted changes in
China's policies on public research investment, biosafety, food safety, trade,
and intellectual property rights.

With this framework, the research is expected to enrich scholarly understanding
of agenda-setting in China's science policy-making process and shed light on the
interactions between science and society in China. The research explores the
role of scientists and other stakeholders in order to contribute a better
understanding of China's policy-making process to the STS literature on science
policy.