* 0925526
* Interfering Pulse Train Magnetometer
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2009,02/28/2014
* Jean-Claude Diels, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 02/28/2014
* USD 350,000.00

This project is to develop an Interfering Pulse Train Magnetometer (IPTM),
sensor of which the probe will be located at the tip of a fiber, tail extension
of a ring laser. A 1000:1 improvement in signal sensitivity over any
magnetometer based on Faraday rotation stems from the conversion of phase to
frequency inside a mode-locked laser cavity. As contrasted to existing atomic
vapor magnetometer, usually accompanied by magnetic coils and RF sources, this
instrument involves only a symbiosis of the laser and a magnetic field sensor.
The principles exploited are (i) coherent population trapping, achieved by
tuning the laser repetition rate and (ii) phase measurement based on the
interference of two trains of pulses. A femtosecond resolution is achieved.

INTELLECTUAL MERIT: Prior NSF supported research led to a phase measurement
technique in which the laser is used as an interferometer. A phase difference
applied to two intracavity pulses is converted into a frequency, easier to
measure than amplitude. The improvement is comparable to that brought by FM
radio as compared to AM broadcast. The phase difference between the two pulses
is produced by the magnetic field applied to an intracavity sensor. Highest
sensitivity is predicted through the use of atomic vapors, exploiting narrow
dark line resonance realized by tuning the repetition rate of the laser to a
submultiple of a hyperfine splitting, hence bypassing the external RF source
usually required obtaining such resonances. With a predicted response of 1013
Hz/T for a 1 cm sensor, the magnetic properties of any material can be
accurately measured. Recent work suggests that ferromagnetic materials can have
an ultrafast response. The new instrument will make it possible to fs resolved
perform pump-probe experiments, where the pump is a pulse sent from outside the
cavity, and two probes are the intracavity circularly polarized pulses
interrogating the magnetic field. The local nature of the probe is unique: it
will be miniaturized in a photonics fiber encapsulating the atomic vapor for
application as a local probe in biology/medicine.

BROADER IMPACTS: This interdisciplinary instrument will lead to a new insight in
nerve activity. This instrument will provide Chemists, Material Scientists
Biologists or Medical researchers with a local magnetometer, as opposed to
magnetoencephalography sensors that cannot operate closer than 3 cm from the
source. As educational impact, training will be provided to the PhD students of
the group, and project results will be incorporated in graduate courses (Modern
topics and Optics Labs). The milestones will be discussed in Optics/Biology
seminar series, involving all students of the Optical Science/engineering
program of UNM. As in previous years, undergraduate students will be enrolled
through the REU. The NSF resources of the Research Education for Teachers (RET)
will be used to enroll the participation of teachers from two selective High
Schools in the summer months of the program. This group will continue to welcome
minorities and newcomers' graduate students from diverse background. UNM is a
Hispanic serving institution.