* 0925100
* EAGER: Separating Proteins Via Dynamic Light Scattering Guidance of Drop Splitting
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2009,04/30/2011
* Antonio Garcia, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Rosemarie D. Wesson
* 04/30/2011
* USD 49,921.00

ASU and the NASA Glenn Research Center propose to combine two relatively new
techniques in order to change the existing paradigm on how proteins can be
separated from a complex biological fluid. In order to explore the early-stage
idea of controlling drop splitting via light scattering detection in a single
drop, funding from the Early- Concept Grants for Exploratory Research program is
well suited because it is a high risk and high payoff project. The paradigm of
light scattering visualization as a means of controlling separation in a single
drop would represent a fundamental change from current state of the art
bioseparations in many ways: (1) there is no confinement of the liquid samples
within a capillary, gel plate, or tube; (2) complex biological samples can be
used; (3) simultaneous molecular weight and isoelectric point detection of
proteins coincident with the separation process; (4) sequences of fractionations
can be programmed and accomplished within minutes using the digital (e.g., drop-
wise) nature of the liquid handling; and (5) the ability to modify focusing
conditions on-thefly to better identify the proteins being detected during
separation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The desired outcome of the research is the
generation of data and the enhancement of modeling capabilities so that multiple
proteins in biological fluids such as urine, saliva, or blood can be separated
and analyzed. We expect that the unique combination of isoelectric focusing and
scanning by lght scattering will generate a wealth of information not previously
available in a rapid, portable system. The exploratory work is needed in order
to understand how sensitivity, resolution, and the role of dynamic electric
fields control protein separation in a drop. The work conducted will greatly
help to formulate a research plan on wide-scale proteomics analysis of bodily
fluids using digital isoelectric focusing with light scattering control and
detection. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed EAGER will broaden participation
by underrepresented groups and enhance infrastructure for research and
education. Two Hispanic female students at Arizona State University (one
graduate, Ana Gomez, and one undergraduate, Risa Garcia) will be directly
involved with the exploratory work on isolectric focusing and splitting of a
drop. We also hope to recruit another underrepresented student to conduct the
light scattering research that will guide the protein bioseparation. The EAGER
funding will catalyze a multidisciplinary collaboration between Arizona State
University and NASA John Glenn Research Center opening the door to other future
joint efforts between the Harrington Department of Bioengineering at ASU and the
life systems group at NASA. &lt;br/&gt;