* 0925472
* NeTS-FIND: An Internet Architecture for User-Controlled Routes
* CSE,CNS
* 12/04/2008,08/31/2010
* Xiaowei Yang, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2010
* USD 162,986.00

Proposal Number: 0627166&lt;br/&gt;PI: Xiaowei Yang&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of California, Irvine&lt;br/&gt;Title: NeTS-FIND: An Internet
Architecture for User-Controlled
Routes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is developing an Internet architecture that enables users or their end-
systems to select the paths their packets take through the network. Such user-
controlled routes are desirable for both economic and technical reasons.
Economically, user-controlled routes are a key factor in maintaining the
competitiveness of the ISP marketplace, just as long distance carrier selection
has had a lasting impact on telephony. Technically, user-controlled routes
provide a fundamental means for improving the performance and reliability of
network communications. This is because they allow end systems to use multiple
diverse paths concurrently and reduce the dependence on a single network path
that has undesirable characteristics. The key technical difficulties associated
with user controlled routes lie in the areas of scalability and robustness. This
project directly addresses these issues. It involves the development of the
following components: 1) a scalable inter-domain routing protocol that
distributes policy-constrained domain-level maps of the network to users and
allows them to explicitly formulate domain-level routes; 2) an end system
protocol stack that allows various applications to take advantage of path
diversity; 3) algorithms and protocols that prevent users from rapidly switching
paths in a fashion that jeopardizes the overall routing stability; 4) techniques
that mitigate the security threats associated with user-controlled routes (e.g.
source address spoofing, multi-path denial of service attacks).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this work will have a positive economic
impact that fosters ISP competition, result in measurable technical improvements
in terms of reliability and performance of network communications, and
contribute to education. Algorithms, protocols, and software developed in this
project will be disseminated through research publications and a project web-
site.&lt;br/&gt;