* 0925907
* National Study of Entrepreneurial Behavior, Regulatory Focus, and Religion
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Jerry Park, Baylor University
* Standard Grant
* mo wang
* 08/31/2014
* USD 394,654.00

Individuals who engage in creative, innovative, entrepreneurial behavior are
highly prized in American society. Entrepreneurial activity is essential for a
robust economy. An emerging body of literature suggests that social influences
affect individuals' creative and innovative behavior by inducing a specific
mindset or regulatory focus. A promotion-focus mindset characterized by an
emphasis on growth, development, achievement is associated with entrepreneurial
behavior. Notably, organizations play a role in shaping this mindset in
individuals.

The purpose of this research project is to explore the impact of religious
communities (churches, synagogues, temples, mosques) on individuals' regulatory
mindsets and entrepreneurial behavior. The research team will test whether
specific values and practices within religious communities are conducive to
heightened entrepreneurial activity. This project includes a national survey of
working adults as well as in-depth case studies of eight religious communities.
The results of have potential to enhance both theory and practice. They will
advance interdisciplinary theory related to explaining entrepreneurial mindsets
and behavior. In addition, they will provide the basis for practical, research-
based prescriptions for mobilizing religious communities to promote
entrepreneurial behaviors that are essential for a thriving economy.