* 0925797
* Stretchable, Tunable, Self-Healing Microfluidic Antennas
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Gianluca Lazzi, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* GEORGE HADDAD
* 08/31/2013
* USD 340,706.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to
investigate microfluidic technology as a platform for highly flexible antennas
and electronics. The approach is to fill flexible, elastomeric microchannels
with a liquid metal that has unique rheological properties. These properties
allow the liquid metal to maintain mechanical stability in the channels and to
flow in response to deformation (stretching, flexing, wrapping) to ensure
electrical continuity while providing significant tunability and conformability.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed devices represent a significant improvement
from conventional copper antennas, which cannot be stretched beyond ~2% strain
without inducing irreversible damage. This collaborative project will have an
impact on applications ranging from wireless devices to biomedical electronics.
The research will provide a better understanding of the characteristics and
limitations of the proposed systems, and will allow this technology to be
incorporated into complex antenna architectures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed interdisciplinary research will benefit society by leading to advanced
electronics that are (i) wearable, (ii) surface conformal, (iii) responsive to
external stimuli, and (iv) durable / self-healing. Underrepresented students and
undergraduates will be actively recruited for this project through established
programs at NCSU. A prototype antenna will be developed as an outreach tool for
presentations at the Engineering Open House and NCSU Undergraduate Research
Symposium, which collectively attracts more than 1,500 high school and community
college students and their parents to campus each year.