* 0925941
* Development of a Low Cost Form of Maglev Transportation Using Electrodynamic Wheels
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Jonathan Bird, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 08/31/2013
* USD 349,134.00

Proposal Number: ECCS 0925941&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: Development
of a Low Cost Form of Maglev Transportation Using Electrodynamic
Wheels&lt;br/&gt;PI Name: Jonathan Bird&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI Institution:
University North Carolina ? Charlotte &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public
Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to
experimentally and numerically verify that a low cost, high efficiency, maglev
vehicle can be built. The approach is to electromechanically rotate Halbach
magnetic rotor?s over flat passive aluminum guideways. The simultaneous
rotational and translational motion of the rotors induces guideway eddy currents
that can provide suspension, thrust and lateral forces for the vehicle. Each
rotor?s speed and direction will be controlled in order to achieve optimal
efficiency and dynamic stability. Custom designed 3D finite element code will be
utilized to model the high-speed rotational and translational motion. An
experimental setup utilizing at least four Halbach rotors will be built.
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;This research will involve the
development of new electromagnetic optimizing techniques and control strategies
for a fully 3D eddy-current electromechanical conversion device. Insightful
trade-offs between stability requirements, efficiency, thrust and suspension
levels will be considered. The research could lead to new methodologies for
designing 3D eddy-current based machines. Novel multivariable control techniques
will be employed in order to ensure stability of the complexly coupled
device.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The utilization of a
maglev transportation system could significantly reduce the nation?s dependence
on petroleum-based energy thereby mitigating airborne pollutants. The project
will contribute to the education and awareness of power engineering as an
exciting area for research. Undergraduate and graduate students will assist with
this project at all levels. The PI will work closely with faculty advisors and
the Multicultural Office to ensure underrepresented students are involved. The
research will be published in leading magnetics and control journals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;