* 0925055
* Impulsive Control of Under-Actuated Dynamical Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Ranjan Mukherjee, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* George Chiu
* 07/31/2013
* USD 247,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The objective of this research award is to expand the sphere
of application of impulsive control, and importantly, translate impulsive
control from theory to practice. This will be achieved through investigation and
experimental implementation of impulsive control in under-actuated dynamical
systems. The main problems to be addressed are balancing, walking, and stair-
climbing in bipeds; but swing-up control of the pendubot and acrobot will be
investigated first. These are benchmark problems in under-actuated systems. The
motivation for addressing these problems is to compare the results of this
research with results in the literature and establish the advantages of
impulsive control for these systems; implement impulsive control for these
systems in experiments, which are relatively simple in terms of complexity; and
understand the effect of impulsive control inputs on system behavior with the
objective of learning to deal with impulsive forces arising from intermittent
contact in bipedal locomotion and other robotic
tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Impulsive forces are not included in the set of
admissible controls for most dynamical systems. By establishing the advantages
of impulsive control of under-actuated systems, this research will initiate
exploration of impulsive control for a wide range of problems such as orbital
transfer of satellites, rapid maneuvering of missiles and underwater vehicles,
and control of prosthetic devices. This award will have broad impact through
integration of research and education, diversity, and outreach. It will provide
research topics to graduate students and contribute towards the development of
future generation engineers and academics. The research results will be
integrated into select courses and published in archival journals and efforts
will be made to increase the participation of minorities. The outreach component
will include sharing results with researchers at federal government laboratories
and collaboration with faculty in other universities.&lt;br/&gt;