* 0925004
* Platform-Driven Innovation Within and Across Firms
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Marshall Van Alstyne, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* erik herron
* 08/31/2013
* USD 703,950.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

In this set of studies, a research team from Tulane, University of Texas, and
Boston University examines questions about how to better coordinate innovation
by means of platforms. They conduct work first at an industry level and then at
a within-firm level, looking to understand principles pertinent to both external
and internal innovation environments. The two projects should yield distinct but
complementary insights into managing innovation.

(1) External Platform Innovation. This portion of the study considers optimal
ecosystem growth. Common products such as personal computers, cell phones,
games, and telecommunications systems often serve as platforms upon which third
party developers build new features. The research will perform analysis of
sequential innovation to answer: When should a platform sponsor open a resource
to outside development? How does competition affect openness? How does the
ability to reuse information assets affect the level of openness? If downstream
developers do add value, should the firm privately subcontract with a subset or
should the firm open the platform to all developers? Should the lead firm bundle
new features into the platform or does this eliminate developers' incentives to
create new features?

(2) Internal Platform Innovation. This portion of the study will explore the
creation of internal knowledge markets. The project uses the principles of two-
sided network theory, information asymmetry, and price theory to design markets.
The team will build and deploy actual market systems to seek answers to the
following questions: What adoption problems arise during the launch of an
internal knowledge market? What incentives motivate participation and
contribution? How can we verify contributed information? Can we measure the
value of new information resources either directly in terms of dollars or
indirectly in terms of increased white-collar productivity? This project will
gather new micro-level data based on novel software tools.

The studies will employ model building, data collection, tool development, and
direct intervention methodologies. Understanding these issues should benefit not
only platform firms but also help regulators who seek to create environments
that foster innovation.