* 0925365
* Collaborative Research: Designing non-autonomous molecular machines
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Christopher Jarzynski, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* George Maracas
* 09/30/2012
* USD 150,000.00

Revised abstract for NSF proposal ECCS-0925365&lt;br/&gt;?Collaborative
Research: Designing non-autonomous molecular machines?&lt;br/&gt;PI: Nikolai
Sinitsyn, New Mexico Consortium&lt;br/&gt;Co-PI: Christopher Jarzynski,
University of Maryland&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5)"
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is tremendous current interest in molecular
machines: nanoscale systems that carry out specific tasks of mechanical work,
microscopic assembly, or information processing. Alongside rapid progress
revealing the details of biological molecular machines, laboratories around the
world have begun piecing together the components of artificial machines ?
molecular rotors, gears, and axles, single-molecule ?walkers?, and the like. The
task of designing these machines is daunting: too small to see with the naked
eye, they operate in a noisy environment where our everyday intuition is not
always a reliable guide. The broad aim of this research is to build theoretical
and numerical tools to enable researchers to predict, tune, and optimize the
response of molecular machines to external control signals.
&lt;br/&gt;&amp;#8232;&amp;#8232;&lt;br/&gt;This research will combine two
theoretical approaches that the PI and co-PI have developed, in collaboration
with colleagues: a geometric theory that characterizes quasi-static response in
terms of geometric quantities analogous to Berry?s phase in quantum mechanics;
and a non-equilibrium framework that elucidates laws that the system obeys even
when it is driven far away from thermal equilibrium. These two approaches will
be combined into a unified theoretical framework, and will be used in
conjunction with microscopically detailed simulations to construct accurate
models of molecular machines. These models will be benchmarked and refined by
application to catenanes, interlocked ring-like molecules that can be
manipulated by means of laser-induced chemistry, and will be used to propose
further experiments involving catenanes or similar molecular structures.