* 0925126
* Regulation of Genes Required for Nitrogen Fixation in Anabaena Heterocysts
* BIO,IOS
* 11/01/2008,08/31/2012
* James Golden, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Amy Litt
* 08/31/2012
* USD 423,662.00

The goals of this project are to understand how certain types of bacteria are
capable of supplying themselves with nitrogen fertilizer, which is required for
the growth of all organisms. The project will determine at the cellular and
molecular level, how these bacteria, called cyanobacteria, produce the cells and
enzymes that "fix" nitrogen from the air to produce compounds that can enter
cell metabolism. Cyanobacteria are green in color and obtain energy from
sunlight with photosynthesis similarly to plants. Like algae, cyanobacteria are
important primary producers, which are food for other organisms, in many
environments, especially the oceans, and they remove carbon dioxide from the
atmosphere, which reduces effects of global warming. Nitrogen-fixing
cyanobacteria provide biologically available nitrogen in natural environments
and are used as nitrogen fertilizer for rice cultivation in some parts of the
world. Recently, there has been enormous interest in using cyanobacteria and
algae to capture energy from sunlight to produce biomass, biofuels such as
biodiesel and ethanol, and hydrogen gas. This project will use the well-
established model organism Anabaena to determine how specialized cells called
heterocysts produce the enzymes required for nitrogen fixation. The project will
use methods of genetics, molecular biology, and biochemistry to study these
processes. This project is expected to reveal new mechanisms of genetic
regulation and gene expression in this large and important group of
microorganisms. Understanding the mechanisms that control nitrogen-fixation
genes will enhance our knowledge of basic microbial biology, genetics, and
metabolism, and will provide knowledge that can be applied to industrial carbon
capture and biofuel production. During the course of this project,
undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral students will receive training in
state-of-the-art research methods. The research will also produce materials and
methods that will be useful to other researchers in both academia and industry,
and the long-term goals of this project will benefit society by providing basic
knowledge related to natural ecosystems, agriculture, global warming, and
biofuels. &lt;br/&gt;