* 0925534
* Fundamental Limitations in Control of Nonlinear Systems with Application to Biology
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Prashant Mehta, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2014
* USD 374,767.00

Objective: The motivation for the proposed research comes from the brain, where
nonlinear dynamics are believed to be at the heart of computation, signal
processing and control. The brain suggests that nonlinear dynamics and control
have a robust, synergistic relationship. This proposal offers an integrated
research program for the fundamental limitations and robustness analysis of
nonlinear systems with control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Intellectual Merit: The
intellectual merit derives from the proposed unified framework for fundamental
limitations and robustness analysis of nonlinear feedback systems. A variety of
system theoretic problems can be cast within the proposed framework, which can
lead to transformative advances in the fundamental understanding of nonlinear
dynamics in brain functions. The project will develop algorithms and software
for model reduction, enunciation of control architectures that are best suited
to exploit synergies between nonlinear dynamics and control and development of
software tools for modeling the neural circuits in the
brain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The theoretical aspects of the
proposed research address fundamental limitations in control of nonlinear
systems, which have broad applicability. The brain itself offers a unique
paradigm that can lead to novel ways to leverage nonlinear dynamics in current
and future engineering applications. In addition the research plan is closely
integrated with an educational plan. Several educational initiatives will help
disseminate the methods, outcomes and the interdisciplinary synergies. This
project seeks to develop a strong undergraduate involvement in research,
interdisciplinary outreach activities, exposure to the central role of dynamics
and control and to foster symbiotic relationships between university research
and the industry.