* 0925982
* RUI: Evolution and Islam: Acceptance of Biological Evolution and Perspectives on Science and Religion Among Muslim Physicians and Medical Students
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Anila Asghar, Hampshire College
* Standard Grant
* Linda Layne
* 08/31/2013
* USD 372,502.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). This Science, Technology and Society project focuses on
understanding the reception of evolutionary biology in the Muslim world by
focusing on Muslim physicians and medical students in 5 Muslim majority
countries (Egypt, Iran, Malaysia, Pakistan, Turkey) and three diasporas
(Germany, UK, US). While the last couple of decades have seen an increasing
confrontation over the teaching of evolution in the US, biological evolution is
still a relatively new concept for the majority of Muslims and a serious debate
over its religious compatibility has not yet taken place. At the same time, a
complex interaction between evolution, culture and religion is already underway.
For example, biomedical and biotechnology departments have been established at
universities across the Islamic world. Evolution is also included the high
school curricula of many Muslim countries, although human evolution is often
excluded. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study: a) Identifies those conditions under
which conflicts arise for educated Muslims (physicians and medical students)
between scientific and religious beliefs, and b) Uses views on evolution as a
means of understanding how educated Muslims negotiate the broader relationship
between science and religion. This project fills a gap in the dialogue over
science &amp; religion by adding Muslim views to the larger debate.
Understanding Muslim responses to evolution may also provide a new context to
look at debates in the US.