* 0925449
* Transatlantic Exploratory Workshop on the Implications of Cutting-Edge Biotechnologies for Sustainability Science and Policy
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2009,01/31/2012
* Eleonore Pauwels, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* stephen zehr
* 01/31/2012
* USD 53,810.00

This proposal funded by the Science, Technology & Society Program supports a
workshop on synthetic biology and sustainability science. The workshop takes as
its point of departure the assumption that Science and Technology Studies (STS),
rather than existing as a mere playing field between natural and social
sciences, offers solid and productive theoretical models to approach
sustainability challenges. Especially in the case of emerging technologies
branded as "sustainable" -- like synthetic biology -- science and technology
studies provides useful critical lenses for approaching: 1) synthetic biology
promises and their actual relevance to sustainability science; 2) socio-
technical alternatives in the development of this new technology; and 3) the
dynamics at stake in the co-evolution of this technology and society.

The overall goal of the workshop is to convene not only STS scholars but also
experts from synthetic biology and environmental sciences and engineering from
both Europe and the United States to initiate a guided but open discussion on
the implications of synthetic biology for sustainability science and policy.
This appears to be the first research effort promoting collaborations between
synthetic biologists, environmental scientists, STS, and sustainability experts.
Building on the productive theoretical models inspired by sustainability
research may lead to early reflections on sustainable trajectories for the
development of synthetic biology applications.

Intellectual Merit: One of the intellectual merits of this workshop is to
provide researchers with the opportunity to reflect about sustainability
commitments and their implications for our synthetic biology case-study under
the light of questions, uncertainties and ambiguities that are not motivated by
only one formed discipline. The outcomes of the workshop are of value in
stimulating innovative research.

Broader impact: This workshop is an opportunity to develop a new area of
research -- at the boundary between STS, synthetic biology and environmental
engineering -- that would be profitable not only for better pedagogy, but also
the science policy community. One of the target audiences for the outcomes is
decision-makers, institutional experts and funding agencies, who need a clear
perspective on the challenges posed by synthetic biology to sustainable
development. The outcomes of the workshop also inform stakeholders in general --
including the public -- on the potential societal and environmental implications
of synthetic biology.