* 0925615
* Collaborative Research:  Signals, Genes, and Metabolites in Defense Priming Mediated by 12-oxo-phytodienoate Reductases in Maize
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Jurgen Engelberth, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 08/31/2013
* USD 540,226.00

Green leafy volatiles (GLVs), the odor typically associated with wounded or cut
plants, are potent signaling molecules involved in the regulation of plant
defense against insect herbivores and pathogens. In addition to activating
direct responses, GLV exposure prepares non-infested plants for subsequent
attack by pests and pathogens by activating mechanisms that prime the plant for
a faster and more intensive response to an actual infestation. Among the genes
up-regulated in maize in response to GLV exposure are several members of the
12-oxo-phytodienoate reductase (OPR) gene family. Increased expression is
accompanied by an increase in total OPR enzyme activity at the time of priming.
OPRs seem to play a significant role not only in the regulation of the
octadecanoid signaling pathway with jasmonates as the end-product, but also in
the regulation of other important defense signals.. The goal of this project is
to comprehensively analyze the biochemical and physiological roles of six maize
OPR family members in the priming of defense responses to insect herbivores and
pathogens and in the regulation of direct defenses. This class of proteins will
be analyzed biochemically, molecularly, and genetically by using transposon-
insertional OPR mutants of maize and by testing the recombinant OPR proteins in
vitro. In addition, global changes in GLV-induced gene expression will be
monitored and the role of these 'primed' changes in direct defense responses
will be analyzed. Priming-induced marker genes will be further characterized by
real-time PCR in the opr mutants. Defense priming to insect herbivory and
diseases is an emerging exciting but little understood area in plant biology.
This project aims to provide basic knowledge about potential molecular and
biochemical mechanisms of priming and will eventually help to develop
environmentally sound pest and pathogen management strategies. Results will be
broadly disseminated through publications, incorporation into textbooks and
coursework, and press releases to local newspapers and web-based journals. The
project is multidisciplinary in nature and will provide participating
undergraduate and graduate students with an integrative experience by combining
such diverse areas as molecular biology, biochemistry, entomology, plant
pathology, chemical ecology and many more. Educational efforts also include
recruitment of students from groups underrepresented in the sciences to the
research groups at both campuses and outreach to local high school teachers and
students.