* 0925709
* GOALI: Characterization of Energy Storage System for Wind Energy Support
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2009,02/28/2013
* David Yu, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* George Maracas
* 02/28/2013
* USD 316,249.00

GOALI: Characterization of Energy Storage System for Wind Energy
Support&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to
develop an innovative integrated wind and energy storage system to support wind
energy to achieve higher penetration in the electric utility grid. Energy
storage can play a major role in improving the short-term and long-term
dynamics, power dispatchability, and reducing voltage and frequency footprint of
the wind energy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main intellectual merit of this
project is to model, simulate, and characterize an integrated system of wind
turbine generator hardware and controls with a new utility scale battery. The
analysis from the modeling and simulation will be applied and a scaled down
model of the system will be built, tested and characterized. The system
developed in this project is capable of assisting in mitigating dynamic power
intermittency, long term power smoothing and power shifting, regulating voltage,
controlling power ramp rate, and frequency droop control.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main broader impact is to provide quality integrated
education, research, and engineering to meet the emerging workforce and needs of
nation?s energy industry. The project team will promote education as an
integrated part of this project. The results of this research will be integrated
in workshops, short courses, and courses to be taught to undergraduate and
graduate students and working professionals. Although there is a large
population of minorities, including African-Americans and Hispanics, in the
greater Milwaukee area, the percent of minority students at UWM is
insignificant. One goal of this project is to include underrepresented minority
and female students in this research.&lt;br/&gt;