* 0925915
* Mapping the International Evolution of Collaboration Networks on Patents Granted to Universities around the World
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Margaret Clements, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Linda Layne
* 08/31/2012
* USD 239,642.00

This project, which is co-funded by the Science, Technology &amp; Society (STS)
and Science of Science and Innovation Policy (SciSIP) Programs at NSF, studies
how knowledge flows between and among academic scientific inventors around the
world. University patents are the object of analysis for this study because
patents reflect both knowledge production and diffusion. By analyzing
collaborations between inventors and institutions on patents granted to
universities around the world, the following questions are addressed: How does
knowledge flow between academic inventors? How do country characteristics,
national policies, and institutional practices shape knowledge diffusion? To
what extent do individual academic inventors direct the flow of knowledge?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From a policy perspective, the international impact of the
Bayh-Dole Act--a bipartisan legislative effort to facilitate technology
development and transfers between industry, the academy and federal laboratories
--is examined. This study traces knowledge diffusion as a complex system by
combining methodological approaches that include network analysis, network
visualization, patent citation analysis, temporal analysis, and topical
analysis. This project: demonstrates important relationships between academic
inventors and inter-organizational networks around the world; analyzes patents
as an artifact of important processes of knowledge diffusion; and describes the
shape, structure and evolution of scientific collaborations on university
patents around the globe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The findings of this study will
provide substantive information that may be of use to organizations and science
and technology policymakers in designing and implementing policies for knowledge
diffusion and innovation. This study intends to make fundamental contributions
to theoretical knowledge about complex systems and processes of knowledge
diffusion.