* 0925122
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:   Why fight? Examining the Ultimate Causes of Aggressive Intertroop Encounters in Wild White-Faced Faki Monkeys (Pithecia pithecia)
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Marilyn Norconk, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 08/31/2011
* USD 14,728.00

In non-human primates, groups often engage in between group aggression. Despite
the integral role these social interactions play in models predicting and
explaining primate behavior, our knowledge of why individuals choose to engage
in this risky behavior remains somewhat limited. In general, aggression between
groups is attributed to defense of resources or defense of mates and infants.
This project will investigate the factors underlying aggression during between-
group encounters in a territorial South American primate: the white-faced saki
monkey. This arboreal primate occupies small home ranges which are actively
defended from neighboring groups along home range boundaries. In order to
comprehensively test the function of this aggression, this project will gather
data on between-group encounters among white-faced saki groups at Brownsberg
Nature Park, Suriname. Variation in aggression and individual participation in
these interactions will be assessed in terms of dependence upon food abundance,
female reproductive state, and within group social bonds. Such data will provide
valuable information on a little known primate species as well as serve as a
case study to help develop models of primate social behavior. The broader
impacts of this study include collaboration with the National Herbarium of
Suriname and the training of a Surinamese student. This project will also
integrate lines of evidence from often distinct aspects of primatology (feeding
behavior, social behavior, and endocrine analysis) in order to comprehensively
examine a behavioral trait. This doctoral dissertation research project will
contribute to the academic training of a female graduate student.

