* 0925595
* The Role of Gesture in Learning
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Susan Goldin-Meadow, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Gottlob
* 09/30/2012
* USD 349,531.00

The gestures that children produce when they talk reflect what they know. But
gesturing can also change what children know, and, in this way, play a role in
learning. The NSF-funded research project by Susan Goldin-Meadow at the
University of Chicago explores how the impact that gesture has on learning is
related to the actions that gestures represent. Specifically, Goldin-Meadow and
her colleagues will study whether an action gesture is as good as, or perhaps
even better than, the action itself in promoting learning. Gesture has the
potential to shape learning more effectively than action itself, precisely
because gesture can focus the learner's attention on those specific aspects of
an action that are particularly relevant to solving a task. Recent research has
asked if gesture impacts learning, and has found that it does. The current
research asks how gesture impacts learning, in hopes of developing better ways
to manipulate gesture to maximize learning. By manipulating the gestures that
children either produce or see their teachers produce during instruction,
Goldin-Meadow and colleagues will explore the ways in which producing or
perceiving gestures that vary in their similarity to direct action influences
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One major goal of this research project is to
harness gesture to maximize learning, taking fullest advantage of all
communication modalities that spontaneously arise in teaching and learning
situations. Like any tool for teaching and learning, gesture may be used more or
less effectively. For example, some gestures may highlight action components
that facilitate learning, whereas others highlight components that are
distracting and get in the way of learning. This research project explores which
types of gestures promote learning at different points in the learning process.
In this way, the research promises to advance the knowledge-base underlying best
practices that optimize teaching and classroom performance. As an example, it
may be possible to alter the rate and types of gestures children produce, and
thus improve learning. This is important because children vary quite a bit in
the number of gestures they spontaneously produce. Interestingly, children from
lower socio-economic homes tend to produce fewer spontaneous gestures than
children from higher socio-economic homes. Moreover, gesturing may be
particularly useful in situations where acting directly on objects is not
practical.