* 0925023
* SHINE Postdoc: Interplanetary Scintillation (IPS) and Solar Mass Ejection Imager (SMEI) 3D-Reconstructions and Imaging of the Solar, Heliospheric, and INterplanetary Environment
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Bernard Jackson, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Paul Bellaire
* 08/31/2011
* USD 159,971.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this work, the Principal
Investigator (PI) will use interplanetary scintillation (IPS) radio data
collected by an international network of ground-based radio telescopes and
antenna arrays, as well as Thomson-scattered white-light observations from
space-based instruments on the Solar Mass Ejection Imager (SMEI) and STEREO
spacecraft, in order to develop 3D tomographic reconstructions of solar plasma
structures in the inner heliosphere. Such structures include coronal mass
ejections (CMEs) and co-rotating interaction regions
(CIRs).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will extract solar wind parameters such as
velocity, density, and magnetic field from his 3D reconstructions and compare
these with multi-point in situ solar wind measurements from spacecraft such as
ACE, STEREO, Ulysses, and Wind. The PI's 3D reconstructions can also be used to
better constrain analyses of extremely-long-baseline (ELB) IPS observations,
such as those recorded by the European Incoherent SCATter (EISCAT) radar, the
EISCAT Svalbard Radar (ESR), and the Multi-Element Radio-Linked Interferometer
Network (MERLIN) radio telescopes. This PI also has well-established links to
IPS research groups at STELab in Japan and the Ootacamund Radio Telescope in
India. Because of his multiple international collaborations, the PI has unique
experience with such ELB analyses, which will allow the extraction of finer
details in plasma spatial structure using images from spacecraft.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this study are manifold. The 3D
reconstructions and ELB analyses planned here offer the potential to transform
the field of heliospheric physics, by providing a global context for discovering
the physical principles underpinning space weather phenomena that affect the
Earth. The PI's technique makes visible a region between the Sun and the Earth
whose behavior is difficult to forecast. The 3D reconstruction method improves
space weather forecasts in this region, and will make them more accurate. The 3D
reconstruction images and movies that are produced by this approach provide a
valuable educational tool, as well as an aid to planning future spacecraft
missions and new ground-based observatories.