* 0925704
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Paleobiology Of Protopithecus Brasiliensis, a Plus-Sized Pleistocene Platyrrhine From Brazil
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2011
* Alfred Rosenberger, CUNY Brooklyn College
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 08/31/2011
* USD 13,903.00

The goal of this project is to reconstruct the paleobiology of the extinct New
World monkey Protopithecus brasiliensis, a little-studied fossil known from
Brazilian cave sites and represented by a nearly complete skeleton.
Protopithecus is linked phylogenetically with living howler monkeys (Alouatta);
both share aspects of the howler's unusual cranial morphology, which is
functionally related to its roaring vocalizations. A major part of this research
will investigate the shape of the mandible and cranial base of howler monkeys in
an effort to test the hypothesis that Protopithecus also had an enlarged hyoid
bone. Measurements captured by laser scanning and 3D digitizing will be analyzed
using the statistical approaches of geometric morphometrics. Another component
of the project focuses on the postcranial skeleton to answer two separate but
related questions: 1) Is there evidence to support a hypothesis that
Protopithecus was a terrestrial quadruped? If so, it would be the only truly
terrestrial New World primate, extant or extinct. 2) Did Protopithecus position
its body in the same unique way that Alouatta does during howling bouts, leaving
distinctive skeletal adaptations in the upper body? The intellectual merit of
this project addresses a large gap in the evolutionary history of New World
primates. Protopithecus is among the most complete non-hominin fossils and it
can shed much light on the evolution of the larger, prehensile-tailed monkeys,
which are poorly represented in the fossil record. The broader impacts of the
project are several. The results will be of interest to the public since
opportunities to derive evidence regarding social behaviors, in this case
vocalizations, from fossilized skulls is rare and intuitively interesting.
International collaborations will be advanced by working with researchers at the
Brazilian museum that houses the Protopithecus fossils. This grant will also
help to support a female graduate student working in the sciences.