* 0925793
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Comparative and Experimental Investigations of Cranial Robusticity in Homo Erectus
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* William Kimbel, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Tran
* 08/31/2010
* USD 15,000.00

Homo erectus, a species of human ancestor, has skull bones four times thicker
than the&lt;br/&gt;modern human average. This research will investigate how
cranial vault thickness (CVT) develops in modern mammals in order to test
hypotheses for why some fossil species had such well developed vault bones. The
function of the cranial vault is to protect the brain and to serve as an
attachment site for many muscles, but molecular influences on the development of
its three layers of bone are not well understood. For example, the effect of
exercise on hormone levels, which may in turn influence cranial bone
development, is uncertain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both comparative and
experimental studies will be used to test hypotheses for increased CVT. Previous
studies have limited their measurement of CVT to total thickness; this study
measures all three layers of the bone. These measures will be correlated (in a
sample of 70 nonhuman primate and 10 hominin species) with several characters
preserved in the cranium such as the size of chewing muscles and brain case
shape. Once correlations are established, a second phase will establish
causative relationships. For this phase, the effects of artificially increased
masticatory strain and variation in growth hormone levels on CVT will be
investigated in a model organism (Mus
musculus).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merits of this project include
expanding current knowledge of physiological processes in osteological
development, providing a better understanding of endocrinological influences on
cranial vault development, and testing hypotheses for increased and decreased
skeletal robusticity throughout human evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the
heart of the study is an investigation of a paleoanthropological question, the
methods used implicitly relate to topics of modern human, non-human primate, and
non-primate mammalian health and development. Thus, the broader impacts of the
study include widereaching implications for subjects as varied as human
consumption of exogenous hormones, traumatic brain injury treatment, exercise
and endocrine physiology, and osteoporosis. This doctoral dissertation research
will contribute to the training and development of a female graduate student.