* 0925141
* Recruiting and retaining underrepresented minorities in the plant sciences: A comprehensive approach
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Mariaelena Zavala, American Society of Plant Biologists
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 08/31/2012
* USD 220,000.00

The objectives of this project are to develop a multifaceted approach to address
the underrepresentation of minorities in the plant sciences and to increase
their participation in plant science research and education. This project will
expand self-funded programs by the American Society of Plant Biologists (ASPB),
including travel awards to the ASPB annual conference, participation in and
disbursement of best poster awards at minority student focused conferences, and
the Diversity Bank - an information resource and matching service created by
ASPB. Regional conferences affiliated with ASPB sectional meetings that will
include workshops for students and faculty at minority-serving institutions on
teaching, research, and learning will be expanded. Collectively, these
activities will encourage and enhance interactions and collaborative efforts
among institutions of higher education. This is important because many of the
traditionally underrepresented students who go on to graduate schools in science
begin their tertiary education at universities that have limited resources for
conducting research. These institutions are usually underfunded, so students
have fewer opportunities to engage in hands-on research, and faculty are
challenged to develop collaborative interactions that support their own
professional development while also providing important networking connections
for their students. The outreach programs will be targeted to institutions with
a significant enrollment of historically underrepresented students, while
leveraging ASPB's strong existing presence at many of the country's largest
research institutions. Results of this project will be disseminated via the
society's Website and member newsletter, as well as through the Understanding
Interventions Conference.

Broader Impact: The overall goal of the project is to develop partnerships that
will integrate teaching and research at different types of institutions of
higher education and a professional society. We anticipate that these
interactions will produce new synergies among the people and the institutions
involved and, therefore, that this project may serve as a model for other
scientific societies to engage a broader spectrum of people in science.