* 0925158
* Collaborative Research: GEOTRACES Atlantic Section: Trace Element Sources and Sinks Elucidated by Short-Lived Radium and Thorium Isotopes
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2012
* Matthew Charette, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 12/31/2012
* USD 869,830.00

In this project, researchers at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution and the
University of South Carolina will measure a suite of uranium/thorium series
radionuclides on the first U.S.GEOTRACES cruise in the North Atlantic. The goal
of GEOTRACES is to identify processes and quantify fluxes that control the
distribution of trace elements and isotopes (TEIs) in the ocean, and to
establish the sensitivity of these distributions to changing environmental
conditions. Thorium and radium radioisotopes are well suited to study the
sources and sinks of TEIs on time and space scales that are required to
interpret lateral and vertical TEI distributions in the NOrth Atlantic basin.
Accordingly, this project will employ the radium ?quartet? (224Ra, 223Ra, 228Ra
and 226Ra) to quantify horizontal and vertical transport of dissolved TEIs, as
well as the shorter lived thorium isotopes, 234Th and 228Th, used to quantify
particle scavenging, vertical fluxes and remineralization rates of bioactive
and/or particle reactive TEIs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A wide range of processes
will be encountered along the proposed GEOTRACES N. Atlantic leg, and the short-
lived U-Th series isotopes proposed herein will play a key role in the
interpretation of observed TEI distributions. The utility of the Th and Ra
tracers can be used to address two main key processes: boundary inputs of TEIs
and TEI particle cycling including scavenging, vertical export and
remineralization. To this end, the sampling plan includes: (1) detailed underway
sampling of short-lived Ra isotopes (224Ra, 223Ra) at the western and eastern
margins to quantify terrestrial inputs and off-shelf TEI transport; (2) upper
ocean (0-1000 m) 234Th and 228Th profiling to capture export and
remineralization patterns, (3) full water column 228Ra and 226Ra profiles to
derive (a) submarine groundwater discharge, (b) midwater transport of TEIs from
shelf/slope-basin interactions and (c) diapycnal mixing rates across the
thermocline and benthic boundary layer, and (4) near bottom sampling to
ascertain TEI sources and sinks associated with abyssal plain sediments and
hydrothermal systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The PIs have
actively involved undergraduate and high school students in their prior NSF-
funded projects, and this activity will continue in this project through the
participation of an undergraduate intern. The anticipated timing of the
GEOTRACES line is ideal for the student?s participation in the cruise as well as
for several weeks back in the laboratory analyzing samples. &lt;br/&gt;