* 0925919
* Oxidation of Aluminum-free Compound Semiconductors for Electronic and Optoelectronic Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Douglas Hall, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Mahmoud Fallahi
* 08/31/2014
* USD 342,000.00

Award abstract for proposal ECCS-0925919&lt;br/&gt;Oxidation of Aluminum-free
Compound Semiconductors for Electronic and Optoelectronic
Devices&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As society has become very sensitive to the need
for both energy-efficient information technology devices and energy-efficient
and environmentally aware manufacturing processes the important communications
technology sector is not unaffected. Wireless handset and optical communications
manufacturers look for ways to adopt greener manufacturing practices while also
continuing to improve the performance and cost of their systems. Fundamental to
all of these communications technologies are the electronic and optoelectronic
devices and the compound semiconductor materials from which they are made. The
goal of this research is to develop improved and higher performance components
for both wireless and optical communication systems by utilizing a newly
discovered oxygen-enhanced wet thermal oxidation process for growing high
quality insulating oxide layers on the GaAs and InGaAs from which many of these
devices are made. The Intellectual Merit of this effort lies in the further
exploration and application of these oxides to real world devices. The optimum
conditions or growth of such oxides will be investigated, with a focus on
improving reproducible uniformity and reducing interface defect density. GaAs
oxides will be explored for use as a field oxide for GaAs integrated circuits to
improve current isolation between individual devices over current isolation
methods. InGaAs native oxides will be applied to InGaAs p-i-n photodiodes, which
are ubiquitous in optical fiber communication systems, and studied for their
potential to reduce surface states and associated dark current, both of which
significantly reduce device performance. The research is potentially
transformative by nature of its promise for realizing powerfully useful new
insulating and passivating dielectric materials capable of impacting a wide
range of electronic and optoelectronic devices while at the same time being
elegantly simple and, with very low environmental impact, compatible with the
green manufacturing movement. The Broader Impact of this work will be found in
the expected improvements in the technical performance of both wireless and
optical fiber communications systems, improvements that will come with
significant reductions in component manufacturing and/or final integrated system
cost. Improvements in GaAs integrated circuits used in wireless handsets may
reduce power consumption by reducing leakage currents between transistor
devices, enabling longer battery life. Improvements in the sensitivity of
photodiodes will enable lower cost fiber communication systems to increase the
adoption of broadband optical communications in underserved areas. Bringing
fiber closer to the home, schools and medical offices will accelerate the
development and adoption of bandwidth-intensive applications such as digital
video, video conferencing, and internet communications across multiple platforms
(from computers and televisions to wireless base stations to mobile handsets).
Secondary impacts include advancing discovery and understanding through the
further development of III-V compound semiconductor oxidation technology, with
other possible applications such as improved photovoltaic devices.&lt;br/&gt;