* 0925697
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: C-peptide of Insulin as an Index of Energy Expenditure in Wild Chimpanzees
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,03/31/2012
* Richard Wrangham, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 03/31/2012
* USD 10,295.00

Chimpanzees will be observed in Kibale National Park, Uganda, to test the
hypothesis that daily variation in urinary C-peptide (UCP) levels among adult
males is correlated with both food intake and energetically expensive behaviors,
such as aggression. The C-peptide molecule is a by-product of insulin synthesis
and when excreted in the urine gives an accurate indication of insulin
production. Insulin stimulates the uptake of glucose from the bloodstream and
thus reflects the availability of energy for the organism.

This study will provide the first direct assessment of the effectiveness of
C-peptide, as an index of energy balance in wild primates. Previous assessments
have been indirect since they used monthly averages of dietary quality, rather
than daily monitoring of individual behavior. This research is designed to
explain why dominant male chimpanzees have been reported to have lower UCP
levels than subordinates, even though UCP levels track energy intake, being
higher when and where fruit availability is greater.

The intellectual merit of this study lies in the possible implications its
findings will have for the methodological development of energetics research in
field conditions. Non-invasive indices of the energetic condition of primates
have always been elusive. C-peptide is promising as an indicator of energetic
balance, energy intake, or energy expenditure and this study will assess its
value. Understanding the relationship between energy expenditure in male
chimpanzees and their dominance rank will also reveal hitherto overlooked
energetic costs of dominance in social mammals.

The broader impacts of the project include the contribution to the functioning
of Makerere University Biological Field Station. Educational programs will be
carried out in local schools to raise awareness and interest in wildlife. This
doctoral dissertation research project will contribute to the academic training
of a graduate student and the results will be published in peer-reviewed
journals.