* 0925782
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Open Book: Digital Form in the Making
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2011
* Paul Rabinow, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Kelly Moore
* 08/31/2011
* USD 9,810.00

This dissertation research, supported by the Science, Technology, and Society
Program at NSF, investigates the mass digitization of books as a significant
transformation not only in the form of the printed book but also in the social
apparatus of the book. It seeks to explore Marshall McLuhan's pronouncement
nearly fifty years ago that "the content of any medium is always another medium"
by exploring what happens to the book when it becomes the content of networked
computers.

The research project is organized around three intersecting questions: How is
the book being rematerialized through digitization? How is it being revalued?
And, finally, how is the book being re-regulated? These questions are pursued
first through extended field research at one mass digitizing organization, where
the researcher will engage in participant observation, interviewing, and other
data collection. One goal at this site is to understand the material practices
of digitization and the materiality of digitized books. Another goal is to
identify and chart the "emergent assemblage" around the digitized book--
librarians, publishers, authors, search engine firms, copyright lawyers,
authors' organizations, "openness" advocates, the state, and others. The project
will track, document, and analyze the controversies, contestations, and
practices emerging around the digitized book.

The intellectual merits of the research are that: it will be one of the few
social scientific studies that focuses on the book in the contemporary moment;
it provides a holistic perspective of the book derived from careful, multi-sited
empirical inquiry; and it anatomizes an important social form in flux, before
new practices are codified or stabilized. To maximize its broader impact, the
published research will lay out, in a detailed, carefully documented way, the
technical, legal, economic and cultural issues around book digitization so that
those involved in the regulation of emergent digital forms can be more fully
aware of what is at stake as existing (or traditional) institutions and
practices for the circulation and preservation of knowledge are challenged and
called into question.