* 0925701
* Systmes Framework for Microprobe-Based Nanoscale Investigation
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Srinivasa Salapaka, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2013
* USD 337,984.00

The objective of this proposal is the development and implementation of a
systems-theory framework for modeling, analyzing, and designing microprobe-based
systems that will enable high-speed and reliable imaging of surface
topographies, matter properties, and probe-and-matter interaction forces with
nanoscale precision.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this
proposal leverages a systems-theoretic approach for analysis and design which
uses real-time model-based techniques to address critical challenges associated
with microprobe based nanoscale investigation. One of the primary challenges
encountered is the control of the main probe; a microcantilever. Currently, most
approaches do not exploit models of the probe to achieve its control. Also,
models of probe-sample interaction in the dynamic mode operation have not been
employed. In this proposal, relevant models for real-time control of the main
probe will be developed and subsequently employed for engendering high bandwidth
and high resolution. The approach, , will provide significant advances in
imaging capabilities, by up to two-orders faster imaging than existing modes. An
important need for probe based nanoscale investigation is that of increasing the
range of the positioning devices, to the millimeter scale without sacrificing
high resolution (nanometer scale). In the proposal, modern control paradigm is
proposed for long-range high resolution positioning which will enable critical
nanoscale-investigation studies, especially in biology. Model-based techniques
are proposed that will resolve a significant challenge of matter-property and
lateral-forces characterization in real time as the matter is scanned for
surface imaging. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts will include
transformative technologies that will enable high precision, high bandwidth and
large range nano investigation capabilities. Thus, proposed research will
translate into technological and economic gains. This work is at the confluence
of dynamic systems and control theory, control applications, and instrumentation
technology. The graduate students involved will be trained in a unique
interdisciplinary manner that exposes them to the diverse research areas and
interaction with industry. Besides its direct impact on graduate education, this
program will provide workshops for advanced graduate students and research
engineers, research experience for undergraduates, internet-based access to SPM-
devices for high-school teachers and students. &lt;br/&gt;