* 0925284
* Quantification of Trichodesmium spp. vertical and horizontal abundance patterns and nitrogen fixation in the western North Atlantic
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Cabell Davis, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 09/30/2013
* USD 1,321,055.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The diazotroph Trichodesmium spp.
constitutes a major pathway of nitrogen flow into marine planktonic ecosystems,
but estimates of its impact on global nitrogen budgets vary widely. Sampling is
made difficult by the fragility of the organism with the consequence that
Trichodesmium spp. are difficult to manipulate in both field and laboratory
experiments. Optical methods that sample the organism nondestructively are thus
appealing. A recent transatlantic survey using the Video Plankton Recorder (VPR)
revealed unexpectedly high abundance of Trichodesmium spp. at depth, suggesting
the vertical distribution of the organism within the&lt;br/&gt;euphotic zone may
be more uniform than previously thought. Application of a simple bio-optical
model of productivity to the observed profile of abundance suggests the depth-
integrated nitrogen fixation rate could be three to five times higher than that
based on the canonical profile of exponential decrease in abundance with depth.
However, the observations described in Davis and McGillicuddy (2006) come from a
latitude range where Trichodesmium spp. are not especially abundant. This raises
a key question: is there a similar vertical distribution in waters further to
the south, where Trichodesmium spp. are an order of magnitude more abundant
overall? If so, are the deep populations actively fixing nitrogen? If so, the
implications for the global nitrogen budget would be
substantial.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To answer these questions, the PIs will survey
the waters of the southern Sargasso Sea and tropical Atlantic on two cruises.
Along-track VPR measurements will be used to document the abundance and
distribution of the organism on the scale of meters to thousands of kilometers.
Standard hydrographic station work will provide for comparison of VPR-based
estimates with microscope counts, as well as some additional in situ optical
methods. A combination of nifH gene expression assays and direct determinations
of N2-fixation rates will be made to assess whether or not the deep populations
are actively fixing nitrogen.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These observations will be
synthesized in the context of an eddy-resolving numerical model. This will
permit investigation of the mechanisms controlling the vertical and horizontal
distribution and abundance of Trichodesmium spp. at multiple scales, including
the enigmatic association of relative maxima in abundance with anticyclonic
eddies. Moreover, integration of these observations into the numerical model
will facilitate revised estimates of nitrogen fixation by Trichodesmium spp. in
the North Atlantic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project
is its interdisciplinary approach (physics and biology), advanced observational
techniques (optical imaging, molecular methods) and integrated analysis in the
context of state-of-the-art coupled physical-biogeochemical models. This project
will provide new insights into the complex oceanographic phenomena regulating
nitrogen fixation and its impact on biogeochemical cycling at the scale of an
ocean basin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this project include
training of graduate and undergraduate students, and enhancement of an existing
web-based outreach program www.whyville.net geared toward promoting science
literacy in children ages 8-14.&lt;br/&gt;