* 0925306
* Collaborative Research: Critical Infrastructure Policy
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Peter May, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Konstantinos Triantis
* 08/31/2013
* USD 264,537.00

This collaborative research addresses the challenges of fashioning and
implementing national critical infrastructure policies. The research addresses
the efforts over the past eight years to fashion a coherent critical
infrastructure policy, the involvement of different entities in those processes,
the interplay with policies addressing other types of infrastructure, and the
implications of changes in federal funding and grant programs. The extent to
which the various coordination efforts have resulted in meaningful communities
of interest, the commitment of relevant partners to undertaking the necessary
actions, and the mechanisms that have been most effective in facilitating these
are of particular theoretical interest. Advances in understanding these issues
contribute to the policy process and public administration literature addressing
the challenges of governing complex policy areas in extending scholarship about
policy coherence, policy regimes, policy learning, policy coordination, and
intergovernmental implementation.

This research provides the basis for theoretically and empirically informed
advice about the design of critical infrastructure policies and about the
coordination of critical infrastructure programs. The integrative theme is the
governance of complex policy areas. Addressing these necessitates actions that
span multiple policy sectors, within and across different levels of government,
and among private and public entities. A fundamental issue is the unification of
these efforts in support of coordinated action. This research has noteworthy
implications for not only critical infrastructures but also other complex policy
areas such as responses to climate change, the depletion of the oceans, and
lapses in food safety. The research engages graduate and undergraduate students
with new frontiers in studying critical infrastructure policy and complex policy
areas. The involvement of junior faculty facilitates future research on these
topics.