* 0925312
* A Sub-2V Printed Flexible Organic RFID System Design for Long Range Communication
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Chris Kim, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* GEORGE HADDAD
* 09/30/2013
* USD 350,000.00

The objective of this research is to demonstrate a prototype radio-frequency
identification (RFID) tag system based on organic transistor technology with
improved communication range. Traditional organic transistor based RFID systems
have a limited communication distance as they are fundamentally restricted by
the capability of delivering a high power supply voltage. The approach is to
fabricate ion-gel dielectric organic transistors with extremely high mobility
capable of low-voltage operation and to design reliable digital and mixed-signal
circuits optimized for these novel devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research will develop key technologies to transform organic transistor
technology into a viable device platform for future large area electronic
systems. New printable high capacitance dielectrics, stable n-type channel
materials with high mobility, and fabrication methods for device reliability
assurance will be developed. Each circuit building block will be optimized for
low voltage operation based on the ion-gel devices and integrated into an RFID
prototype. Fabrication of printed, flexible RFID circuits will be accomplished
using a readily available, direct-write, aerosol-jet-printing method.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will have a major impact in the general arena
of printable, flexible, large-area electronics. New course materials will be
developed on organic transistors for the undergraduate and graduate curricula. A
laboratory module will be prepared that simultaneously teaches students about
materials issues and basic transistor operation. This interdisciplinary
laboratory module will be incorporated into an undergraduate laboratory course
in materials science and engineering or in electrical engineering. This project
will proactively recruit and nurture under-represented minority students, women,
and K-12 students, and strongly leverage existing university-wide outreach
efforts.