* 0925714
* Life-Cycle Damage and Downtime Cost Estimates for Structural Systems Subjected to Seismic Loads
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Mircea Grigoriu, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 07/31/2014
* USD 276,000.00

The main objective of this award is the development of an accurate, efficient,
and conceptually simple methodology for assessing the life-cycle seismic
performance of realistic structural systems. The research is motivated by its
potential to contribute to the practical implementation of performance-based
seismic design concepts. A first step of the research is the development of a
probabilistic model describing the seismic hazard at a particular site. The
model will be calibrated with the data available from the United States
Geological Survey. The model will deliver arrival times, magnitudes, and
epicenter locations for the sequence of seismic events likely to occur at a
particular site during a specified time interval, as well as ground motions
during these events. A second step of the research is the development of reduced
order models characterizing probabilistically seismic ground acceleration
records at a site. Resulting reduced order model will be used to calculate
system fragilities as functions of earthquake magnitudes and epicenter-to-site
distances, rather than a single seismic intensity parameter. These developments
will be applied to estimate life-time damage and downtime costs for realistic
structural systems and construct metrics rating the seismic performance of
design alternatives.

The completed research will provide an accurate and conceptually simple
methodology for estimating life-time damage and downtime costs for structural
systems, which are essential ingredients for the developments performance-based
design procedures. In addition to providing useful input to performance-based
design-related studies, the project is likely to open new research directions on
the analysis of complex, large scale dynamic systems with uncertain properties
subjected to random actions. The reduced order models developed in this study
can be used to design efficient protocols for testing equipments and other
systems subjected to random excitations. These protocols will extract maximum
information from a specified number of tests by selecting representative samples
of these excitations. Graduate and undergraduate engineering students will
benefit from results of the proposed research through classroom instruction,
participation in the project as members of the research team, and software
packages to be developed in the project.