* 0925785
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: From Diet to Tissue: Compound Specific Isotopic Routing in Chimpanzees
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2011
* John Kingston, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 08/31/2011
* USD 13,834.00

Evolutionary processes occurring within the last 3 million years of the hominin
lineage have been intimately associated with diet. Dietary factors hypothesized
to have played critical roles in the niche partitioning between
australopithecines, paranthropines, and early Homo include variable
contributions of seeds, tubers, ripe or unripe fruit, pith, and animal flesh.
Current approaches, however, lack the necessary resolution for differentiating
the dietary contribution of these items within fossil species. Isotopic
approaches represent one methodology with the potential of quantitatively
estimating the contribution of individual food stuffs within a given dietary
niche. As the tissues of an organism are constructed from dietary components
ingested from the environment, the isotopic composition of the individual
reflect these inputs. However, to interpret tissue level isotopic variation in
relation to individual diet, one must understand the underlying isotopic
variability within the lived environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to utilize compound specific isotopic analyses of individual amino
acids to reveal how isotopic variability within the diet of chimpanzees is
consumed, metabolized, and deposited within the hard tissues. Incorporating
elements of primatology, biogeochemistry, and nutritional science this project
will examine amino acid delta13C and delta15N variability within the environment
and the subsequent physiological routing from diet to hair, bone and teeth of
modern chimpanzees in Kibale National Forest, Uganda. Intellectual merit: These
analyses represent a novel and significant approach to improve our understanding
of isotopic variability within modern East African C3 ecosystems and chimpanzee
physiology. Additionally, they will provide the groundwork necessary for high-
resolution dietary reconstruction from fossil remains of our earliest hominin
ancestors. Broader impacts: The ability to quantify past consumption and thereby
elucidate the role of foods over the course of human evolution is critically
important for making informed decisions about how humans should healthfully,
sustainably, and ethically consume into the future. This research will
contribute to the doctoral dissertation and academic training of a graduate
student.