* 0925332
* Workshop:  Illinois Summer Neuroscience Institue, University of Illionois at Urbana-Champaign, IL; May  2010, 2011 and 2012
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Gene Robinson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Asson-Batres
* 07/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This project will support the Illinois Summer Neuroscience Institute (ISNI) for
three years. The Institute provides students with an introduction to
neuroscience research, to graduate school, to careers in neuroscience, and to
the neuroscience community. The ISNI is a one-week intensive introduction to
neuroscience, targeting mainly students from underrepresented groups in science,
in their first two years of undergraduate study. The ISNI is held at the campus
of the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (UIUC) and is organized and
led by the UIUC Neuroscience Program. Students learn about state of the art
questions and techniques from UIUC faculty who are experts in a broad range of
areas within neuroscience. After hearing about research from the faculty, the
students conduct a laboratory exercise that allows them to experience the
challenge, excitement, and the inevitable frustrations of research. The
exercises will take advantage of the expertise in insect neuroethology and
Drosophila genetics at UIUC. The purpose of the Institute is to attract students
to neuroscience who might not otherwise have the opportunity or exposure to the
discipline and to the neuroscience community. The ultimate goal is to expand the
pool of applicants, especially from underrepresented groups, to UIUC and to
other neuroscience programs in the US.