* 0925901
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Reproductive Ecology of an Endangered Primate: Diet and Foraging Behavior Alteration in Adult Female Sanje Mangabeys (Cercocebus sanjei)
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Joanna Lambert, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Tran
* 08/31/2011
* USD 14,755.00

This study contributes to delineating interrelationships between primate
reproduction and environment and provides understanding of how variation in
female reproductive patterns represents an adaptive response to local conditions
to ensure reproductive success. It is presently unknown which reproductive
strategy is dominant among primates; i.e., the "classic pattern", where
conception is correlated with high food availability; the "alternative pattern",
where lactation correlates with high food availability; or "aseasonality", where
no discernable pattern in births is observed. This study will examine
reproductive seasonality in the Endangered Sanje mangabey (Cercocebus sanjei),
endemic to the Udzungwa Mountains of Tanzania. The main objective is to
determine whether females express reproductive seasonality, and if reproductive
patterns are influenced by extrinsic factors, such as food availability, and/or
intrinsic factors, such as female dominance and body condition. The inter-
relationship between these variables will also be investigated. As such, this
project aims to understand the complex relationship between extrinsic and
intrinsic variables acting upon primate reproduction and, therefore, informs
important theoretical areas within primate ecology and evolutionary biology. The
intellectual merit of this study includes the elucidation of the reproductive
ecology of this species. The strategies for successful acquisition of energy and
nutrients during reproductive periods will be examined as will the risk of
parasitism during reproductive phases and the role of geophagy in relation to
parasitism and/or pregnancy. Data will be collected on the social and foraging
behavior of 22 adult female Sanje mangabeys over one annual cycle. Fecal and
urine samples will be collected to determine parasite prevalence between
reproductive and non-reproductive periods, and energy balance, respectively.
Food consumed by females will be analyzed for nutritional content, and 12
ecological plots will be monitored monthly in order to assess food availability
within the habitat. The remaining population of Endangered Sanje mangabeys is
only partially protected and subject to habitat loss in a substantial area of
their distribution. As such, the broader implications of this study include
providing information on their reproductive ecology, especially resources vital
for female reproductive success, which is key to successful conservation
measures. In addition, the Tanzanians participating in the project will be vital
to conservation efforts, and the attendant knowledge transfer will promote their
continued employment and foster local appreciation of Tanzanian biodiversity.
Finally, this project will provide research experience for a graduate student
and provide the basis for a doctoral dissertation.