* 0925202
* An Engineering Control System Paradigm for Quantitative Understanding of Hemostasis
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Babatunde Ogunnaike, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 08/31/2014
* USD 395,906.00

0925202&lt;br/&gt;Ogunnaike&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this
research is to develop and validate an engineering control system paradigm for
obtaining quantitative insight into how multiple interdependent hemostatic
processes interact to control blood loss safely and effectively following vessel
injury. A novel quantitative modular modeling and analysis technique for
organizing the mechanistic details of this biological process will be developed
and validated experimentally. The resulting mathematical model will be used to
elucidate mechanisms of hemostatic disorders from a control system perspective,
and to generate testable hypotheses about effective treatment. The specific
question to be answered is: &lt;br/&gt;Quantitatively, how do the various
components of the entire hemostatic process work together to produce fast,
effective and stable responses to vascular injury under normal conditions?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific tasks that will be performed are:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Task 1: Model Development. Develop a detailed control
system block diagram representation of the components of hemostasis, derive
mathematical models for each component and integrate into a holistic,
comprehensive dynamic model. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Task 2: Model Validation
(Experimental). In a continuing collaboration the PIs will validate the
predictions of each principal module of the overall model against independent
experimental data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Task 3: Model Analysis and Hypothesis
Generation. Computation studies and theoretical analyses of the model will be
carried out; derivation of quantitative insight into pathological disorders from
a control system perspective; and generation of hypothesis regarding effective
treatment regimens in terms of optimal compensation for component malfunction
responsible for the identified disorder. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit Systemic changes in life sciences research have created opportunities for
mathematical modeling to play a major role in developing quantitative and
predictive understanding of complex biological phenomena. With ever improving
experimental capabilities facilitating the acquisition of more refined data on
the most intricate cellular and molecular mechanisms, increasing computational
power has steadily steered mathematical modeling in systems biology towards
adopting ?bigger and more complex? representations of these complex systems. For
the specific problem of hemostasis there are currently no holistic quantitative
models of the complete hemostasis process perhaps because many of the
constituent components are quite complex in their own right, and a ?standard?
attempt at developing a holistic model is not likely to be very useful. By
recognizing that at the heart of hemostasis is an automatic biological control
system, this research aims to deploy concepts from engineering control systems
to develop a comprehensive hemostatic process model that achieves fidelity
without sacrificing analytical tractability. The PIs envision two kinds of
primary impact for this research: (i) Technical: an improved quantitative
understanding of how this biological process is regulated under normal
circumstances, and how the characteristics of the whole emerge from the
connection of the individual component parts, with implications for clinical
practice in the form of more precise treatment of hemophilia and thrombophilia;
(ii) Methodological: demonstrating how to achieve high-fidelity and analytical
tractability simultaneously in models of extremely complex biological phenomena.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact At the heart of the evolving undergraduate
training program is the issue of how to integrate biology within the classical
chemical engineering curriculum. This research addresses theoretically and with
experimental validation, issues that are perfect for introducing students to
biological control systems, and how to employ such simulation tools as SIMULINK
for modeling and understanding such systems. The results of this research will
be integrated into the teaching curricula and widely disseminated through
publications and presentations to other educators and researchers. In addition,
the PI, as a minority himself, is committed to recruiting under-represented
groups into the chemical engineering discipline in general and systems biology
research in particular, and should be able to attract minority students to
participate in this effort.