* 0925774
* Dispersion engineering using leaky-mode resonant photonic lattices
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Robert Magnusson, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2014
* USD 341,999.00

Project objective: The objective of this project is to conduct theoretical and
experimental research on the dispersion properties of nanostructured resonance
elements. Fundamentally new types of dispersive devices using leaky-mode
resonance effects in subwavelength photonic lattices will be designed,
fabricated, and tested. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: This project
charts new directions in photonic device technology based on nanostructured
subwavelength elements. The proposed devices are unexploited in slow-light
engineering. This project will define their applicability. Computations show
that leaky-mode resonance devices compare favorably with leading concepts in the
field. Although based on totally different fundamentals, in structure and device
density, the proposed concept is similar to photonic-crystal based micro-
resonator chips whose fabrication is particularly challenging. It appears that
the proposed leaky-mode resonance delay lines can be fabricated more directly.
Additionally, the elements show flat transmission spectra across useful bands.
Detailed comparison requires fabrication and testing of prototype devices. As
very little is currently known about these effects in the context of slow light,
this project constitutes basic research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: If
the research verifies the practicality of these concepts, this work can have a
major impact in promoting new device technology. Very compact optical delay
lines, signal buffers in all-optical communication systems, and light-storage
elements would become feasible. Moreover, this project is aligned with a broad
plan to develop research and education in photonic nanostructures at the
University of Texas at Arlington. It will strengthen research in photonic
crystals and integrated photonic circuits and support efforts in building
nanofabrication methods and infrastructure. With the principal investigator?s
recent appointment to the Texas Instruments Distinguished University Chair in
Nanoelectronics, major funding for equipment and facilities was provided. This
project, which seeks mainly student salary support, would thus enhance the use
of new, modern facilities. Therefore, the proposed project provides excellent
analytical and experimental experience for both graduate and undergraduate
students. There is special focus on recruiting female students as well as
students belonging to populations that are underrepresented in science and
engineering and converting them into new graduate students. In addition, the
principal investigator is Chief Technical Officer of Resonant Sensors
Incorporated, a start-up company developing new sensor technology. As part of
his duties under the Texas Instruments Chair, he will teach a yearly course on
entrepreneurship and business, open to all undergraduate and graduate students,
to stimulate innovation and technology transfer. The results of this research
will be widely disseminated in journals and conferences. As there is currently a
heavy worldwide emphasis on the study of periodic layers and lattices, new
publications and results, illustrating the interesting effects and applications
realized in the leaky-mode regime, might stimulate additional research and
technological progress.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;