* 0925217
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Room-temperature terahertz semiconductor Raman lasers
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Mikhail Belkin, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2013
* USD 324,987.00

The objective of this program is to develop room-temperature terahertz
semiconductor Raman lasers based on giant Raman nonlinearities associated with
intersubband transitions in semiconductor superlattices. &lt;br/&gt;The new
devices are expected to operate at room temperature because the Raman gain does
require population inversion across the low-energy terahertz transition. Giant
values of Raman nonlinearity will allow using midinfrared quantum cascade laser
butt-joined to the Raman section for pumping. Such device configuration will
result in millimeter-sized electrically-pumped terahertz semiconductor laser
sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this research is to
explore a novel and highly promising approach to produce the first room-
temperature terahertz semiconductor laser source. This work will enhance our
understanding of optical nonlinearities and intersubband electron dynamics in
semiconductor nanostructures. This project promises significant advances in
state of the art terahertz sources, yielding compact semiconductor devices
operating at room temperature, at higher power, and with new functionalities
such as broadband electric tunability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts
are also significant. The proposed research lies at the intersection of the
optoelectronics, nonlinear optics, and physics of semiconductors. This
combination of disciplines offers a unique educational environment for the
students involved in the project. &lt;br/&gt;Knowledge and techniques developed
during research will be incorporated into graduate- and undergraduate-level
courses, disseminated through publications, technology transfer, and the
research groups? websites. &lt;br/&gt;Room-temperature terahertz semiconductor
lasers developed as a result of this program are expected to transform existing
terahertz instrumentation with applications ranging from high-resolution
spectroscopy and local oscillators for radio astronomy to terahertz remote
sensing and imaging.&lt;br/&gt;