* 0925422
* Time-dependent quantum simulation of nanodevices
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Kalman Varga, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 08/31/2013
* USD 313,790.00

During the last few years impressive progress has been achieved in the
development, fabrication and practical implementation of nanodevices to bridge
the terahertz gap. The terahertz gap, lying roughly between 100 GHz and 30 THz,
exists because the operating because the operating frequencies of transistors
and lasers (typical semiconductor devices) do not overlap. The realization of
THz nanodevices extends the range of electronics beyond the 100GHz barrier which
is a major breakthrough leading to new transistors with higher speed, lower
power usage and reduced heat generation. Besides important applications in
security, biological sensing/imaging and high speedcommunications, the THz
techniques allow probing electron dynamics in nanostructures observing electron
propagation in real time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This research addresses the
theoretical and and quantum simulation challenges of emerging new nanodevices
operating at the terahertz (THz) region and beyond. The theoretical description
and computational simulation of these systems is challenging because one should
use time-dependent quantum mechanical approach with time-varying electromagnetic
fields. This work represent the first systematic approach to studying the high
frequency behaviour of nanodevices by time-dependent quantum simulations. The
research will primarily focus on simulating and predicting the high-frequency
behaviour of prototypical nanodevices, such as nanowires, carbon nanotubes,
graphene, molecular device based field-effect transistors (FETs) and realistic
(e.g. FINFET) transistors. The key contribution will be in providing
quantitative descriptions of AC characteristics and high frequency properties of
novel nanodevices including graphene, carbon nanotube, silicon nanowire
transistors and nanoscale FINFETs. The results will be validated against
experimental data through collaborations with experimental groups and will
ultimately be cast in a form that will be suitable for incorporation in compact
models for circuit modeling so that they can serve in the design of emerging
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;