* 0925424
* Broadband dielectric spectrometers with 1-10 nm planar nanofluidic channels
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2009,03/31/2014
* Pingshan Wang, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* GEORGE HADDAD
* 03/31/2014
* USD 324,060.00

The objective of this research is to develop broadband dielectric spectrometers
with 1-10 nm planar nanofluidic channels for the study of confinement effects of
fluids and molecules. The approach is to use wet etch of native silicon dioxide
and wafer bonding to form nanofluidic channels and to use doped silicon as
transmission lines to provide broadband characterization capabilities. Parasitic
signal de-embedding procedures for accurate measurement will be developed. The
obtained spectrometer will be used to study confined water properties under DC
electric fields. The measured water properties will also serve to demonstrate
the functionality of the developed spectrometers.

Intellectual merits: This is the first effort to integrate broadband dielectric
spectroscopy with individual nanofluidic channels. The obtained critical channel
dimension approaches 1 nm, which is vital for studying confined fluids and
confined molecules. The measured dielectric properties of confined water under
DC electric field stresses have also not been reported to date. These results
are important to verify models in molecular dynamics studies.

Broader impacts: The dielectric spectrometers are powerful new tools for use in
biology, chemistry, nanofluidic electronics, health science and tribology.
Transformational research results are expected in these areas with the developed
spectrometers. Social, economical and environmental impacts include novel
analytical instruments for health services and high performance electrochemical
capacitors, which is critical for electric cars to mitigate energy challenges
and greenhouse gas emissions. The integration of research and teaching will
enrich high-speed circuit courses, inspire and attract students of diverse
backgrounds into the science and engineering disciplines.