* 0925624
* Hybrid Organic-Inorganic Infrared Light-Emitting Devices using Group IV Semiconductor Nanoparticles
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Uwe Kortshagen, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2013
* USD 349,998.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to
realize efficient infrared electroluminescence using a hybrid organic-inorganic
light-emitting device based on emissive group IV semiconductor nanoparticles
including Si, Ge and Si1-xGex.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Group IV
semiconductor nanoparticles have the potential to be efficient and tunable
photon sources in the infrared. To date, these systems have not been extensively
studied in light-emitting devices. In this work, performance will be maximized
by engineering the device architecture, processing conditions, and nanoparticle
passivation length. Device performance will be correlated to nanoparticle film
morphology using various microscopies. With an improved understanding of
architecture and film morphology for Si-based light-emitting devices, other
novel group IV systems will be investigated in order to provide multiple
infrared light-emitters. The focus on group IV systems will broaden the study of
nanoparticles for photonic device applications, and will also contribute to the
basic understanding of radiative and non-radiative processes in these
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The PIs have identified as a
priority the education of high school, undergraduate and graduate students on
issues relating to the synthesis of nanoscale systems and their optoelectronic
properties. Programs are proposed including summer research experience for high
school students and teachers, research opportunities for undergraduate students
through programs at the University of Minnesota, and the integration of research
results into undergraduate and graduate classes in Chemical Engineering and
Materials Science and Mechanical Engineering. Results will be disseminated to
industrial partners through the Industrial Partnership for Research in
Interfacial and Materials Engineering, where both PIs are active
participants.&lt;br/&gt;