* 0925529
* High Performance Graphene-Based Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Nitin Padture, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Anupama Kaul
* 07/31/2013
* USD 350,000.00

The objective of this research is to use the newly developed method of site-
specific stamping for depositing graphene and few-layers graphene on a wide
variety of substrates in making high-performance graphene-based devices. The
approach is to first identify, design, and fabricate alternate substrates for
enhanced device performance and functionality. Second, high-performance graphene
devices are fabricated using the site-specific stamping method, in conjunction
with atomic layer deposition of top gates. Third, direct current device
characteristics, high frequency properties, and other device parameters are
measured, analyzed, and correlated to the physical properties of the graphene
layers. This research integrates experiment, theory, and atomistic modeling. The
electronic properties within the graphene critically depend on the substrate,
where carrier transport is limited by scattering and electron-phonon
interactions. But the current choice of the substrate is largely restricted to
silica and silicon carbide. The site-specific stamping method used here expands
the choice of substrates, and has the potential to not only overcome some of the
limitations but also allow engineering of carrier transport and band gaps in
graphene. This is critical for the realization of high-performance graphene-
based electronic devices. Current methods for graphene-based devices fabrication
suffer from fundamental barriers: (i) not amenable to large-scale fabrication,
(ii) lack of site-specificity in graphene placement, and (iii) severe
restriction on substrates. The site-specific stamping method has the potential
to overcome these critical barriers, and to make transformative contributions to
high-performance graphene-based electronics. This research is used in enhancing
classroom teaching and outreach experiences.