* 0925882
* Development of  Scanning Near Field Ultrasound Holography with Integrated Electronic Detection for Sub-Surface Nanomechanical Imaging
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Vinayak Dravid, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2013
* USD 341,119.00

NSF ECCS-0925882&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A large number of modern physical and
biological structures and devices require tools and techniques to see below
surfaces, non-destructively and with nanoscale resolution. With respect to "non-
destructive" real-space imaging, there is a clear void between the two ranges of
length-scales offered by confocal / photon or acoustic/sonography techniques
(micrometer scale) and SPM (nano- and sub-nanometer scale). This is particularly
true if features of interest are buried deeper into the material, beyond the
interaction range of proximal probes. The project concerns development of a
Scanning Near field ultrasound holography (SNFUH) with integrated electronic
feedback and actuation system for imaging buried nanostrucures and pattern
recognition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Intellectual Merit of the project
addresses many unmet needs for sub-surface imaging tool-set. The project
research comprises an innovative combination of micro-electro-mechanical systems
(MEMS) approach, scanning probe microscopy (SPM), acoustic holography integrated
with all-electronic feedback approach; to enable massively parallel metal-oxide
semiconductor field-effect transistor (MOSFET) embedded microcantilever platform
for rapid turn-key imaging tool-set. By combining the nanometer-scale spatial
resolution of conventional SPMs with the elastic imaging capabilities of
acoustic or ultrasonic microscopes, the electronic detection SNFUH project is
expected to fill the critical need in characterizing and investigating the
static and dynamic mechanics of nanoscale systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Broader Impact of the project promises to open new vistas in non-destructive
high resolution microscopy for imaging buried nanostructures, defects,
delaminations and sub-surface pattern recognition in semiconducting materials
and devices. The education plan focuses on (1) development of a teaching module
in nanomechanics of soft and structures which includes hand-on-laboratory demo
and classroom tutorials; (2) Undergraduate and RET (research experience for
teachers) individual project modules correlated with research goals. The
educational objectives will be achieved by (a) providing hand-on, team
experience to promote active and collaborative learning; (b) exposing promising
students at the undergraduate level to research opportunities in emerging field
of nanomechanics, and (iii) to recruit and retain traditionally under-
represented students though MIN (Minority Internships in Nanotechnology)
programs which provide opportunities for undergraduates to participate in hands-
on research in the area of nanotechnology. Collectively, the project will
attempt to address the unmet technology requirements for imaging buried
defects/structures in nationally critical important fields of emerging nano-
electronics and nano-bio-electronics. The project is also expected to positively
impact educational and training needs; by providing diverse educational and
societal outreach initiatives for American students; with a particular focus on
underrepresented groups.