* 0925111
* Ancient Tuberculosis in The Americas: A Midwestern Perspective
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,02/28/2013
* Della Cook, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 02/28/2013
* USD 123,802.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). Our understanding of the evolution of the bacterial species
that cause tuberculosis (the Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex, or MTC) and
their effect on our own species through time is extremely limited. In
particular, the history of MTC on the American continent remains unresolved.
This project proposes detailed analyses of ancient DNA (aDNA) samples from the
prehistoric Illinois Yokem and Schild sites. This study will detect MTC and
other potential infectious causes of skeletal pathology (blastomycosis,
histoplasmosis, and brucellosis) in several hundred ancient individuals from the
Lower Illinois River Valley, determine the temporal distribution of MTC
infection, explore the genetic variation in four MTC genes to identify which
species was present and clarify the evolutionary tree of modern MTC. It will
refine paleopathological diagnosis of these diseases and determine if newly
developed high-throughput sequencing (pyrosequencing) methods can be profitably
applied to the study of ancient pathogens. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: This research addresses long-standing questions about human and pathogen
evolution, and American prehistory, from a perspective only aDNA can provide.
The analyses will confirm, characterize, and provide better understanding of the
nature of tuberculosis infections in peoples in the New World prior to European
contact, as well as provide proof-of-concept for the application of new
pyrosequencing technology to these types of questions. Additionally, the results
will help to better understand the evolution and epidemiology of this crippling
disease. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This project is part of an
ongoing effort with the Indiana University Genome Center multi-user facility
using next-generation pyrosequencing instrumentation, the results of which will
provide for additional collaborative research. The data generated from this
research will be made available in multiple publicly accessible online
databases. The project will provide unique training opportunities for two female
graduate students and at least one female undergraduate student, forming a
portion of their dissertations and honors thesis, respectively.