* 0925477
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Conjuring Copper:  The History, Culture, and Science of Mineral Resources in the Ecuadorian Andes
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,02/28/2011
* Michael Dove, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 02/28/2011
* USD 13,260.00

This dissertation research project builds on the conflict over copper mining in
the Intag region of northwestern Ecuador. Despite sustained interest by a number
of mining companies since the mid 1990s, communities adjacent to the mineral
concession have blocked engineers from accessing the area. Mining has been a
point of tension in places like Intag and a topic of national discourse since
the early 1990s, when the World Bank sponsored a series of reforms to attract
international mining investment. Though no major mining projects have developed,
Ecuador's current president remains equally certain of the country's mining
potential. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Contemporary claims of mineral wealth stand in
stark contrast to previous assessments of mineral dearth. Through most of the
20th century, geologists describe Ecuador as a country noted primarily for its
lack of mineral resources. Until their considerations in the 1970s of plate
tectonic models of copper deposits, mining geologists repeatedly stated that
Ecuador's geology would not support industrial-scale mining. Based on Ecuador's
transformation from a country of mineral scarcity to one of mineral plenty, and
drawing on the conflict over copper mining in the Intag region, this research
asks the following question. How are mineral resources in the Ecuadorian Andes
historically constituted, socially constructed, and differentially
imagined?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research project is to de-
naturalize mineral resources by investigating the historical, political,
cultural, and geological contexts through which mineral deposits, especially
copper, materialized as objects of economic significance in Ecuador. This
research will examine Ecuador's mineral resources as they emerged in scientific
journals, in relation to geological maps, and through geological fieldwork. It
will compare contemporary assessments, narratives, and metaphors of Ecuador's
mineral wealth with depictions of Andean nature by 19th and early 20th century
travel writers and naturalists. Through research on Intag's settlement history
and ethnographic analysis of contemporary agrarian relations, this project will
also consider local resource epistemology, the perspective from which local
populations represent and depict subsoil mineral resources. This project draws
form and contributes to literature from Science and Technology Studies as well
as environmental anthropology and Latin American history. In the way it
elucidates resource epistemology, resource history, and state development goals,
the results of this project will be a useful reference point for both local
communities and policy makers. &lt;br/&gt;