* 0925910
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Lifestyle and Reproductive Effects on Bone Mineral Density in an Amazonian Forager-Horticulturalist Population
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2011
* James Snodgrass, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 08/31/2011
* USD 1,900.00

Lifestyle changes associated with market integration have been closely linked
with increased risk of chronic disease, although minimal research has addressed
the effects on bone density and bone loss. Bone mineral density (BMD) is a
critical diagnostic measure of bone health and is often applied in clinical
settings as a marker for future fracture risk and osteoporosis. Although various
lifestyle and reproductive factors are suggested to shape BMD, data are often
inconsistent and there are major gaps in our current knowledge. This, in part,
stems from relatively homogenous study populations and a reliance on sometimes
problematic self-report data. The proposed research will focus on the indigenous
Shuar of Ecuador, an Amazonian forager-horticulturalist population currently
undergoing rapid cultural and economic change. The study will assess the effects
of lifestyle and reproduction on BMD among adults in six Shuar communities
experiencing varying degrees of market integration. The study will be cross-
sectional and employ an urban-rural design with an adult sample (> 14 years old;
90 females, 90 males from each of the two regional areas). Using a mixed
quantitative-qualitative approach, basic anthropometric and BMD data (measured
using quantitative ultrasound techniques) will be collected along with measures
of physical activity (assessed using accelerometry), diet, female reproductive
history (number of pregnancies and breastfeeding patterns), socioeconomic
status, and lifestyle change. Intellectual Merit: The results from this study
will expand upon previous research on the health effects of economic development
and lifestyle change by adding a skeletal component. This study will also
increase current understanding of how the human skeleton is affected by
lifestyle factors, and will improve the ability of biological anthropologists to
interpret skeletal variation in past populations. Broader Impacts: In addition
to strengthening international research collaborations and providing locally
relevant health information to study partners, the proposed research has the
potential to inform osteoporosis treatment and prevention efforts. This doctoral
dissertation research project will contribute to the academic training of a
female graduate student from an underrepresented group.

