* 0925218
* NSF-ANR Workshop on Dynamics in the Human Sciences: Cognitive, Behavioral & Social Complexity
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2009,06/30/2011
* Claudio Cioffi-Revilla, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Teutonico
* 06/30/2011
* USD 44,324.00

This workshop on Dynamics in the Human Sciences: Cognitive, Behavioral & Social
Complexity is being jointly coordinated by l'Agence Nationale de la Recerche
(ANR) and the Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences Directorate of the
National Science Foundation (NSF/SBE). This two-day workshop will bring together
researchers from a wide variety of disciplines united by their work on
complexity science. These scholars will assess work done to date in the area of
complexity science, especially through funding opportunities such as NSF's Human
and Social Dynamics program and the European Commissions EXYSTENCE program. They
also plan to develop possible new areas of investigation, with a focus on
emergent phenomena, phase transitions, and the dynamics of complex systems.

The proposed workshop is a timely step to facilitate international
collaborations in the social, behavioral, and economic sciences. The respective
research communities of NSF/SBE and the ANR have conducted ad hoc collaborations
in the past, but this workshop aims to focus those collaborations on the field
of complexity and dynamics. The chosen workshop topic of complexity is one that
is being highlighted as a frontier area for the human sciences, both at NSF and
abroad. Much of the research in this area has historically come from US and
French researchers and these countries continue to represent the cutting edge of
complexity science research.

This workshop has strong broader impacts in that it will strengthen
international collaborations. In addition, it includes the participation of
junior scientists in the workshop, which will help their careers in their
respective fields, as well as help them establish international collaborators at
an early stage in their careers.