* 0925165
* Fairness and the Provision of Public Goods
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Barry Markovsky, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2012
* USD 134,921.00

SES-0925165&lt;br/&gt;Barry Markovsky&lt;br/&gt;University of South Carolina
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
investigates fairness perceptions in public goods settings. These are social
contexts in which participants choose whether or not to contribute to something
that benefits everyone, but all benefit equally regardless of whether they
contribute. Rational choice theories typically model the conditions for the
emergence of cooperation in such contexts based on the structure of incentives.
This research employs a theory of fairness perceptions?multilevel justice
theory?to predict how fairness considerations guide critical judgments and
choices. Individuals believe fairness judgments are critical in public goods
settings because whether or not the collective benefit can be maintained depends
on the aggregation of the individual choices. The PI will conduct three
experiments to test hypotheses derived from multilevel justice theory. Study 1
tests the effects of salient features of contributions to the group,
specifically, whether contributions are framed as absolute amounts or as
proportions of one?s resources. Fairness judgments and subsequent decisions are
hypothesized to vary considerably based on the framing of contributions. Study 2
treats subgroups, rather than individuals, as the decision-making units but
otherwise replicates the first study?s design and hypotheses. Study 3 looks at
the effects of two kinds of group orientation factors on individual justice
conceptions: social identification (feeling part of the larger group) and social
value orientation (preferences regarding the distribution of resources between
self and others). Based on previous research, it is hypothesized that will be an
interaction effect whereby group identification plays a secondary role to social
value orientation. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Research employing
public goods settings is increasing in the fields of sociology, psychology,
economics and political science because of its relevance to many real-world
phenomena, e.g., priming social movements and maintaining public education
systems. This research combines social dilemmas and justice and has the
potential to inform policy on issues such as taxation, environmental policy, law
enforcement, and international relations. Findings will also contribute to a
better understanding of public reactions to the new government
programs.&lt;br/&gt;