* 0925878
* Non-Linear Dynamics of Stance and Stepping
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* James Lackner, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Gottlob
* 09/30/2012
* USD 467,606.00

Complexity science involves the study of situations where the behavior of a
system is not easily understood by studying its parts in isolation, but depends
crucially on understanding how the parts interact (the weather, turbulence, and
the economy are among the most familiar examples of complex systems). Complex
systems analysis has been increasingly successfully applied by psychologists and
neuroscientists to the study of perception, action, and cognition. The NSF-
funded research project by psychologists James Lackner and Paul DiZio at
Brandeis University is an example of the application of complexity science to
human movement and motor control. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lackner and DiZio take
the approach of beginning with a deceptively simple question, study it in a
deceptively simple experimental paradigm, and analyze the task and behavior with
a deceptively simple model. The question is how far must a person be moved off-
balance before they will take a step to avoid a fall. With the Hold &amp;
Release (H&amp;R) technique, the experimenter applies a small force to the
sternum of the research participants, which they resist in order to maintain
balance. When the force is released participants must make postural adjustments
to maintain balance and if the force is large enough a step is required. It
appears that a (relatively) simple linear model -- the one-leg inverted pendulum
model -- can account for participants' postural adjustments in this situation.
The model breaks down, however, when the force is large enough to require the
participant to take a step in order to maintain balance. This requires the
transition to a more complex non-linear model which assumes the two legs operate
in a coordinated but asymmetrical fashion. Lackner and DiZio will test this
model by performing the H&amp;R task in a rotating room. This simple next step
adds additional forces (especially rotational Coriolis forces that serve to pull
the movement away from the intended trajectory but that change continuously as a
function of the limb's velocity) and additional degrees of freedom for
participants' responses that provide a rigorous environment for testing the new
model. The model is refined enough to make detailed predictions about
participants' stance, about which combinations of forces will push them to the
stepping threshold, and even with which foot the step will be
made.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, Lackner and DiZio will have succeeded
in taking a major step towards unifying the study of posture and locomotion,
which until now have been studied as essentially separate processes. It is clear
that any improvement in our understanding of motor control can have implications
for the assessment and treatment of movement disorders, but this approach is
particularly promising because H&amp;R measurements are easy to make and the
detailed model is so tightly coupled to the measurement paradigm. The
interdisciplinary nature of complex systems research is also demonstrated by
this project, in which psychologists Lackner and DiZio will employ a Ph.D.
physicist as a post-doctoral researcher. Undergraduate physics majors regularly
assist with Lackner and DiZio's research.