* 0925642
* GOALI: Role of surface area and quality factor on small molecule detection sensitivity
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Solomon Assefa, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 07/31/2013
* USD 361,870.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits: The objective of
this proposal is to quantify the relative importance of surface area and quality
factor on the sensitivity of detecting small molecules. While high quality (Q)
factor resonant optical biosensors require fewer target molecules to be present
for detection, without sufficient surface area the number of molecules captured
by the sensor remains below the threshold for detection. In this work, we build
on the rapid progress that has been made over the last decade in the fabrication
of extremely high Q-factor photonic crystals and the PIs recent introduction of
multi-hole defects (MHDs) that enable the surface area of photonic crystal
biosensors to be varied while maintaining a high Q-factor. Silicon photonic
crystal sensors with independently tunable surface area and quality factor will
be theoretically and experimentally investigated to determine the most favorable
sensor properties for the detection of variable-sized biomolecules. Guidelines
will be established to suggest when the introduction of increased surface area
will benefit sensors for the detection of specific sized biomolecules. The
development of a sensitive, reliable biosensor with the capability of monolithic
integration with silicon electronic devices addresses a critical need for point-
of-care diagnostics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: There is strong
demand in medical diagnostics, genomics, and homeland security for the
development of reliable, sensitive, biosensor arrays capable of detecting
multiple toxins, DNA fragments, and other small molecules. The proposed research
establishes ground rules for the development of new biosensors and the
modification of existing sensor designs, which will enable rapid, transformative
progress in the sensitivity and throughput of small molecule detection. A
primary educational goal of this program is to expose students to state-of-the-
art infrastructure at IBM and give them the opportunity to work in an industrial
research setting through collaborative research. The value of higher education
in science and engineering for K-12 students will be promoted through hands-on
outreach activities. An interactive nanoscience exhibit highlighting optical,
materials, and biological phenomena will be created for use at outreach
events&lt;br/&gt;