* 0925679
* Development of Fault Tolerant Electromechanical Systems via Field Reconstruction Method
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2011
* Babak Fahimi, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* George Maracas
* 08/31/2011
* USD 236,569.00

Development of Fault Tolerant Electromechanical Systems via Field Reconstruction
Method&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The main objective of this research is
to develop a new design methodology for fault tolerant and self-healing
operation of electromechanical energy converters. Field reconstruction method
will be used to develop just-in-time detection and optimal management of various
electrical and mechanical faults which may occur within a multi-phase permanent
magnet synchronous machine. Furthermore, a feasibility studies for inclusion of
multi-physic and nonlinear magnetic problems in FRM technique will be conducted.
An important educational objective of this research is to develop a web-based
control system used in a long distance electric machinery laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt; Field reconstruction method provides an analytical formulation for
analysis of electromagnetic fields using which different disciplines of
engineering such as signal processing, electromagnetic, and power electronic can
effectively be employed to create optimal and efficient solution for adjustable
speed motor drives. This formulation allows for the use of advanced optimization
algorithms, pattern recognition techniques, and modern control techniques to be
effectively integrated in the design of the magnetic configuration and power
electronic-based control of the drive. Development of such formulations will
pave the way for shortening the computational time by avoiding the redundant
numerical procedures that are typically used in finite element
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Successful implementation of efficient, fault
tolerant, and intelligent electromechanical energy converters is a necessity in
realization of smart grid systems. Reliable solutions for increasing the
efficiency of wind generators, electric propulsion units in plug-in hybrid
vehicles, and home appliances is an integral part of an energy conservation plan
which can be reached through this research.&lt;br/&gt;