* 0925690
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Reproductive Competition in Female Sanje Mangabeys
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,12/31/2011
* Diane Doran, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 12/31/2011
* USD 15,000.00

This research will investigate female competition over mates in a wild
population of Sanje mangabeys (Cercocebus sanjei), in the Udzungwa Mountains of
Tanzania. This study will address two major questions. First, are some females
better able than others to enact their reproductive goals, i.e. mating with
preferred males at times of conception while preventing other females from doing
so? Second, if so, by what methods is this achieved? To answer these questions,
behavioral observations on sexual and social behavior will be combined with data
on ovarian hormones gathered through analysis of fecal samples. This unique
double-sided approach of behavioral and endocrinological data will provide the
information necessary to identify differences in female, as well as male,
behavior in response to changes in female reproductive state.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Established theory views females as less sexually
competitive than males. As a result, most studies of sexual competition focus on
male behavior. It is females, however, that invest most heavily in reproduction
(e.g., gestation and lactation), with males generally contributing only sperm,
providing little or no offspring care. Consequently, for females to be
reproductively successful, i.e., have offspring survive to maturity; they must
expend significant energy to care for offspring or receive supplemental support,
e.g., access to food, from other group members, such as adult males. To ensure
such support is provided, females may have to compete over access to preferred
mates. It is expected that a female will prefer and compete over the male(s)
that provide the greatest benefits to her and her offspring, while at the same
time mating promiscuously to confuse paternity, which has been shown to
encourage aid and discourage infanticide from other males. It remains unclear,
however, to what degree females compete over access to mates, and what impact
this has on female reproduction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits
of this project include providing a better understanding of the factors
regulating female-female and male-female social relationships, and contributing
to a more refined understanding of the variables underlying sociality. The
broader impacts of this study include aiding in the conservation of the
endangered Sanje mangabey by providing (a) data on reproductive rates, essential
to the development of appropriate management plans; (b) long-term continued
research presence, an important deterrent to poaching and illegal activities;
and (c) employment and training for Tanzanian field assistants. This study will
also contribute to the training of a graduate student as part of his doctoral
dissertation research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;