* 0925829
* Visualizing spin torque in nanoscale magnetic devices using ultrafast x-ray microscopy
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* William Bailey, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 07/31/2013
* USD 354,484.00

Spin momentum transfer is one of the most actively studied phenomena in
nanoscale magnetic devices. This phenomenon is widely believed to be critical
for enhancing the density of a next generation of magnetic random access memory
devices, as well as for the realization of future on-chip microwave oscillators
for signal processing. The response of ultrathin film magnetization in
multilayer heterostructures, patterned into submicron pillars, to short-pulse
(picosecond to nanosecond) spin polarized currents, determines the device
performance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merits:&lt;br/&gt;In the
proposed research, new insight into the magnetization dynamics and operation of
spin torque devices will be gained through synchrotron-based, stroboscopic x-ray
transmission microscopy and magnetometry. The penetration depth of x-rays into
metals, combined with the magnetic circular dichroism of absorption at Fe, Co,
and Ni edges, makes buried layer magnetization selectively accessible; pump-
probe (stroboscopic) measurement, synchronized with radio frequency driving
fields, illuminates their dynamics. Otherwise-unobtainable spatial resolution of
40 nanometers, down to 15 nanometers, can be attained through the short
wavelengths of soft x-rays and the use of focusing optics; innovative techniques
to enhance both temporal resolution (to 2 picoseconds) and magnetic contrast
have been demonstrated in prior work by the PI and coworkers on unpatterned
films, and will be applied in the proposed research on nanostructures. The
effects of spin torque will then be visualized at picosecond time scales and ~40
nanometer length scales, allowing device designers to "take movies" of
operation, both in device switching and precessional magnetization dynamics, in
real devices. Technical goals include the clarification of free and fixed layer
dynamics, the first imaging of spin wave propagation away from a point contact,
and of phase locking in arrays of nanopillars. Observed results can be compared
directly with detailed micromagnetic simulations, using observed inhomogeneity
as an input for the first time. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will provide a unique and broad graduate
training experience for &lt;br/&gt;two Ph.D. students, who will have the
opportunity to work on site at both a startup company and national laboratories.
Research activities will be closely integrated with outreach activities to local
K-12 students; Columbia will provide a 50% cost match for the support of one
graduate research assistant who will be actively involved in the maintenance of
the Hayden K-12 outreach program, with "Science Saturdays" enrichment for
students typically drawn from Harlem. The proposed activities will enhance
research infrastructure at national laboratories, developing novel synchrotron-
based instrumentation for the study of magnetization dynamics. Benefits to
society are possible by providing understanding of, and assisting in the
development of, novel magnetoelectronic products.