* 0925997
* Nanoparticle-Bridge DNA Sensor for Electrical Detection of Ultra-Low Concentrations of DNA Molecules
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Seong Jin Koh, University of Texas at Arlington
* Continuing Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 09/30/2013
* USD 319,581.00

Proposal 0925997&lt;br/&gt;PI: Seong Jin Koh&lt;br/&gt;The University of Texas
at Arlington&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;This project
will investigate a new DNA sensing method which is capable of detecting ultra-
low concentrations of DNA molecules without any amplification. Importantly, its
sensor output will be a direct electrical signal, without using any transducers,
which has numerous benefits including compactness, portability, facile
integration with other systems, multiplex sensing, and low cost. The key
components of the proposed DNA sensor are 1) DNA hybridization is carried out
exclusively on the surface of nanoparticles (~50 nm in diameter), 2) the
presence of target DNA (to-be-detected DNA) molecules leads to the formation of
nanoparticle-DNA-nanoparticle conjugates, and 3) the nanoparticle-DNA-
nanoparticle conjugates are detected using simple I-V measurements. This
approach allows the detection of extremely small concentrations of DNA molecules
since, in principle, the formation of even a single nanoparticle-DNA-
nanoparticle conjugate can lead to a current flow across electrodes. The high
sensitivity of the proposed DNA sensing method could play a significant role in
advancing biomedical science/technology, such as disease diagnosis and medicine
development, as well as protecting our citizens and soldiers from biological
threats/attacks.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of this project lie in the educational and outreach programs that will
be integrated with its research component. Student training is one of the
important parts of the educational program. By performing the proposed research,
students will be extensively trained as competitive scientists and engineers.
This will occur through their designing the experiments, training on cutting-
edge experimental tools, obtaining deep and broad knowledge of the field through
extensive literature search and reading, discussing the experimental results
with the PI and colleagues, and presenting their findings in international
conferences and peer-reviewed journals. The other important educational
component is in the classroom. The course MSE5351 (Current Topics in
Nanotechnology) will provide students in-depth knowledge of recent important
advancements in the field of nanotechnology. This will be done through PI's
lecturing on key concepts and techniques in nanoscale science and technology and
also students' reading of important landmark publications and discussing them in
the class. In addition, this class will provide several experimental modules
which will take place in the form of demonstrating key experimental steps and/or
carrying out hands-on experiments. Importantly, the resulting findings from the
proposed research will be incorporated into the experimental modules. This
program will also run outreach programs by providing science camps for K-12
students and teachers. In particular, one of the camps will be targeted for
elementary students in their 4th or 5th grades. By focusing on young ages, this
camp aims to expose young minds to the exciting and fun world of science and
technology and to inspire them to pursue careers in science and technology,
ultimately contributing to preparing for our nation's superiority in science and
technology in generations to come.