* 0925068
* Racial Democracy, Crime, and Justice:  Broadening Research and Participation
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Ruth Peterson, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 09/30/2012
* USD 432,302.00

SES-0935068 Ruth Petersen Lauren Krivo Ohio State University

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This project builds on the successful collaboration of a group of scholars from
diverse backgrounds (African American, Asian, Latino, and White), disciplines
(Criminology or Criminal Justice, Family Relations, Law, Public Policy,
Political Science, Social Work, and Sociology), and stages of career
(assistant-, associate-, and full-professors, and graduate students) whose work
is oriented to broadening perspectives and participation in research on crime
and criminal justice, and improving the quality of research on the interlinkages
among race/ethnicity, crime, and criminal justice. These scholars (the Racial
Democracy, Crime and Justice Network, RDCJN) established a Summer Research
Institute (SRI) and annual summer workshops as vehicles for pursuing these
goals. The group has achieved a number of important successes. The SRI has
graduated 22 young scholars who are publishing and gaining tenure. The RDCJN has
also published two volumes: The Many Colors of Crime: Inequalities of Race,
Ethnicity, and Crime in America and "Race, Crime, and Justice: Contexts and
Complexities" (Volume 623, May of The Annals of the American Academy of
Political and Social Science). The goals of this project are to build on these
successes. We seek to: (1) continue to advance the research and professional
development of young scholars from underrepresented groups for carrying out
innovative research, and thereby foster democratic inclusion in academe; and (2)
undertake additional collaborative projects that will provide a more complete
understanding of the interrelationships among race/ethnicity, crime, and
criminal justice. These two goals are closely interrelated. Improving
understanding of crime and justice outcomes requires bringing the unique
perspectives and methods of underrepresented groups to bear by democratizing
academe.

Approaches to Achieving Project Goals. To facilitate achieving project objects,
the PIs will hold additional SRIs for underrepresented faculty to enhance their
research achievements and success in academe. The institutes will be structured
to provide a "safe" and resource-rich environment that supports, trains, and
mentors young faculty in the completion of a paper/proposal for journal
publication or grant review, and offers a tool-kit of information for survival
in the university. In the long run, these activities should contribute to a
critical mass of scholars-of-color whose work is visibly placed, and whose
presence and success encourages students-of-color to pursue research and
teaching careers. Second, they will hold summer additional workshops to develop
collaborative projects oriented to improving the quality of research on crime
and justice. The workshops will be structured to: provide a setting for
reporting on and improving on-going research; draw on the diverse perspectives
of scholars from different disciplines, race/ethnic backgrounds, and stages of
career in developing research; and support the broadening participation
activities of the SRI, especially by integrating underrepresented faculty into a
larger network of scholars.

Broader Impacts. This project will have two important broader impacts. First, it
will broaden participation in the field by fostering the careers of scholars
from underrepresented groups. The workshops and SRIs will bring diversity in
perspectives and participation to research and curricula within criminology and
criminal justice. Second, it will draw on the expertise of diverse scholars to
carry out innovative crime and justice research. The central premise of this
work will take into account the complexity of race/ethnicity and embed analyses
in the differential positioning of groups in society. Through collaborative,
multi-method, and comparative studies, the researchers will produce a body of
original multidisciplinary work that emphasizes the variable significance of
race for crime/criminal justice, and how racialization relates to the
understanding of citizenship and democracy, nationally and around the world.

