* 0925926
* Investigation of Nanoscale Spin Dynamics with Scanning Probes
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Sara Majetich, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2012
* USD 377,573.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will investigate the
spin torque induced switching and ferromagnetic resonance dynamics of small
patterned magnetic tunnel junction devices using scanning probe microscopy in
several modalities. Scanning probes will be used to assist in the patterning of
devices between 10 nm and 1 &amp;#956;m in size. Additionally, as previously
demonstrated under NSF funding, scanning probes will be used to make electrical
measurements on devices fabricated in this way. Custom probes developed for the
delivery of the high currents needed for switching and for making measurements
of FMR up to 10 GHz will be used and further developed. Samples for this work
will be provided through collaboration with Everspin Technologies. The goal will
be to quantify the role of size and shape of devices in the sub-100 nm range in
determining critical current for switching and the onset of spin-torque induced
resonance. These results will have application to memory as well as spin-torque
oscillator devices in aggressively scaled technologies. The approach proposed in
this work offers several advantages for the fabrication and characterization of
spin-torque driven devices. Most importantly, testing with probes dramatically
simplifies the fabrication challenges, reducing the patterning aspect ratio that
is required, as well as eliminating leads and the need for planarization.
Secondly, patterning with probes allows for very small features to be made with
equipment of modest cost and complexity, amplifying the activities of the one
graduate student who would be funded by this work. Finally, the scanned probe
geometry can quickly test many devices to assess distributions and statistics,
which will be central to success of spin torque driven devices both for memory
and oscillator applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Merit: The technical
merit of this work is that it offers the ability to assess both DC and RF
interactions among patterned spin torque devices, and the spread of these
values. Clearer understanding and quantification of these distributions will
enable the design of dense arrays for memory without unacceptable interactions,
or, conversely, arrays of oscillators with interactions sufficiently strong to
facilitate the coupling of many devices together and large power outputs. This
will move us along on the development of a spin torque gain medium, or ?swaser?,
as coined by Luc Berger, with enormous application to RF communications. We are
taking a novel approach where we attempt to couple discrete oscillating elements
with magnetostatic interactions, rather than continuous films to attempt to
further quantize the allowed modes of the system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact: The broader impact of this work has two aspects. First is our strong
industrial interaction. Everspin is following this work closely as it bears
directly on future generations of technology they might develop. A second
dimension of this broader impact of this work is the planned outreach activities
that we will undertake. The PIs in this team have a proven track record working
with undergraduates building artifacts. We will focus on implementing a first
generation CMOS-MEMS scanned probe microscope on a chip. To do this we will
enlist a small team of undergrads to design and prototype a CMOS-MEMS scanned
probe microscope suitable for deployment in a classroom. While ambitious, we
believe this is quite tractable for modest cost and complexity and will present
an excellent learning opportunity for ECE and Physics undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;