* 0925340
* Defect Reduction in Megasonic Cleaning, through In-Situ Characterization of Cavitation Processes using a Novel Electrochemistry based Device with Improved Time and Space Resolution
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Farhang Shadman, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Anupama Kaul
* 08/31/2013
* USD 299,133.00

" This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)." &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective
of this research is to develop an electrochemistry-based device for monitoring
cavitation phenomena, such as microbubble dynamics, at solid/solution interfaces
in a megahertz frequency sound field. These phenomena play a key role during
megasonic cleaning of semiconductor wafers but are very poorly understood.
Uncontrolled cavitation can damage critical features on a wafer and this
research is a significant step toward the development of a defect-free megasonic
cleaning process. The approach is based on ultrafast probing of amperometric and
impedance signals on a microelectrode array surface that are sensitive to
cavitation phenomena. The interpretation of measured signals will be conducted
using a combination of multiphysics theoretical and computational simulations of
cavitation dynamics based on chemically-reactive flow models. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This research?s intellectual merit resides in the exploration of
cavitation phenomena at spatial and temporal scales not accessible with existing
probes. Temporal and spatial information of the electrical signals from the
electrochemical device will provide direct feedback to controlling conditions
for optimum cleaning with minimal structural damage during fabrication of
integrated circuits. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research will greatly assist
integrated circuit industry in its effort to develop damage-free cleaning
technologies. It will provide a valuable opportunity in interdisciplinary
research for students, who will be recruited from underrepresented and
ethnically diverse population of the Tucson community through the University of
Arizona?s multicultural programs. Broad dissemination of findings will be done
through the Center for Environmentally Benign Semiconductor Manufacturing, a
multi-university, industry sponsored center based at the University of Arizona.