* 0925827
* Std Research: Documenting Biodiversity: Biological Systematics in Historical and Conceptual Context
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* David Patterson, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2013
* USD 104,514.00

There is at present no consensus among practitioners of modern systematics with
regards to the nature of their object of study, and the same goes for those who
are working to catalog biodiversity. The proposed project is an attempt to re-
orient old debates on these topics by asking foundational questions in a new way
while still paying attention to the philosophical, historical, and social
implications of systematics and its applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project has two goals. The first is to examine and test some foundational
ontological assumptions behind modern systematics and contemporary efforts to
understand biodiversity. Once questions about units of analysis have been
addressed, it will be possible to ask value, logistical, and policy questions in
an informed way: How should we understand biodiversity? How is it best
cataloged? Which species concepts work best in particular situations? Is there a
unique best species concept? In what ways does it make sense for some or all of
the various database projects to work together or to adopt the same ontology?
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This work will proceed by way of two workshops. In the
first, the PI will work with researchers at Arizona State University as well as
with eminent species theorists from around the world to compare six of the most
widely used approaches to species discovery using the same group (beetles of the
genus Eleodes) and the same morphological, molecular, and combined data sets.
The second workshop will bring together representatives from several
biodiversity databasing projects to examine assumptions, compare units of
analysis, and look for ways to work in concert. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project should shape the way each of the participant groups thinks about their
units of study, and this has the potential for large-scale ramifications for
everything from species definitions to project missions to database ontology and
wider conceptions about what biodiversity is and what we should care about it.