* 0925837
* Analyzing Working Nanosensors: Mapping the Electron Transport and Surface Reactivity of Nanowire Based Chemiresistors and ChemFETs
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Andrei Kolmakov, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Anupama Kaul
* 07/31/2013
* USD 236,949.00

The objective of this proposal is to bridge the gap in understanding of the
surface chemistry, size, morphology, faceting and doping effects on receptor and
transduction functions of nanowire based chemical sensors. The approach is to
apply state of the art analytical spectromicroscopy coupled with electron
transport measurements to the individual nanowire sensing elements wired as
chemiresistors or field effect transistors and conduct the measurements in a
wide pressure range. The intellectual merit of this work is based on the seeking
of answers to the fundamental questions which are at the frontier of modern gas
sensorics: (i) whether and what kind of new surface properties of 1-D MOx
nanostructures will become prominent when their diameter shrinks to material's
Debye length and bellow?; (ii) whether the interplay between surface chemistry
and electron transport properties at this scale becomes progressively bi-
directional (iii) what are the contributions of common electro-active
imperfections to the sensing performance of the nanowire device? The potential
broader impact this research on society will be via the development of a novel
methodology to investigate in situ new nanoscopic sensors, fuel cells,
catalysts, energy harvesting nanodevices and nanostructured filters. The
experimental methods, protocols and tooling developed in this research are
applicable to other fields of nanotechnology, (bio)chemistry and material
science. The project contains the effective mechanisms for disseminating
nanotechnology research to local high schools and community colleges in Southern
Illinois. The inherent interdisciplinarity and collaborative nature of the
proposed research will be used as vehicle to integrate research and education.