* 0925718
* Spatial Subsidy and Trophic Connectivity between Nearshore Macrophyte Production and Subtidal Food Webs
* NONE,NONE
* 12/15/2009,09/30/2013
* James Eckman, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* David L. Garrison
* 09/30/2013
* USD 893,463.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

Macroalgae are a major component of autochthonous production in nearshore food
webs. Much of the macroalgal production is annually exported to adjacent marine
environments. In combination with phytoplankton and other organic matter
sources, it likely provides a significant, but little studied allochthonous
alternative to local production or a potentially critical source of organic
matter to ecosystems below the photic zone. The investigators will conduct a
systematic study of the magnitude and variability of this macroalgae subsidy and
its importance to deep-subtidal consumers in waters of the San Juan Archipelago,
Washington. The underlying question addressed in this proposal is: What is the
role of macroalgal detritus as an organic matter source for shallow and deep
subtidal food webs within the nearshore marine ecosystem, and what are the
processes that determine this role? To address this question the investigators
will (1) assess the transfer of macrophyte (seaweeds and seagrass) biomass from
shallow nearshore sources to recipient deep subtidal basins, (2) evaluate the
extent to which macroalgae (versus phytoplankton and other sources) subsidize
subtidal food webs, and (3) investigate the biotic and abiotic processes that
alter detrital biomass over time.

This research will integrate descriptive sampling, in situ and laboratory
experiments, and geochemical analyses to comprehensively identify and evaluate
the spatial and temporal scales over which macroalgal subsidies operate and the
relative magnitude and importance of the effect. The project could substantially
transform our understanding of the relative importance of sources of organic
input to the entire nearshore ecosystem. The spatial and temporal scales of this
influence are unknown yet critically important to understanding food web
linkages to nearshore organisms over a range of ecosystems and trophic levels
(including high level consumers such as fish, birds, and marine mammals).
Detrital input into these subtidal food webs is likely to be pervasive over the
nearshore region and this research will contribute to a fundamental
understanding of the role and importance of these subsidies. Such a study is
critical if a true understanding of the ecological significance of the
phenomenon is to be achieved. The waters of the San Juan Archipelago are
particularly well suited to addressing the suite of questions posed.
Nevertheless the significance of this research program applies to any nearshore
temperate or boreal ecosystem where fringing benthic primary production can be
exported into adjacent, or even distant, ecosystems. Because such systems are
widespread, the research has broad ecological relevance.

In addition to providing valuable insight into subsidy-based linkages among
coastal ecosystems, the results of this research will also inform coastal
fisheries management and fish and shellfish habitat protection strategies (three
of the focal species - crabs and sea urchins - consuming the exported macroalgae
in this project constitute large commercial fisheries in Washington state),
identify sensitive indicators of ecosystem state and dynamics for long-term
monitoring, and provide insight into the broader implications of regional
climate change scenarios linking riverine discharge and primary and secondary
production to climate. This project will support education through: 1) funding
for two graduate student Research Assistants, 2) a training program for
undergraduate scientific divers, 3) broad and innovative interaction with
regional K-12 students through the Friday Harbor Laboratories Marine Science
Outreach Program and the new UW-FHL GK-12 program and 4) support of a summer
high school research intern.