* 0925342
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: The effects of Land Use Practices on the Socioecology of the Olive Baboon and Human-Baboon Interactions
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Ryne Palombit, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 08/31/2011
* USD 15,000.00

This study will clarify the forces that influenced the evolution of primate
social behavior by addressing questions regarding baboon behavior and human-
baboon interactions. The first aspect of the research will test theories that
are based on social behavior in relation to ecology by examining variation in
primate social behavior given changes in food resource distribution and
predation pressure arising from human land use practices. This will be achieved
by answering two related questions -- how do baboons modify social behavior in
response to 1) human alterations of their habitats and 2) human changes in
predation risk? The second aspect of the study will test theories that predict
how human cultural beliefs and practices influence human-baboon interactions.
This aspect of the study will incorporate how different human cultural land use
practices influence the relationships humans have with baboons by addressing the
following questions: In the different land use systems, what are people's values
towards baboons, and how do these values, in turn, influence human-baboon
interactions while sharing the same environment?&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The study
will take place in Laikipia District, Kenya for 18 months. Baboon social
behavior will be recorded during ten minute focal samples while data on human-
baboon interaction will be conducted using semi- structured and structured
interviews. This project seeks to examine the olive baboon's response to
particular types of environmental changes which will provide insights on how
this species adapts to changes that are likely to occur in habitats where
baboons and people coexist. Furthermore, understanding how local people view and
interact with baboons and other wildlife provides a means of evaluating whether
local communities can be encouraged to make land use decisions aimed at
facilitating the human-baboon coexistence. This research will also yield
practical contributions to wildlife management and conservation practices as
well as contribute to the training of a female Kenyan graduate student.