* 0925269
* Analysis of Nonlinear Oscillations via Lyapunov Approach
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Tingshu Hu, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2013
* USD 286,824.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objective&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The
objective of this program is to develop a systematic and numerically tractable
Lyapunov approach for evaluation of the magnitude of nonlinear
oscillations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The
intellectual merit is that the Lyapunov approach provides a quantitative and
reliable characterization of the magnitude of nonlinear oscillation. Although
nonlinear oscillations have been extensively studied, most efforts were devoted
to qualitative description of the complex behavior. There also exist some
approximate, but not reliable, methods, such as the describing function method,
to estimate the magnitude of oscillations. The main tools of the Lyapunov
approach include the description of a piecewise linear element with saturation
functions and a compatible piecewise quadratic function. These tools convert the
analysis problem into numerically tractable linear-matrix-inequality based
optimization problem. The methods can be adapted for designing parameters for
minimization of unwanted oscillations. The methods will be applied to optimal
design of some power electronic systems for suppression of unwanted
oscillations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This
program will have significant impact on many branches of science and engineering
since nonlinear oscillations exist in systems of various types. The research
results will be submitted to interdisciplinary journals and conferences for
publication, so as to promote the application of Lyapunov theory, and other
methods for control systems. Appropriate research results will be incorporated
into the graduate course ``Nonlinear Systems," which the PI has been teaching
and renovating. The proposed work will seek broad participation from graduate
and undergraduate students. In particular, female and minority students will be
encouraged to participate in the program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this program,
a fundamental tool in control systems, the Lyapunov function, will be extended
to address a highly interdisciplinary subject - nonlinear oscillation - which is
studied in almost all branches of science and engineering. It is expected that
this program will promote cross fertilization between control theory and other
research fields, and yield revolutionary discovery in nonlinear
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;