* 0925822
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement:   Dental Microwear of Pliocene Bovids from East African Hominin Sites: Implications for Paleoenvironmental Dynamics and Human Evolution
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Jessica Scott, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 08/31/2012
* USD 15,000.00

&lt;br/&gt; Many researchers have suggested that Pliocene climate change was a
motive force for human evolution. The basic idea was that a shift toward drier,
more open settings led to adaptations for bipedality and the consumption of
savanna resources, including large grazing mammals. However, more recent
paleoenvironmental reconstructions suggest that Pliocene hominins occupied more
variable or mosaic habitats including both open and closed settings. While many
techniques have been used to refine our understanding of the paleoenvironments
of eastern Africa, these have not led to consensus reconstructions. This project
will test competing hypotheses for the paleoenvironments of four sites
associated with Australopithecus anamensis and A. afarensis by bringing a new,
independent dataset for the inference of diet and by extension, habitats, of
actual individuals in the days preceding their death. This study uses dental
microwear texture analysis to reconstruct ratios of graze to browse in the diet,
and therefore ecological contexts, of fossil bovids from Kanapoi (8 genera),
Allia Bay (7 genera), Laetoli (8 genera) and Hadar (9 genera). This project will
reconstruct the paleoenvironments of these four important early hominin sites
and how ecological settings may have changed over the temporal spans of the
hominins that lived there. Intellectual Merit: A large database of microwear
textures for both extant and fossil bovids will be generated, and will provide a
substantial comparative collection for future research. It will also serve as an
important test of taxonomic uniformitarianism, which is often assumed in the use
of faunal assemblages as paleoenvironmental proxies. In addition, since
evolutionary changes in A. anamensis and A. afarensis are widely considered to
be adaptations to shifting paleohabitats, the improved reconstructions resulting
from this study will have important implications for understanding the
relationship between environmental change and human evolution in eastern Africa
during the Pliocene. The broader impacts of this study include establishing a
doctoral dissertation research program for a female graduate student from an
underserved, EPSCoR state and provide a research assistantship to an
undergraduate through the University of Arkansas Honors College-Environmental
Dynamics Research Mentoring Experience for Students (HERMES) program. It will
provide both students with training in data collection techniques and research
methods.&lt;br/&gt;