* 0925788
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: In Utero Sources of Skeletal Variation: the Role of Maternal Prenatal Stress
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2010
* Leslea Hlusko, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 08/31/2010
* USD 15,000.00

Skeletal variation results from both genetic and non-genetic factors. Some of
the non-genetic factors that have been, and continue to be studied include
mechanical loading, diet and aging. However, factors that influence early
skeletal development, especially prenatally, have not received much attention.
This project investigates maternal stress during pregnancy as a nongenetic
factor that may affect fetal bone formation and growth, and later lead to
skeletal variation observed in adults.

The study hypothesizes that induced stress during pregnancy has a significant
and negative impact on the skeletal development of offspring, even though the
offspring?s environment is stress-free. For a controlled test, pregnant rats
will be subjected to immobilization stress at various times during gestation.
The offspring will be sacrificed at specific stages of post-natal development.
Measurements of bone quality will be taken from femoral histological sections to
test for differences between the offspring from stressed and un-stressed
mothers.

This project investigates an understudied non-genetic factor that can impact
prenatal skeletal development, maternal stress. This stage in skeletal
development is critical because any structural or biochemical compromise may be
irreversible. The model organism, the rat, is commonly used in bone
developmental research. Therefore, results from this research will be readily
comparable to other studies.

Intellectual Merit: This project will help to clarify some of the non-genetic
factors that influence bone quality and microstructure. Given the potentially
significant impact that prenatal stress can have on skeletal phenotypes, and
that rats are an established model, implications from this research are of broad
scientific and social relevance.

Broader Impacts: This research is the doctoral dissertation project of an
African woman from Kenya. She is the first in her family to attend college. This
project will promote international science training and the education of a woman
from an underrepresented group.