* 0926026
* Professional Dev Fellowship: Using informatics to advance history and philosophy of science research
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* John Howard, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2012
* USD 84,066.00

The project is designed to address simultaneously the need of acquiring
additional professional experience in informatics in order to advance research
in the history and philosophy of science (HPS) and to open up new areas of
research and investigation at the intersection of these two areas. As more and
more texts, images, and archival sources become available in digital form,
history and philosophy of science, and the humanities more generally, are now
experiencing a transformation similar to the life sciences during the 1990s and
the first decade of the 21st century. While these trends are inevitable,
researchers in these areas are ill-prepared to take advantage of the new
opportunities or to shape the future development of relevant parts of the
emerging new cyberinfrastructure. The post-doc's training in biology and HPS, as
well as his work on the NSF funded Embryo Project, has given him a unique
perspective on the possibilities and challenges of the upcoming digital era in
HPS. With the fellowship he will spend time training with computer scientists
and informaticians at the Marine Biological Laboratory in Woods Hole, MA, as
well as the Max Planck Institute for the History of Science in Berlin. He will
acquire new skills related to developing this cyberinfrastructure, which will
then be tested and implemented in the context of the Embryo Project. This
professional training fellowship will go beyond supporting research in HPS as
the tools and techniques developed will contribute substantially to the digital
humanities at large. Presenting HPS related results and information to a
multitude of different user groups has enormous educational and outreach
possibilities as well, and this depends on a substantially developed cyber-
infrastructure to deliver this scholarly content to students, policy makers,
judges, and the interested public.