* 0926141
* Ion Beam Engineering of Single-Crystal Sapphire Fibers for Fabrication of Buried Optical Claddings in Harsh Environment Sensing Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* MengBing Huang, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 08/31/2011
* USD 233,846.00

The implementation of advanced sensing technology based on single-crystal
sapphire fiber optics in harsh environment sensing applications is hindered by
the lack of an appropriate cladding structure for sapphire fibers that is able
to function without degradation or failure under harsh conditions. This NSF
project aims to address the challenge by exploring a solution relying on ion
implantation and thermal annealing for achieving buried optical claddings within
single-crystal sapphire fibers. Basic knowledge about the effects of ion
implantation and thermal annealing on the optical and structural properties of
single-crystal sapphire fibers, will be acquired. On the basis of such
knowledge, design and fabrication of embedded claddings in sapphire fibers will
be performed. The performance of prototyped sapphire fiber claddings will be
evaluated under harsh conditions encountered in combustion processes of
industrial applications (e.g., power plants and engines). Possible correlation
between the performance characteristics of such claddings and the material
properties of sapphire fibers, will be identified to optimize materials
processing in fabrication of high-quality buried claddings in single-crystal
sapphire fibers.

The success of the research would be very useful for industrial applications
requiring harsh environment sensing. The project will facilitate a close
collaboration/partnership between university and industry, promising a rapid
transfer of enabling harsh-condition sensing technology from an academic setting
to the industry if the technology proves viable. The research will enable a
coherent integration of research with education, by establishing connections
between basic scientific concepts and industrial applications in teaching of
graduate student courses, and by providing the involved graduate student and
underrepresented undergraduate students with various research experiences on
materials processing and characterization, as well as fabrication and testing of
fiber-based optical devices. These will prepare the students for their future
research careers, and in turn will help the industry recruit talents for its R&D
programs.