* 0926381
* Regulating Current Through a Nanoparticle Necklace by Microorganism:  A Transformative Technology for Biofuel Cells and Biosensors
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Ravi Saraf, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2013
* USD 391,056.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Charging a nanoparticle by a single electron can significantly modulate the
passage of current through the particle. The goal of the study is to leverage
this single electron phenomena to design and study an electronic hybrid bio-nano
device where the biochemical process in a living microorganism charges (or
discharges) the nanoparticle(s) to turn the current ON/OFF through the
particle(s), i.e., bio-gating. The bio-nano device will be a two dimensional
network of 10 nm size Gold particles that behaves as a single-electron-device
interfaced with microorganisms. The bio-gating will be accomplished by
modulating the current through the network of necklace by stimulating the
microorganism with nutrient. To impact practical applications and
manufacturability, issues on integration with conventional microelectronic
circuitry will be addressed.

The proposed bio-nano device integrated to electronic circuit will represent a
paradigm of hybrid bio-nano devices with a broad range of applications, such as
a highly specific sensor where the cell detects the moiety and has the
sensitivity to flip the ON/OFF switch of the nanodevice to produce a digital
signal; or the hybrid bio-nano device could function as an energy conversion
system to produce electricity as the cell is exposed to nutrients. The project
will train a graduate student in the area of sensors, nanotechnology and
biophysics. Demonstration of the device will be part of an out reach program
called ?Bright Lights? and ?Big Red Summer Camp? administered by Lincoln Public
School and University of Nebraska ? Lincoln to introduce middle and high school
students to science and engineering.

