* 0926610
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Latino Immigrants in the Contemporary South
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Monica McDermott, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2010
* USD 10,000.00

SES-0926610&lt;br/&gt;Monica McDermott&lt;br/&gt;Laura Lopez-
Sanders&lt;br/&gt;Stanford University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project examines
the process of Latino socioeconomic incorporation and its impact on race and
ethnic relations in "new immigrant destinations." Latino immigrants are starting
to concentrate in regions that have no recent experience with immigration.
However, few researchers have effectively explained the process of Latino
incorporation and its impact on new immigrant destinations. Given that more than
half of the immigrant population in the U.S. is of Hispanic origin, the degree
to which this population successfully incorporates socio-economically will
influence the social, political and economic fabric of the nation. A central
issue is how Latino immigration will impact the employment opportunities of less
educated African Americans in new immigrant destinations. African Americans are
the group most likely to compete for jobs and other resources with Latino
immigrants and hence are most affected by immigration. To address this, the CO-
PI uses a rich data set that includes face-to-face interviews with approximately
180 residents of black, white and Latino origin conducted during and after an
economic boom in South Carolina (June-Sept 2005 and June-Sept 2009
respectively). Additionally, the data include unobtrusive observations of social
interactions gathered via immersion in black-white-Latino jobs and neighborhoods
in South Carolina for a period of twelve months (Sept 2005-Sept 2006).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has several broader impacts. First, it
contributes to our understanding of how different economic conditions influence
the relationships between African Americans and Latinos. Second, it sheds light
into the ways in which new immigrants settle in regions without a longstanding
history of immigration. Finally, given that black men often face employment
discrimination, and that unauthorized immigrants are essentially unprotected by
labor law, explaining how these vulnerabilities play out in new labor markets
will hopefully result in more equitable employment and immigration policies.