* 0926708
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Explaining Welfare Generosity  Trajectories Across US States, 1911-1996
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Lane Kenworthy, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2010
* USD 10,000.00

SES-0926708&lt;br/&gt;Lane Kenworthy&lt;br/&gt;Lisa
Thiebaud&lt;br/&gt;University of Arizona&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prior to the
establishment of Aid to Dependent Children in 1935, states offered cash
assistance to single mothers and their children through locally administered
programs known as mothers' pensions. Since the first mothers' pension law was
passed in 1911, the rank-ordering of states' generosity has been remarkably
stable, shifting only after welfare reform in 1996. Prior research has neither
documented nor explained this remarkable path dependence. This dissertation will
study initial levels of welfare generosity across states as well as why the
rank-ordering of states' benefit levels remained so unvarying while the programs
proffering assistance (and the country as a whole) changed dramatically. It is
hypothesized that differences in state capacity and racial composition across
states during the mothers? pension era can explain states? differing
trajectories with regard to generosity. The co-PI will use three analytic
strategies: content analysis of initial mothers' pension legislation,
statistical analysis of benefit levels, and case studies of Massachusetts and
Texas utilizing process-tracing of archival material. This project has the
potential to contribute to substantive and theoretical knowledge about the
American welfare state. Substantively, we know very little about welfare policy
at the state level in the US, and what we do know is focused on the antecedents
to and effects of the 1996 welfare reform. Furthermore, the extant literature on
welfare generosity at the state level, which is purely quantitative, lacks
attention to causal mechanisms. Theoretically, scholars have long considered
race to be a key part of the explanation for the limited American welfare state,
but they have only recently taken the interaction between race and state
capacity into account. For example, the stingiest states usually have both weak
state capacity and a large African-American population, and it may be the
combination of these factors that ensures low benefits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As
decision-making about social policy shifts from a federal to a state
responsibility, it becomes increasingly important to comprehend how states make
policy decisions and how certain decisions become "locked in." The research
conducted to date indicates strong path dependence in states? policy
trajectories, so the historical perspective of this research is integral to
understanding contemporary welfare policy. Furthermore, as the US becomes more
racially and ethnically diverse, understanding how race continues to affect
welfare policy aids in ensuring that the welfare state is accessible to all
citizens. Finally, the amount of cash assistance is of paramount importance to
those who receive welfare, and the real value of welfare benefits has been
declining since the 1970s.