* 0926746
* A National Survey of Organizations to Study Globalization, Innovation and Employment
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Clair Brown, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* mo wang
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,012,496.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

At this time, the U.S. has no data resources that permit satisfactory
measurement and analysis of three key processes in our economy -- globalization,
technological change, and innovation. Better measurement of the effects of these
forces could enable better decision making in many areas pertinent to
competitiveness and economic well being. This project makes an important
contribution by collecting and analyzing new data on global engagement, use of
technology, and innovation-related activity by United States organizations.

The project involves conduct of a National Organization Survey (NOS), which will
link to items in the well-regarded General Social Survey (GSS), and which will
be made available for broad dissemination to the research community. The data
will be of use to policy analysts as well as scholars in organization sciences,
economics, and geography, among other fields, enabling them to address many
important topics pertaining to both scientific and policy debates.

The survey uses a dual frame approach. The first frame consists of a nationally
representative sample of public sector and other not-for-profit organizations as
well as for-profit firms derived from and linked to a nationally representative
survey of workers, the General Social Survey (GSS). The second frame consists of
a representative sample of large for-profit firms, which are those that are most
likely to be globally engaged innovators. The dual frame survey will allow the
team to study how an organization?s domestic jobs relate to its actions
regarding innovation, use of technology, outsourcing, and off-shoring.

This is the first National Organizational Survey to collect significant data on
activities by business functions. It is also the first time that data on
business function outsourcing and off-shoring has been collected from a
representative sample of United States organizations. With this data, analysis
can go beyond recent globalization studies that estimate the number of American
jobs that are potentially off-shorable, and begin to systematically examine what
firms and other organizations are actually doing in regard to both outsourcing
and off-shoring.