* 0926228
* BRIGE:  Time-resolved Surface Damping in Nanoscale Resonators for Monitoring of Biological/Chemical Reactions
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Robert Candler, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2011
* USD 193,000.00

BRIGE: Time-Resolved Surface Damping in Nanoscale Resonators &lt;br/&gt;for
Monitoring of Biological/Chemical Reactions&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fundamental
investigation of energy dissipation from surface forces (i.e., surface
dissipation) in nanomechanical resonators is proposed, especially in regards to
how it may be used to detect and study biological or chemical reactions. In the
past decade, micro- and nano-mechanical resonators have been thoroughly studied
for use as chemical and biological sensors by detecting mass-induced change of
resonant frequency that results from specific reactions. However, the
dissipation of vibrational energy due to surface forces, one reason that
resonators eventually "ring down," has until now not been utilized as a sensing
mechanism. Previous work demonstrated that surface forces can have a more
powerful effect on surface dissipation than on resonant frequency, opening up
the possibility that surface dissipation could be used as a new sensing metric
for resonating biological or chemical sensors. The parameter quality factor (Q)
is a measure of energy dissipation in resonators, with energy lost to surface
forces (Qsurface) being the particular loss mechanism of interest in this work.
Toward this end, three objectives will be pursued: 1) Fabrication of resonators
with Qsurface as the limiting energy dissipation mechanism, 2) Measurement of
Qsurface dependence on different gases, and 3) Tracking the change of Qsurface
over time to determine if temporal information about Qsurface can give insight
into the occurrence or progress of biological or chemical reactions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposed work is as follows:
First, a fundamental question - "Why do resonators not ring forever?" - will be
addressed. While some forms of energy dissipation (e.g., air damping) are
reasonably well understood, others remain elusive. Surface dissipation is
especially difficult to understand, because its dependence on a high surface-to-
volume ratio makes it difficult to see above the nanoscale. Next, the use of
Qsurface as a new tool for measuring the occurrence or progress of chemical or
biological reactions will be explored, revealing insight into surface forces
that would not be measureable with a purely mass-induced frequency-shift method.
Finally, the use of time-resolved measurements will be investigated to reveal
differences between chemical or biological reactions that occur during the
reaction process, as opposed to looking at only the before-and-after snapshot
views.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will have broader impact in several ways.
In engineering, the use of surface dissipation could allow for a new platform
for measuring biological and chemical reactions. The time-resolution of these
measurements could lead to discovery of surface force-related phenomena during
these reactions. In education, this program will enable four undergraduate
students from underrepresented groups to each receive one year of research
training. This will prepare these students to be the technical leaders and role
models for the next generation of engineers. The undergraduate researchers will
serve as role models and mentors to high school students by teaching them about
how engineering benefits society.