* 0926715
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: A Long-Term Paleoclimate Perspective on the Changing Hydroclimatology of the Bear River Basin
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2011
* Andrea Brunelle, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 07/31/2011
* USD 8,875.00

Paleoclimate records from sedimentary archives provide baseline information
about the long-term range of natural climate variability in a region. The Bear
River Basin, located at the intersection of Utah, Idaho, and Wyoming, is an
important area providing water resources for three states. Future population
growth in the basin and along the Wasatch Front is going to increasingly depend
on the availability of water in coming years. Long-term variability in Bear
River water resources is not well understood due to relatively short
instrumental datasets, yet resource managers and policy makers will need a long-
term perspective to plan future development to avoid creating future political
conflicts or endangering sensitive wildlife habitat in areas such as a nearby
migratory bird refuge. Paleoclimate data extracted from lake sediments and
speleothems from the Bear River Range, a primary hydrologic recharge area for
the Bear River, will provide a much needed long-term record of hydroclimate and
vegetation in the river basin. Pollen, charcoal, magnetic susceptibility, and
loss-on-ignition data will be extracted from sediment cores collected from a
small glacial lake. These data will provide a record of climate and vegetation
in the area over approximately the last 13,000 years. Stable carbon and oxygen
isotope ratios from a stalagmite in nearby Minnetonka Cave will also be used to
develop an independent climate and vegetation history at multi-decadal
resolution. Speleothem records and lacustrine records have both been used
frequently to extract paleoclimate proxy data from locations throughout the
world. However, a direct comparison of records obtained from the two archives is
often difficult due to relatively large distances between records, or
significantly different topographic settings. This study will compare a
speleothem record and a lake record located less than 10km from one another.
Furthermore, the cave and the lake are located at similar elevations and both
lie in valleys located on the east side of the main ridgeline. Thus, conditions
at the two sites can be assumed to have been similar throughout the length of
the overlapping records, allowing a direct comparison of archive
sensitivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this project will provide
context for understanding historic Bear River water resource inventories. In
addition, due to the location of the Bear River range along an observed regional
climate boundary, the paleoclimate record from the region will provide a long-
term record of past boundary migration and the resultant effects on local
hydroclimatic conditions and biogeography. Comparing and contrasting the timing
and nature of past climate changes in the Bear River Basin with locales to the
north and south will help refine the spatial distribution of areas that are
predicted to have increased/ decreased precipitation in the future, as a result
of global climate change. This study will also provide a methodological
contribution to the field of paleoclimatology by providing insights into any
signal preservation biases that may exist in lake and cave deposit records. As a
Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide
support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
career. &lt;br/&gt;