* 0926340
* Collaborative Research: Lateral mixing and dispersion on the inner shelf
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Stephen Monismith, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2013
* USD 597,394.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;This award
is for a suite of comprehensive field observations to elucidate and quantify the
mixing processes in the inner shelf and to directly examine the impact of these
processes on inner shelf biological distributions. Predictive modeling of
coastal flows requires parameterizations of sub-gridscale processes, which, in
the horizontal dimension have characteristic length-scales of 10s to 1000s of
meters. This study will provide a comprehensive picture of horizontal dispersion
on the inner shelf at these scales and its implications for scalar
distributions. It is hypothesized that the physical limitations imposed by
vertical boundaries and stratification restrict vertical motions and exchange
processes leading to strong anisotropies in the flow field and dispersion in the
inner shelf. Previous work has shown that mixing in the bottom boundary layer is
scale-dependent in the horizontal direction in spite of the limiting effects of
the bottom boundary. It is likely that scale-dependency may be different higher
in the water column where stratification may create even greater anisotropies
and restrictions on vertical transfer rates, and in the surface mixed layer due
to the influence of waves, winds, as well as surface heating and cooling. This
project will directly measure lateral dispersion rates in the bottom mixed
layer, stratified interior, and surface mixed layer on the inner shelf under
different forcing conditions in order to quantify any scale-dependent mixing and
highlight the similarities and differences in lateral mixing at different
depths. Once the dispersion rates and scale dependencies are determined, they
will be used to examine how the lateral rates of mixing may correspond with
biological thin layer development, maintenance and degradation. Two, two-week
long field experiments will be conducted on the inner shelf of northern Monterey
Bay to examine these issues. After deploying an array of moored instruments to
measure physical, optical and acoustical properties, the research team will
release a tracer dye, in separate releases, within the bottom boundary layer,
stratified interior, and surface mixed layer during both the early and late
portions of the upwelling season in northern California. The dye?s spatial and
temporal distribution will be measured using an autonomous underwater vehicle
equipped with a fast response fluorometer, as well as a tow body equipped with a
fluorometer and ancilliary instrumentation that measure concurrently biological
and geochemical properties of interest. The dye measurements will be used to
quantify the lateral mixing by fitting the data to scale dependent laws, and
comparing and contrasting the corresponding rates of dispersion with different
climatological and hydrodynamics forcing conditions (winds, surface waves,
internal wave, stratification, and turbulence) during these two measurement
periods. Connecting the lateral mixing processes and forcing conditions with
measured biological distributions (thin layers) will help determine the role of
horizontal mixing in homogenizing and/or redistributing biological
scalars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;This work will provide
valuable new insights into the transport and mixing of scalars in the coastal
region, particularly at the 'intermediate' scales of 10s to 1000s of meters. It
will have a broad scientific impact, especially on interdisciplinary modeling
efforts of the inner shelf where estimates and/or parameterizations of lateral
mixing cause significant uncertainty.&lt;br/&gt;As coastal populations continue
to grow, and pressure on marine ecosystems continues to increase, it will be
increasingly important to understand the underlying mechanisms determining
transport and/or retention in the nearshore environment. Understanding lateral
dispersion in the coastal environment has significant implications not only for
the transport/retention of marine larvae, and harmful algal blooms but also for
the transport/retention of pollutants. Better understanding of these mixing
processes will ultimately be of interest to environmental planners, policy
makers and other stakeholders in coastal communities. The proposed research will
also support one postdoctoral scholar and two PhD students.