* 0926727
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Fire Regimes in the U.S.-Mexico Borderlands: Disentangling the Relative Importance of Top-Down vs. Bottom-Up Controls
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* William Romme, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 08/31/2011
* USD 12,000.00

The twentieth century was a period of significant change in climate, land use
(e.g., grazing and fire suppression), forest structure, and fires throughout
most of western North America, culminating in increasingly large and severe
forest fires in the late twentieth century. The frequency and ecological effects
of fires are determined by a complex interplay of climate, fuels, and ignitions.
Unfortunately, the compounding effects of fire suppression have hindered
research progress; natural fire regimes have been altered, making climate-fire
and land use relationships nearly impossible to decipher. Yet, to manage forests
for potentially novel climate conditions, land managers need improved
understanding of the linkages among climate, land use, vegetation, and
topography and how these linkages influence fire regimes. Understanding the
synergy of these linkages requires documenting fires prior to 1900, as well as
fires that would have occurred in the absence of anthropogenic fire exclusion.

Doctoral student Jed Meunier, under the supervision of Professor William Romme
at Colorado State University, will integrate ecological and dendrochronological
methods to collect data on fire history and climate for the past 300+ years for
several unique sites in northern Mexico to explore these linkages. This project
investigates the following questions: 1) What is the relative importance of top-
down (e.g., climate) and bottom-up (e.g., land use, topographical position,
fuels) controls on fire regimes locally, among sites, and regionally? 2) How do
intra-annual patterns of precipitation (winter westerly vs. summer monsoon)
impact stand dynamics and fire regimes, and have these patterns remained
consistent or changed over time? 3) What has been the role of stand-replacing
fire vs. low-severity fire, and has that role changed in the past century? This
work will elucidate disturbance and climate controls of forest stand dynamics in
both pre-1900 and in the twentieth century, an era of extreme climate
variability and paucity of climate-fire information, providing an ecological
analogue to forests north of the border.

The results of this study will contribute to our understanding of the influences
of climate and anthropogenic controls on fire and forest stand dynamics. The
U.S. and Mexico face similar threats of ecological degradation, including lack
of fire in fire-dependant ecosystems, increasing population pressures, excessive
demands on natural resources, and climate change. A fundamental understanding of
long-term trends in precipitation variability and historical vegetation shifts
in the borderlands region, including recent twentieth century changes, will help
prepare for future climate variability. Lack of available data on long-term
trends and climate variability hinders the planning and appropriate use of
resources. Understanding twentieth century changes in climate, land-use, stand
structure, and fire and their interactions may provide an analogue for future
climate variability. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this
award will provide additional support to enable a promising student to establish
a strong independent research career.