* 0926269
* Integrated Biological Sequence Data Management
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2008,09/30/2011
* Jignesh Patel, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Julie Dickerson
* 09/30/2011
* USD 406,613.00

The University of Michigan is awarded funds to develop a comprehensive system
that can support complex declarative and efficient querying on biological
sequences, called SEQ. The approach is to extend a relational database engine
with sophisticated and powerful methods for querying on sequences. Extending a
relational database engine, rather than build a stand-alone sequence query
processing tool, is a much more challenging task, but is essential as it allows
the end-user to combine the power of analytical facilities already provided by
SQL engines with the added ability to query sequences. A crucial aspect of this
approach is to have a clean query algebra that provides a powerful set of
biological sequence querying features, and can be accommodated within the
framework of an extended relational model. SEQ will be implemented by extending
the existing Postgres database engine. The collaboration between the
investigators (computer scientists and biomedical researchers) will also
facilitate actual deployment of the SEQ system in a project that will analyze
various genomes for transcriptional regulatory elements related to genes
essential for eye development and visual function. The key intellectual
contribution of this proposal is in the development of a declarative querying
tool for managing biological sequence data sets in a relational framework. This
effort naturally requires designing and implementing methods that span most of
the layers of a relational database engine, including query algebra, query
language, query processing algorithms, data storage methods, and query
optimization methods. The SEQ project will lead to new computer science methods
for sequence query processing in each of these database management aspects. A
current preliminary prototype clearly demonstrates the tremendous functionality
and performance benefits of these aspects in the SEQ approach. In addition to
the contributions that SEQ will make to computer science research, the project
will also directly assist in the analysis of downstream targets for a
transcription factor critical for rod photoreceptor development and function.
The broader impacts of this proposal are in enabling life scientists to query
and manage sequence data using declarative and efficient querying methods, and
to enable the processing of complex sequence queries with traditional relational
querying. The project will result in a free open-source OSI-certified release of
the SEQ system using the ECL license. This release will allow the entire life
sciences community to leverage these powerful querying methods. We note that a
number of model organism databases are starting to use relational databases
(often Postgres) for managing sequence data; as an example see the Chado schema
used by GMOD. Sequence analysis tools are very applicable to this broader range
of users as the system will essentially add complex sequence querying
functionality (with efficient performance) to Postgres. The broader impacts of
this proposal include enhancing the nascent bioinformatics curriculum at the
University of Michigan. The project will result in cross-training computer
science PhD students in life sciences research, and include the training of at
least one women PhD. This project will allow undergraduate and graduate
students, post-doctoral staff, and faculty in the EECS department and the
Kellogg's Eye Center at the University of Michigan to foster a close interaction
in the methods that span the disciplines of computer science and genetics.