* 0926491
* Collaborative, RUI: Plume-Ridge Interaction in the Northern Galapagos: Understanding mantle-lithosphere dynamics through geochemistry, geophysical mapping, and gravity modeling
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Karen Harpp, Colgate University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 08/31/2013
* USD 215,998.00

Mantle plumes are thought to be responsible for creating ocean archipelagos
including Hawaii, Easter, and Galápagos. Similarly, mid-ocean ridges are an
essential driving force in plate tectonics. The Galápagos Archipelago is one of
the few places on the planet where mantle plumes and mid-ocean ridges interact,
providing a rare opportunity to improve our understanding of Earth's important
dynamic processes. This research develops a multi-disciplinary perspective on
plume-ridge magmatic and tectonic interaction using geophysical data and
geochemical analysis of rocks collected from the seafloor. Work includes
carrying out a detailed bathymetric and gravity survey of the North Galapagos
seafloor. Deep-sea camera traverses and rock dredging also provide essential
data to resolve seafloor structural fabric and information about the crust and
upper mantle. Geochemical analyses of collected lavas provide essential
information for determining mechanisms by which plume material is transported
between the archipelago and the mid-ocean ridge. This project is a fully
integrated research and teaching collaboration between undergraduate (Colgate
University) and research institutions (Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution,
University of Idaho). Undergraduates participate fully in the project including
the cruise and subsequent extended research projects during which they develop
cutting edge analytical skills and present their work at international
conferences. Broader impacts also include post-doctoral fellow support and
training of students from Ecuador and marine biologists from the Charles Darwin
Research Station, the primary institution responsible for conservation and
research in the archipelago. Impacts of the work will assist in ongoing
conservation efforts in the Galapagos.