* 0926999
* Collaborative Research:  Frontal Interaction and Atmospheric Forcing North of Cape Hatteras, an Analysis and Modeling Study
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* James Churchill, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2013
* USD 555,260.00

This study will examine the dynamics of the interaction of a shelfbreak jet with
a western boundary current and associated offshore transport of shelf water
masses. This situation occurs in the north Pacific (Kuroshio/Oyashio), south
Atlantic (Brazil/Malvinas currents), and Cape Hatteras (Gulf Stream,/shelfbreak
front). The focus will be on the region north of Cape Hatteras, where the
shelfbreak front detaches from the continental shelf and becomes entrained in
the Gulf Stream. The science questions to be addressed are:&lt;br/&gt;--The
response of the shelfbreak jet (acceleration/deceleration and separation from
the continental shelf) to motion of the Gulf Stream front relative to the
shelfbreak,&lt;br/&gt;-- Response of the shelfbreak front to forcing by strong
wind stress and surface heat loss&lt;br/&gt;-- Dynamics by which outer shelf
water is entrained into the Gulf Stream&lt;br/&gt;-- How the shelf dynamics are
affected by the narrowing shelf width approaching Cape Hatteras, with focus on
the vorticity dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A combination of existing high-
resolution data sets including those collected during the Frontal Interactions
Near Cape Hatteras (FINCH) program as well as a sub-regional numerical model to
investigate these questions will be utilized. The numerical model will be a
?child? sub-domain of a larger scale model of the entire Middle Atlantic Bight.
Supporting data including sea surface temperature and satellite-based altimetry
will also be used to gain insight into frontal motions and their response to
forcing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;This work will be of
importance to understanding fundamental dynamics of shelf water export in a
known region of mean offshore transport. The sub-regional model will be
important in understanding long-term trends in fresh water transport and shelf-
slope exchange in this area. This region is similar to other important regions
of large shelf export including the Kuroshio/Oyashio convergence in the north
Pacific and the Malvinas/Brazil current convergence in the South Atlantic. This
is also a region where organic carbon transport from the shelf to the deep ocean
is important.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The Hatteras region
contains numerous commercial fisheries as well as endangered marine mammal
species. Results will be communicated to appropriate fisheries scientists and
cetologists. The modeling effort will include graduate student support.
Gawarkiewicz will continue activities at the Children's School of Science at
Woods Hole, where he has been on the Board of Directors for five years, and has
initiated the purchase of oceanographic instruments (including a video-equipped
ROV), spoken extensively in classes, assisted in recruitment and evaluation of
teachers, and helped develop course activities for a number of classes.