* 0926926
* BRIGE:  Towards Efficient Production of Next-Generation Cellulosic Biofuels: A Synthetic Microbial Consortia Approach
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Xiaoxia Lin, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Ted A. Conway
* 08/31/2011
* USD 175,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;PI: Lin, Xiaoxia&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
0926926&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The PI?s long-term
research goal is to develop a novel microbial consortium system for efficient
and robust production of advanced biofuels from renewable lignincellulosic
feedstocks. Her current focus is on the production of higher alcohols (e.g.
butanol), which, compared to ethanol, are potential petroleum substitutes with
exceptionally better properties (e.g. high energy densities and compatibility
with existing transportation infrastructure). Inspired by the ubiquitous
existence of synergistic microbial consortia in nature, the PI will explore the
promising direction&lt;br/&gt;of engineering synthetic microbial consortia,
which consist of various microbial strains, each specialized in a specific sub-
task in converting cellulosic biomass to fuel molecules. In this two-
year&lt;br/&gt;BRIGE proposal, the PI?s objective is to develop efficient and
robust recombinant E. coli strains&lt;br/&gt;capable of working in synthetic
microbial consortia to convert cellulose/hemicellulose derived sugars into
butanol fuel molecules. More specifically, the PI will address the following two
key components in the development of such strains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Aim 1:
Engineer efficient pentose specialist for butanol production.&lt;br/&gt;Aim 2:
Enhance butanol tolerance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When completed successfully, the
proposed project will lay a solid foundation for the
ultimate&lt;br/&gt;realization of efficient and robust microbial consortia for
cellulosic biofuel production, which can&lt;br/&gt;potentially lead to large-
scale and cost-effective next-generation bio-refinery processes. In
addition,&lt;br/&gt;the project will advance basic understanding of microbial
metabolism and physiology, such as alcohol toxicity, and will generate several
recombinant microorganism engineering strategies&lt;br/&gt;that can be valuable
for a broad range of applications. In synergy with the research efforts
described above, the PI proposes education and outreach activities that aim to
i) stimulate active learning in an undergraduate thermodynamics course; and ii)
promote women in science and engineering. In collaboration with the Women in
Science and Engineering (WISE) Program at the University of Michigan, she will
organize an engineering summer camp for K-12 school girls and mentor
undergraduate and graduate female students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will lead to efficient and robust
recombinant E. coli strains capable of converting cellulose/hemicellulose
derived sugars into isobutanol. Such strains will be utilized&lt;br/&gt;in
synthetic microbial consortia to enable consolidated bioprocessing (CBP) for
cellulosic biofuels, which will potentially lead to large-scale and cost-
effective production of sustainable next-generation biofuels. In addition, the
project will advance basic understanding of microbial metabolism and physiology,
such as alcohol toxicity, and will generate a number of
recombinant&lt;br/&gt;microorganisms (e.g. efficient pentose specialists) and
the engineering strategies associated with&lt;br/&gt;them which are valuable for
a broad range of applications. The proposed education and outreach plan will
greatly enhance the educational experiences of i) many chemical engineering
undergraduate students at the University of Michigan; and ii) a spectrum of
female students ranging from K-12 to undergraduate and graduate students. The
outreach activities centered around female students will ultimately help in
broadening the participation of women in science and engineering
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;