* 0926136
* AAPT Topical Conference:  The Advanced Laboratory
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2010
* Warren Hein, American Association of Physics Teachers
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 05/31/2010
* USD 48,940.00

This project supports a two and a half-day Topical Conference on the Advanced
Laboratory held in conjunction with the summer meeting of the American
Association of Physics Teachers (AAPT) in Ann Arbor, Michigan. The conference
brings together a dispersed community of faculty and technical staff from our
nation's colleges (including two year colleges) and universities who direct the
intermediate and advanced laboratories - labs that are not taught with the
introductory physics courses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the conference
are to give participants an understanding of the wide variety of curricula used
in advanced labs, a knowledge of and hands-on experience with new or improved
experiments and techniques, methods for assessing student understanding in
advanced laboratories, techniques for integrating undergraduate research with
advanced labs, a knowledge of commercially available equipment appropriate for
advanced labs, and a broader view of teaching strategies and pedagogy for the
laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: During the workshop,
participants explore all aspects of the challenge of teaching the advanced
laboratory, while listening to speakers, participating in workshops, presenting
results, and engaging in dialog with others with similar interests. Challenges
in creating and offering an advanced lab include designing a curriculum that
responds to the results of physics education research as well as local
constraints, incorporating labs that do much more than repeat classic
experiments, introducing students to modern instrumentation, integrating
"writing across the curriculum" into the course, and increasing the breadth of
experience for students engaged in independent research. The conference provides
significant experiences for participants on all these
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The conference allows physicists
involved in the advanced lab to identify themselves as an interest group that
can lead to an increased exchange of information about the intermediate/advanced
experimental physics curriculum. The project is using a pre-conference survey to
assess the advanced lab interests and experience of the participants and a post-
survey to assess the overall effectiveness of the conference. The proceedings
are being published electronically and included in enhanced content on the
advanced lab section of the digital library comPADRE.