* 0926620
* Bridge to the Future for GIs:  Crucial Education for Operation Rebuild America
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2011
* Sue Rosser, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Alan Cheville
* 04/30/2011
* USD 217,732.00

Georgia Tech proposes to respond to the national needs of building
infrastructure, returning GIs, and dearth of U.S. trained engineers by using
this planning grant to create an innovate, interdisciplinary graduate program to
prepare Post-9-11 veterans for leadership in the national initiative to rebuild
America?s infrastructure.

Intellectual Merit: In order to create the innovative, interdisciplinary
graduate program to prepare the Post-9/11 veterans for leadership in rebuilding
the U.S. Infrastructure, Georgia Tech (GT) proposes first to initiate an
extensive survey about the needs and interest of Post-9/11 GIs in graduate
engineering educations and the career leadership positions likely to be open to
them after receiving graduate degrees. These data would be made widely available
to all institutions so that they could plan for the influx of returning GIs. GT
then proposes to develop an innovative model interdisciplinary PhD that
capitalizes on the skills and military experience in planning, implementation,
and leading teams of Post-9/11 returning GIs, to prepare them for civilian
occupational leadership positions to rebuild and recreate the U.S.
infrastructure of roads, schools, health, governance, energy, IT and utility
systems, as proposed by the new administration in Washington. The planning grant
would be used in the following five areas: 1) to assess the size of the
population of Post-9/11 Bill eligible individuals potentially interested in
pursuing graduate degrees in engineering nationally and locally; 2) to determine
and develop the curriculum that would be most appropriate for both their
interests and the national infrastructure leadership needs; 3) to assess and
understand the types of curricular, con-curricular and other support services
needed to help these individuals be successful in pursing graduate work; 4) to
assess the career opportunities and placement available to Post-9/11 GIs with
engineering PhDs; and 5) to develop relationships with the organizations vital
for sustaining the program and for career opportunities and placement.

Broader Impact: The interdisciplinary PhD to be developed by Georgia Tech would
serve as a model that could be scaled and modified for implementation at other
institutions. Because of its history with both the military and engineering,
Georgia Tech is a logical place to implement a PhD. A major research university,
ranked number four in graduate engineering, Georgia Tech is the largest producer
of engineering, including PhD graduates, in the United States. Georgia Tech also
has a long and successful relationship with the U.S. Armed Forces; Amy, Navy,
and Air Force ROTC unites that also serve metro Atlanta institutions, including
Georgia State University, Emory, Morehouse, Spelman, and Agnes Scott, report to
the Ivan Allen College at GT. Other factors, such as the large number of
military bases in the state, a law allowing out-of-state active duty persons to
pay in-state tuition, an active group of military alumni, and preliminary data
on the relatively large number of ROTC officers who return to graduate work at
GT and the large number of reservists currently activated from Georgia suggest
that the proposed interdisciplinary graduate program would have a sufficient
target audience. The focus of the program on recreating the U.S. infrastructure
would fill a critical national need, while providing the Post-9/11 GIs with
education needed to assume leadership positions in infrastructure rebuilding.
This new degree program provides the PhD educational complement to the research
addressing the challenges of American?s aging infrastructure.

