* 0926006
* IHCS: Cyber Systems: DWDM Multi-Mode Switching for Telesurgery and Heterogeneous Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Yuhua Chen, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* GEORGE HADDAD
* 08/31/2014
* USD 303,091.00

&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to develop a novel router
architecture that can cost effectively support a large number of dense
wavelength division multiplexing (DWDM) channels while meeting the needs of a
diverse set of applications. The approach is to design an integrated multi-mode
switching router platform that can concurrently support electronic packet
switching, optical circuit switching, and optical burst switching. With this
multi-mode switching approach, each wavelength channel can be individually
reconfigured to a different switching mode. Each application or each type of
message within an application can choose the most appropriate switching
mode.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With respect to intellectual merit, the project
provides an approach for cost effective scaling of router systems by maintaining
a relatively small number of expensive electronic switching ports. The
evaluation of the interplay among different switching modes within the multi-
mode switching router node provides insights into performance and cost
tradeoffs. The development of integrated multi-mode scheduling schemes provides
a unified approach to manage system resources shared among different switching
modes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With respect to broader impacts, the proposed
approach has the potential to facilitate a variety of heterogeneous networked
applications, including telemedicine and telesurgery which are explicitly
considered in this research. Telemedicine and telesurgery allow medical experts
and resources to be shared remotely and offer the opportunity to change the how
quality medical services can be delivered. This project and its related network
test bed provide training opportunities to graduate and undergraduate students,
especially women and students from other underrepresented groups. High school
students work on related projects in the principal investigator's research
laboratory and this has the potential to attract these students to engineering.