* 0926265
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Terrorism and Counterterrorism: A Comparative Cross-National Analysis
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Michael Schwartz, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2010
* USD 8,084.00

Why do different countries at different historical periods employ varying
tactics in response to non-state terrorism and insurgency? This study explores
empirically alternative explanations for this question during the last four
decades. Using an integrative theoretical approach, it interlaces traditional
actor-oriented international relations explanations that emphasize rational
decision making and power relations with more sociological and cultural
approaches, which emphasize ideas, norms, legitimacy and cultural toolkits. A
two-step inquiry is conducted to explore these approaches. First, the
relationship between terrorism and state response is examined through a series
of quantitative regression analyses, combining pooled time-series cross-
sectional analyses and event history analyses. Second, the research takes a more
sensitive in-depth look at the same questions using a comparative historical
investigation of three prominent ongoing terrorist campaigns in Turkey, Israel,
and India. This project is the first to examine the determinants of states'
counterterrorist policies applying a comprehensive theoretical framework to a
variety of counterterrorist measures on a cross-national level. It provides
insights into the processes of states' decision making and the various factors
that influence policy makers and show that these are often affected by
considerations that are not strictly utility-driven. In addition, the study has
important public policy implications. It provides decision makers and security
forces with important information about the effectiveness of various
counterterrorist measures, equipping them with more efficient tools in their
fight against domestic and international terrorism.