* 0926973
* Shifted Baselines: Quantifying Past Human Influences on Andean Landscapes
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2009,03/31/2014
* Mark Bush, Florida Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 03/31/2014
* USD 306,710.00

Knowing what is natural in terms of an ecosystem, rather than simply accepting
what appears to be natural, is important for all investigation of natural
processes. In marine biology this concept has been summarized as "shifting
baselines" in which each generation accepts a degradation of the environment and
perceives it to be "natural." Carbon storage, rates of growth, vegetation
succession, and potential biodiversity all are important components of ecosystem
services modified by human actions. Sometimes societal changes enhance one
process at the cost of another. Historically, water retention may have been
paramount in a dry setting like the high Andes, but when faced with global
climate change, carbon storage may become more pressing. Efforts by policy
makers to grapple with climate change and loss of biodiversity increases the
need for deeper understand of the trajectory of landscape change and for clearer
identification of what is natural. This research project will investigate an
area of very high biodiversity in the Peruvian Andes, where efforts to conserve
Andean habitats to promote both biodiversity and carbon sequestration are being
undertaken in a landscape that has been manipulated for millennia by humans.
Present plans for high elevation carbon sequestration center around Polylepis, a
tree that can grow at higher altitudes than any other. Woodlands of this tree
are important habitat for endemic species. While efforts to expand forests are
fueled by the belief that Polylepis was once much more abundant than present,
this hypothesis has not been tested. The investigators will define "natural
baselines" for ecosystems across a range of elevations, determine the natural
height of tree line (important for above-ground carbon storage), and the
trajectory of landscape change relative to climate change for the last 11,000
years. The researchers will analyze sediment cores from ten lakes and 200 soil
cores to provide the historical data to establish these natural baselines, and
they will investigate how climate change interacted with human activity to
produce altered fire regimes, crop use, and forest cover. Paleoecology can,
through analysis of fossil pollen and charcoal recovered from soils and lake
sediments, provide detailed information about how systems have changed. The
early Holocene climate (from roughly. 11,000 years to 9,000 years before the
present) was quite similar to that of today, but human populations in the Andes
were very low. This period therefore offers insights into the Andean ecosystem
without human activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Forming regional conservation
policy with regard to local land use or even global carbon budgets requires an
understanding of the trajectory of human influence on ecosystems. This project
will provide new data on the timing, extent, and nature of human-induced change
in Andean landscapes and provide baseline data relevant to ongoing efforts to
constrain the effects of climate change through carbon sequestration while
conserving biodiversity. Collaborations with scientists in complimentary
disciplines (soil science, plant physiology, ecology, and remote sensing) will
permit project results to be integrated into a larger prediction of appropriate
policy for Andean conservation and for attempts to mitigate carbon release
within Andean ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;