* 0926029
* Soil Sensors and their Wireless Underground Network for Precision Farming and Environmental Management
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2009,12/31/2015
* Robert Weber, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 12/31/2015
* USD 460,949.00

The objectives of this program are to develop: (1) In-situ soil sensors for
monitoring soil properties such as soil moisture and nitrates; (2) Underground
wireless sensor network for autonomously gathering the spatio-temporally varying
soil properties; (3) Information management and decision-making technology based
on distributed monitoring for modeling and analysis of agricultural production
systems.

The intellectual merits are: (1) Development of a network based framework for
researchers to better understand properties of soils and the environment over a
large area; (2) Establishment of an underground sensor and communication
network; (3) Development of tools for fertilization management in farming for
minimizing their environmental impact while meeting crop demands.

The broader impacts are: (1) The proposed program is a step toward precisely
controlling fertilizer application that will help reduce their run-offs to the
watersheds and minimizing the environmental impact; (2) The proposed underground
sensor network will find its use in any application requiring remote underground
distributed-sensing, safety against surface activities (human, fire, etc.), or
covertness (e.g., border patrol); (3) The underground network infrastructure can
be used by other research community such as (remote-sensing) to
calibrate/validate their own equipment/algorithms; (4) Three Ph.D. students will
be trained in an interdisciplinary area of agriculture sciences, soil sensing,
underground wireless networking, and decision-making based on crop/hydrologic-
flow/carbon-cycle models.

The transformative components of the proposal are: (1) Introduction of
information and cybersystem technologies to the field of agriculture for
precise, frequent, and high-resolution measurement of soil properties, and
measurement-driven control of agriculture inputs; (2) Development of a wireless
sensor network infrastructure capable of underground communication, energy-
efficient operation, localization, and resiliency to failures; (3) Development
of accurate and field-deployable sensors for measuring soil properties such as
moisture and nutrient.