* 0926889
* Collaborative Research: Quantifying the Effects of Iron and Light on the Growth of Diatoms from the Ross Sea, Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 02/01/2009,11/30/2012
* Peter Sedwick, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Diana Nemergut
* 11/30/2012
* USD 255,742.00

Intellectual merit: In much of the Southern Ocean, iron and irradiance are
thought to exert major controls on the timing and location of blooms of the two
major phytoplankton groups, Phaeocystis antarctica and diatoms. Recent numerical
modeling studies have simulated the broad-scale features of algal biomass and
species composition in the southern Ross Sea, by prescribing a higher iron
requirement for the growth of diatoms relative to P antarctica and by allowing
higher growth rates by P. antarctica under low irradiance. However, there are
large uncertainties associated with the parameterizations used in these models,
particularly with regard to phytoplankton iron parameters, which are typically
assigned static values. Results of recent laboratory experiments with colonial
P. antarctica suggest that the iron requirement of this species can be
relatively high, and appears to vary strongly as a function of irradiance. In
this project, the investigators will use laboratory experiments to quantify the
iron requirements of diatom species that are representative of open-water, ice-
edge and sea-ice environments of the southern Ross Sea, including Thalassiosira
gracilis, Pseudo-nitzschia subcurvata, Fragilariopsis cylindrus and Navicula
glaciei. The experimental data will be used to test a number of hypotheses
concerning the effects of iron availability, irradiance and UV-B exposure on
growth rates, production of dimethylsulfoniopropionate and dimethylsulfide,
cellular pigment composition, and the relative uptake of macronutrients. In
addition, the investigators will conduct preliminary "algal competition
experiments", in which the growth of mixed assemblages containing both diatoms
and colonial Phaeocystis antarctica will be examined, as a function of iron and
irradiance, with and without UV-B exposure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts: The research will provide quantitative information that is required to
construct robust, mechanistically-accurate numerical models of Southern Ocean
ecosystems and biogeochemistry. This project also will make educational
contributions at several levels, through the direct involvement of graduate and
undergraduate students in laboratory research, and through planned outreach
activities aimed at K-12 students and the general public, including lecture
presentations in Bermuda and South Carolina, and the development of web
materials in consultation with a group of K-12 science teachers.