* 0926241
* Continuation and enhancement of the MPOWIR program
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2014
* Susan Lozier, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 09/30/2014
* USD 454,564.00

MPOWIR (Mentoring Physical Oceanography Women to Increase Retention) is a
community-led program aimed at providing mentoring to junior women in physical
oceanography in order to improve their retention in the field. Initiated in
2004, the MPOWIR program has been in full gear, working on the objectives of the
program, as determined by the community in a planning workshop in the fall of
2005: (1) to provide continuity of mentoring from a young woman's graduate
career, through her postdoctoral years to the first years of her permanent job,
(2) to establish a collective responsibility within the physical oceanography
community for the mentoring of junior women in the field, (3) to provide a
variety of mentoring resources and mentors on a variety of issues, (4) to cast a
wide net to avoid exclusiveness and (5) to open this mentoring program to all
those who self-identify as a physical oceanographer. This proposal is for the
continuation and enrichment of MPOWIR activities. Specifically, the following
MPOWIR activities will be continued and expanded:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. The
Pattullo Conference: The centerpiece of the MPOWIR effort, this conference aims
to provide advice to junior women on developing their research programs; build
community with peers and senior scientists; and expose senior scientists to the
culture and concerns of junior women.&lt;br/&gt;2. MPOWIR website: This website
is the central place for information on MPOWIR activities and is intended to
provide mentoring opportunities to all physical oceanographers regardless of
gender.&lt;br/&gt;3. Databases and surveys: Data collection and surveys are used
to establish retention statistics and to quantitatively assess and track the
impact of MPOWIR activities.&lt;br/&gt;4. Mentoring groups: These groups provide
both peer and traditional mentoring on a smaller, more intimate
basis.&lt;br/&gt;5. Town Hall meetings and socials: These events facilitate
networking between physical oceanographers and provide career development
information to junior scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Additionally, the reach
of the MPOWIR program will be broadened by adding three new elements: an
increasing focus on gender-neutral mentoring; development of a mentoring
workshop that can be conducted at institutions and universities; and a focus on
exporting this program to other discipline-based
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This proposed activity,
through its focus on the retention of women in the field of physical
oceanography, will allow further capitalization on the investment the funding
agencies and universities have made on the education of women students.
Essentially, this proposed work seeks to stem the loss of intellectual capital
for the physical oceanographic field, as well as other Geosciences
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This proposed work aids
efforts to create a scientific workforce whose diversity more closely matches
that of the student population and that of the U.S. population as a whole, by
aiding the retention of women in the field of physical oceanography and other
Geosciences disciplines.