* 0926790
* Accelerated Degradation of Active Nanosystems by Biomolecular Motors
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Henry Hess, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 08/31/2014
* USD 340,000.00

The research objective of this award is to develop an understanding of the
degradation pathways of active nanosystems. At the macroscale, a car engine will
rust when inactive, but wear out when running. Similarly, active nanosystems
which incorporate mechanical motion degrade faster when activated. This project
will utilize molecular shuttles, nanoscale transport systems powered by the
motor protein kinesin, as a model system. Microfabricated guiding structures
will be used to exert defined, cyclic loads on the moving shuttles, and optical
microscopy will be employed to observe the breaking of the central part of the
shuttle. Investigating degradation within these active &lt;br/&gt;nanostructures
explores new ground, since the molecular shuttle system is too large to be
readily described in atomic-level terms of force-activated dissociation of
single bonds, but too small to apply macroscopic concepts of wear and fatigue.
Thus a mesoscale view of these systems on the nanoscale is required and will be
developed through a combination of experiment,simulation, and theory.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The result of this research will be an improved
understanding of wear and fatigue at the nanoscale. This understanding is on one
hand critical for the design of durable devices which can function for their
intended lifetime without failure. On the other hand, degradation products may
be released from the system, similar to the ?brake dust? created from brake pads
in a car. To assess the potential environmental and toxicological impact of
active nanosystems it is therefore important to understand how the nanosystem
evolves over its lifetime and ultimately fails. While this research is only a
first step towards understanding these complex processes, it will ? if
successful ? create a template for the evaluation of other active nanosystems
and provide a basic scientific framework to understand these degradation
processes. &lt;br/&gt;