* 0926780
* Collaborative Research: Impact of Atmospheric Deposition on the Distribution and Speciation of Trace Elements in the Upper Ocean - Focus on Iron in the Sargasso Sea
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2009,07/31/2010
* Peter Sedwick, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Simone Metz
* 07/31/2010
* USD 109,521.00

Recent studies in the Sargasso Sea (BATS region) have revealed a large,
seasonal-scale change in the dissolved iron (Fe) concentration of the surface
waters where concentrations decreased from ~1-2 nM in summer 2003, when aerosol
Fe concentrations were high, to ~0.1-0.2 nM in spring 2004, when aerosol Fe
concentrations were low. These changes were interpreted as the result of the
seasonal dust input into the highly-stratified, oligotrophic surface waters
during the summer, followed by the removal of this aeolian iron due to the
convective mixing, biological uptake and particle scavenging during the winter-
early spring. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers from the Bermuda Biological
Station for Research, the University of Delaware and Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institute have devised a simple model that implies that aeolian input of
dissolved Fe into the surface ocean does not scale with total aerosol Fe
concentrations. To test this hypothesis, the scientists will use the Sargasso
Sea as a natural laboratory to carry out the following objectives: (1) achieve a
quantitative understanding of the impact of mineral aerosol deposition (dry and
wet) on the concentration and speciation of Fe in surface waters of the Sargasso
Sea; (2) test the new model for aerosol Fe solubility that have been developed
for the Sargasso Sea, and thus evaluate the potential for application of this
model at the global scale; and (3) evaluate the need for an autonomous, buoy-
mounted aerosol sampler for quantifying the concentration and solubility of
aerosol iron over the open ocean. To attain these goals, both time-series
observations and intensive process studies will be done. The work will include
shipboard water-column sampling, atmospheric sampling at the Tudor Hill tower on
Bermuda, the use of an autonomous aerosol sampler on the Bermuda Testbed
Mooring, and subsequent analyses of the concentration and speciation of Fe and
other trace metals in seawater, aerosol, and rainwater samples.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As regards broader impacts, this study will provide needed
data to improve predictive capabilities of biogeochemical-ecosystem models. In
addition, this project will document the utility of an autonomous, buoy-mounted
aerosol sampling systems linking atmospheric and oceanographic processes for
environmental monitoring and research in marine geochemistry and
biogeochemistry. The goals of this research are compatible with the focus of the
SOLAS and GEOTRACES programs. One graduate student and one undergraduate student
(funded as part of the REU program) from the University of Delaware will be
trained as part of this project. &lt;br/&gt;