* 0926594
* Decadal Upper Ocean Variability in the North Pacific: Mechanisms, Impact and Prediction
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Bo Qiu, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2014
* USD 417,937.00

Decadal variability in the midlatitude North Pacific Ocean has received
considerable attention in recent years because of its impact upon the marine
ecosystems and the weather anomalies over the North America continent. While
scattered evidence exists suggesting the ocean dynamics works to contribute to
an increase in variance and persistence of the North Pacific midlatitude ocean-
atmosphere system on decadal timescales, a detailed understanding of how the
system works is still lacking. In order to improve our ability to predict the
midlatitude Pacific climate variability, a better understanding of how the upper
ocean dynamic and thermodynamic processes interact is of fundamental importance.
The mid-latitude North Pacific Ocean is subject to both buoyancy and momentum
flux forcing at the sea surface. Because of the planetary beta effect, the wind
stress-induced upper ocean anomalies tend to propagate westward and accumulate
in the Kuroshio Extension region. By transporting warmer tropical-origin water
to the mid-latitudes, the Kuroshio Extension is also where the largest air-sea
heat exchange and its variability take place. The non-linear nature of the
western boundary current circulation variability can further complicate the
time-varying upper ocean signals. In this study, Dr Qiu and colleagues examine
the processes underlying the observed upper ocean variability based on available
in-situ/satellite observations and a high-resolution OGCM hindcast output. The
scientific goals of the proposal are (1) to provide a comprehensive description
of the decadal variability in the midlatitude North Pacific from the perspective
of the upper ocean dynamic and thermodynamic process interaction, (2) to develop
testable hypotheses about the role of ocean dynamics in determining the sea
surface temperature changes, and (3) to explore whether the long memory of the
ocean dynamics can be utilized for improved prediction.

The Kuroshio Extension system is an important component of the earth's climate
system, particularly in the North Pacific basin. Its influence upon the
intensity and tracks of the midlatitude storms and the North Pacific marine
ecosystems, as well as its impact on the weather patterns of the U.S. northwest
coast, are of important societal relevance. This study aims to gain a better
understanding of the roles of ocean dynamics in determining the decadal and
longer timescale variability in the North Pacific climate system. This improved
understanding could potentially expand our capacity to predict the decadal
oceanic state. While the focus of the study is on the KE system specifically,
many of the scientific questions, such as the roles of the oceanic adjustment
through baroclinic Rossby waves, the intrinsic recirculation gyre variations,
the interaction between the western boundary outflow and the bottom topography,
and the impact of the upper ocean circulation changes upon the regional SSTs,
apply to the other western boundary current systems as well. A better
understanding of the KE system variability could serve as a useful step in
elucidating the ocean's roles in the midlatitude air-sea coupling in general.