* 0926235
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Multiethnic Populations, Career Trajectories, and Socioeconomic Mobility
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Scott South, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2010
* USD 7,805.00

In the United States, high rates of immigration have once again raised important
questions concerning the effect of ethnic diversity on patterns of socioeconomic
mobility and levels of inequality between racial and ethnic groups. However,
despite the potential effect of immigration and ethnic diversity on racial and
ethnic stratification within multiethnic societies, research has yet to provide
an examination of the impact of these factors on patterns of social mobility
over the life course. While prior research focuses extensively on metropolitan
area characteristics related to contemporaneous race and ethnic labor market
disparities, the contribution of this research is to examine the multiethnic
aspects of communities that affect the career trajectories of American workers.
Applying cross-classified multilevel growth curve models to data from the
National Longitudinal Survey of Youth and U.S. Census Bureau, this research will
provide a comprehensive assessment of the social forces contributing to the
differential patterns of intragenerational socioeconomic mobility among race,
ethnic, and gender groups in the post-civil rights era. Particular attention is
given to the impact of immigration and ethnic diversity on occupational
attainment, earnings growth, and acquired work experience of native born workers
from young to middle adulthood. The dissemination of this research will impact
the broader society by helping researchers, policy makers, teachers, and
students to better understand the effects of increasing ethnic diversity on the
social and economic well-being of their communities.