* 0926662
* Collaborative Research: Dynamics of Interpersonal Coordination and Embodied Communication
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Kevin Shockley, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2013
* USD 418,809.00

Communication is an act of coordination. Conversants must coordinate their
mental activities to achieve the common ground required for effective
communication. But how is this coordination achieved? This project tests the
hypothesis that coordination of body movements and eye movements helps minds
work together. The objective is to evaluate whether coordinated movement that
occurs during conversation embodies the coordinated mental activities that make
communication possible. The research employs a highly innovative approach to
understanding these processes of mental and bodily coordination. The approach
capitalizes on methods derived from nonlinear dynamical systems theory, a sub-
domain of complexity science. The investigators will record patterns of body
movements, such as gestures and postures, and patterns of eye movements. They
will then apply time series analyses designed to capture the complexity of
nonlinear dynamical systems to quantify the coordination of body and eye
movements between people who are conversing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research on
interpersonal coordination during conversation is a theoretically important and
far-reaching issue because it serves as a hub topic for interdisciplinary
studies of cognition, perception-action, language and communication, social
psychology, and neuroscience. The proposed research offers innovative methods
for studying joint action and strategies for understanding the relation between
coordinated movement and coordinated cognition during joint action. These new
measures of coordination provide quantitative tools for studying the complex and
covert processes of conversational interaction. As part of this project, the
investigators will establish a freely available, online, Joint Action Research
Database (JARD). This will enhance the research infrastructure in this
interdisciplinary field by serving as a repository for eye and body movement
time series and speech data collected in this project and from other interested
labs. In parallel with JARD the researchers will make available the software
analysis tools appropriate for studying the complex dynamics of interpersonal
coordination.