* 0926996
* Formation and Maintenance of Thin Tropical Cirrus and Its Role in Troposphere-Stratosphere Exchange
* GEO,AGS
* 01/15/2010,12/31/2013
* Dale Durran, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Edward L. Bensman
* 12/31/2013
* USD 371,238.00

Thin cirrus clouds located in the tropical tropopause layer (15 to 17 km
altitude) occur more than 30% of the time over large areas of the tropical
western Pacific Ocean. The formation and maintenance of these clouds and the
role they play in troposphere-stratosphere exchange is uncertain. Questions
regarding the origin and maintenance of tropical cirrus were posed more than
twenty years ago. While transport from stratosphere to troposphere is relatively
well understood, the processes that move air from the troposphere into the
stratosphere in the tropics remain enigmatic. Thin cirrus may well play a role
in this process but the exact nature of how that occurs is not known. Previous
investigations have identified dynamics, microphysics and radiative transfer as
all playing some role, but no studies to date have combined all three into a
single coupled model. This project will finalize development of a high-
resolution process model for thin cirrus that combines dynamics, microphysics
and radiative transfer. The model will be used to investigate the role that
these three processes play in maintaining thin cirrus layers and the role that
Kelvin wave activity may play in forming the layers. In addition, model results
will shed light on the transport of small ice crystals and the potential
dehydration of air processed through the thin cirrus layers from the troposphere
into the stratosphere.

Intellectual merit: The result of this research will be an assessment of the
relative importance of these three processes in maintaining thin cirrus and the
way in which they may couple to Kelvin wave dynamics to generate thin cirrus.
The main hypothesis is that Kelvin wave activity generates thin cirrus, which
then grows and maintains itself through dynamical motions driven by radiative
heating. Cloud ice water content is maintained by a balance between crystal
growth during vertical lifting and sedimentation. The coupled model will provide
insight on how air is processed through these thin layers by radiative heating
and dynamics and whether the circulation can produce dehydrated air that can
subsequently be injected into the stratosphere.

Broader impact: Large scale models of the tropical atmosphere struggle to
capture the structure of the upper troposphere and lower stratosphere. Part of
this problem is due to a lack of adequate vertical resolution but lack of
knowledge about the physical processes also plays a large role. The results of
this research will permit an assessment of the magnitude and importance of
diabatic heating in the tropical tropopause layer and the role that thin cirrus
play in the heating. By combining model results with new satellite observations,
the areal extent of the heating can be evaluated. Similarly an assessment can be
made of the magnitude of induced vertical transport. These results will both
constrain existing model results and be used to parameterize thin cirrus
properties and impacts in the next generation of models.