* 0926656
* A Crossroads of the Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation: The Charlie-Gibbs Fracture Zone
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2015
* Amy Bower, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 09/30/2015
* USD 2,913,796.00

Intellectual Merit: Recently the oceanographic community has agreed that we
should work quickly to advance our understanding of the Atlantic Meridional
Overturning Circulation (AMOC) in recognition of its importance in Earth's
climate system. While intense observational effort has been made to describe the
basic structure and (in some cases) low-frequency variability at a few locations
along the paths of the AMOC, relatively little attention has been paid to the
Charlie-Gibbs Fracture Zone (CGFZ), a gateway for both the warm and cold limbs
of the AMOC over the Mid-Atlantic Ridge. The result is an incomplete description
of even the most fundamental characteristics of this exchange flow.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project presents a combined observational and
modeling study of the AMOC at the CGFZ. The primary objectives
are:&lt;br/&gt;(1) to obtain an improved direct estimate of the mean and low
frequency variability of the deep westward transport of Iceland-Scotland
Overflow Water through the CGFZ, and&lt;br/&gt;(2) to gain a better
understanding of the causes of the low-frequency variability in the transport of
overflow waters through the CGFZ, especially of the role of the NAC in
generating this variability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An array of eight current
meter and hydrographic moorings will be installed across the CGFZ that will
measure the currents and water properties between the bottom and 500 m for two
years beginning in 2010. This array will provide the first long-term,
simultaneous observations of both the westward and eastward flows over the CGFZ.
An exploratory study of diapycnal mixing intensity in the CGFZ will also be
conducted. The modeling component of the proposed work will be idealized in
order to address basic dynamical questions about how baroclinic, energetic flows
are partitioned between one or more narrow gaps in mid-ocean ridges. The
connection between model and data will be made through the phenomenology of
interest, i.e., the space and time scales of the variability and the coupling in
both the vertical over a single gap and meridionally between
gaps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: By providing an improved
understanding of the strength and variability of the warm and cold limbs of the
AMOC where they cross over the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, the research will help to
sort out the ocean's role in global climate and provide a transport benchmark
for critical evaluation of climate models. This project will also contribute to
the scientific literacy of blind and visually impaired middle and high school
students through a continuing collaboration with the Perkins School for the
Blind in Massachusetts. The primary objectives of this effort are to stimulate
interest in the earth sciences through face-to-face and online interaction with
a working researcher who shares the students' particular disability and to
develop accessible physical and virtual tools for teachers of the visually
impaired to use with students at Perkins and in the Massachusetts public
schools.