* 0926986
* Collaborative Research:Extracting Multi-century Low-latitude Sea Surface Temperatures from Coral Skeletons Using Replicated Records of Annual Growth: Method Refinement&amp;Applicat
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Anne Cohen, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 08/31/2013
* USD 680,666.00

Proxy reconstructions of global temperatures over the past 1000 years provide a
context for understanding recent warming trends and allow better estimates of
the contribution of anthropogenic (greenhouse gas) forcing to global climate
change. Data compiled mostly from high latitude tree ring records suggest that
the late 20th century was the warmest period of the last millennium.
Nevertheless, the uncertainties associated with these estimates are significant,
especially during the period known as the Medieval Warming which ended ~700
years ago. Temperature changes at the earth?s surface follow most closely those
of the global tropics, which are 75% ocean; yet few datasets that span the last
1000 years exist from the low latitude oceans. In order to improve global
temperature reconstructions and to reduce uncertainties, well-replicated records
of sea surface temperature (SST) from the low-latitude oceans are urgently
needed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Massive long-lived corals, which accrete calcium
carbonate skeleton in annual bands like growth rings on a tree, have the
potential to provide this information. The PIs have recently applied a method of
reconstructing annual SST that takes advantage of the demonstrated relationship
between the skeletal growth of corals and water temperature. In multiple records
generated from 3 coral species, coral growth captures between 50-60% of the SST
variability in the instrumental record, on interannual and longer timescales.
Applying the method to a ~440-year long slow-growing coral collected from the
Bahamas suggests that SSTs were within error of modern ~ AD1550, that Little Ice
Age SSTs were about 1ºC cooler than today and that there is a strong
anthropogenic signal in the SSTs of the last 50 years. The PIs will build on
this initial work, focusing on refining the method of extracting SST from coral
growth records and applying it to generate multi-century long proxy SST records
for the low-latitude Atlantic and Pacific Oceans. Data acquisition by 3-D CAT
scanning of intact coral cores is relatively rapid and inexpensive, enabling
generation of many records of varying lengths from multiple colonies at each
site, and, using techniques applied in dendrochronology, provide enough data to
provide realistic error estimates on reconstructed SSTs. Funding will support 3
PIs, a post-doctoral research scientist, a PhD student, and research experience
for an undergraduate.&lt;br/&gt;