* 0926699
* Collaborative Research:  Nitrogen fixation, nutrient supply and biological production in the Gulf of Mexico
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Tracy Villareal, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 09/30/2012
* USD 328,180.00

This project will study the interplay of physical, chemical, and biological
factors in supplying nitrogen, an essential nutrient, to temperate coastal and
offshore waters of the Gulf of Mexico. The Gulf is an economically important but
understudied marginal sea with major commercial and recreational fisheries as
well as extensive fossil fuel deposits. Diazotrophic (N2-fixing)) cyanobacteria
bloom regularly in offshore and coastal waters of the Gulf and the limited data
suggest that they contribute significant quantities of both nitrogen and carbon
to the pelagic food web. These diazotrophs may play also a critical role in
supplying N to other organisms, including the ichthyotoxic red tide
dinoflagellate Karenia brevis. Despite its importance, little is currently known
of the factors that promote N2-fixation in the Gulf or the relative significance
of different physical and biological processes in creating conditions that favor
N limitation in the water column. The Gulf of Mexico is strongly influenced by
both riverine inputs and advective processes, providing an excellent model
system for studying nutrient dynamics, physical forcing of productivity,
terrestrial-oceanic linkages, and the potential impact of land use and climate
change on marine ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The relatively small basin of
the Gulf of Mexico provides an opportunity to quantify and study interactions
among physical, chemical, and biological processes relevant to a broad range of
other coastal and oceanic systems. Land-use and climate change are likely to
affect the circulation and hydrography of the Gulf, as well as the magnitude and
nature of riverine inputs, all with uncertain impacts on the biogeochemistry of
the Gulf of Mexico. This research will provide timely insights into these
processes and will generate a baseline of understanding for evaluating and
predicting the impact of future land use and climate changes in the system. This
project will make an important contribution to our understanding of the factors
that regulate N2-fixation and its role in supporting the biota in temperate
waters. The following specific goals are included in the work:&lt;br/&gt;1.
Identify the major diazotroph groups in the Gulf of Mexico and characterize
their distribution and activity in different regions and water
masses.&lt;br/&gt;2. Quantify the impact of advective processes, mesoscale
features, and riverine inputs on nutrient limitation and N2-fixation in the
Gulf, and evaluate the controls on N2-fixation and the degree of spatial and
temporal niche differentiation among diazotroph assemblages in different regions
affected by these processes.&lt;br/&gt;3. Use satellite data and physical models
to scale up our measurements spatially and to evaluate the regional significance
of N2-fixation in the Gulf of Mexico. The researchers will also use a coupled
physical/biological model to explore variability in the physical forcing and the
potential impact of likely land use and climate change scenarios in altering
nutrient dynamics and N2-fixation in the Gulf of
Mexico.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators and their institutions have a
strong commitment to undergraduate and graduate education. This project includes
support for graduate students, a technician, and undergraduates. In addition to
peer-reviewed papers and websites, workshops aimed at K-12 teachers, and a
program involving high school teachers in research will be used to disseminate
the results of this project broadly in the local community. The investigators
are committed to increasing the diversity of the ocean science community and are
active in recruiting and training efforts at their institutions.