* 0926273
* Variation in the Oldowan:  Recovery of Lithics and Fauna from the Gobaad Basin, Djibouti
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,02/28/2011
* David DeGusta, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2011
* USD 176,628.00

With National Science Foundation funding, Dr. David DeGusta and Dr. Sonia
Harmand will lead an international team of researchers to investigate the
Oldowan archaeology sites in the Gobaad Basin of Djibouti. The overall goal of
this project is to contribute to our understanding of early human behavior by
testing hypotheses regarding the oldest known type of stone tools (the Oldowan
tradition). An initial season of fieldwork in the Gobaad resulted in, among
other finds, the discovery of three new sites containing Oldowan stone tools
associated with animal fossils. One site spans over 150 m2, includes the remains
of a hippo, and appears to be relatively undisturbed. These sites provide an
opportunity to test hypotheses about the nature of variation in Oldowan tools,
the causes of such variation, and the meat foraging/processing behavior of early
hominids. One season of fieldwork will be conducted to excavate the sites,
recover the stone tools and fossils they contain, and collect samples for
dating.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The resulting data (stone tools, fossils, and
information on their antiquity) should permit the testing of several hypotheses.
Stone tools are the best available source of information regarding the cognitive
capacity and technical skills of early humans. Did cognitive capacity develop in
punctuated bursts followed by long periods of stasis, as held by the Stasis
Model? Or did it develop in more mosaic fashion, as held by the Diversity Model?
These are fundamentally different routes to the expanded cognitive capacity that
is the hallmark of our species, and the Gobaad sites should help illuminate
which path was taken during the Oldowan. In addition, the associations between
stone tools and faunal remains at the Gobaad sites will illuminate the meat
foraging and processing behaviors of early humans, behaviors that were also
critical in our evolution. The results of this work, then, should provide
insight regarding important aspects of early human behavior at the dawn of
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will significantly enhance
collaborations between Djiboutian and US scientists, as it is apparently the
only US-led scientific project of any sort currently working in Djibouti. Such
collaborations are critically important for Djibouti, as the country is in
severe need of assistance and expertise in heritage management (e.g., there are
no museums in Djibouti). Since this project is carried out with the support and
cooperation of the Djibouti government, it further strengthen ties between the
US and this strategically placed country in the Horn of Africa. The project
provides training to students from both the US and Djibouti, and the results
will be disseminated through universities in both countries.