* 0926148
* Collaborative Research: RoboBees: A Convergence of Body, Brain and Colony
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* J. Gregory Morrisett, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 08/31/2014
* USD 9,301,955.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of
2009&lt;br/&gt;(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RoboBees: A convergence
of body, brain, and colony&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;J. Ayers, G. Barrows, D. Brooks,
S. Combes, L. Mahadevan, G. Morrisett, &lt;br/&gt;R. Nagpal, S. Ramanathan,
G.-Y. Wei, M. Welsh, R.J. Wood, T. Zickler&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
entails the creation of a coordinated colony of robotic bees, RoboBees. Research
topics are split between the ?body?, ?brain?, and ?colony?. Topics within the
?body? include all aspects of the flight apparatus, propulsion, and power
systems. The ?brain? involves research on the electronic nervous system
equivalent of a bee?s brain including circuits for sensing and decision-making.
Finally, research within the ?colony? entails communication and control
algorithms that will enable performance well beyond the capabilities of an
individual. Each of these research areas is drawn together by the challenges of
recreating various functionalities of natural bees. One such example is
pollination: Bees coordinate to interact with complex natural systems by using a
diversity of sensors, a hierarchy of task delegation, unique communication, and
an effective flapping-wing propulsion system. Pollination and other agricultural
tasks will serve as challenge thrusts throughout the life of this project. Such
tasks require expertise across a broad spectrum of scientific topics. The
research team includes experts in biology, computer science, electrical and
mechanical engineering, and materials science, assembled to address fundamental
challenges in developing RoboBees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond pollination and
assisted agriculture, coordinated robotic insects will have substantial impact
upon rescue workers for search and rescue and hazardous environment exploration
applications. High fidelity environmental monitoring, traffic monitoring, and
mobile sensor networks are just a few examples of the future impact of
coordinated RoboBees. Since each RoboBee component must be developed from
scratch, technological fallout will be prevalent throughout research on the
body, brain, and colony. This new technology and the exciting and tangible
nature of robotic bees present a tremendous opportunity to catalyze young minds
and encourage their participation in science and engineering. An integral part
of this program is the development of a museum exhibit, in partnership with the
Museum of Science, Boston, which will explore the life of a bee and the
technologies required to create RoboBees. &lt;br/&gt;Â¬&lt;br/&gt;For more
information, please visit: http://robobees.seas.harvard.edu