* 0926532
* Conference: Theoretical Issues in Sign Language Research 10
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Ronnie Wilbur, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 08/31/2011
* USD 20,000.00

The tenth international Theoretical Issues in Sign Language Research (TISLR)
conference will be held on September 30 and October 1-2, 2010 at Purdue
University. It is co-directed by Dr. Ronnie Wilbur and Dr. Diane Brentari. Sign
language linguists will share their latest research in all areas of linguistics
related to sign language structure and use. A special theme of TISLR 10 is
"Research Methodologies in Sign Language Linguistics". This theme provides an
opportunity for researchers to explain and discuss diverse qualitative and
quantitative research methods for studying the world's sign languages. Just as
technology has affected the field of linguistics generally, advances in
technologies and software have made it possible to analyze sign language data
more effectively and to share data electronically. The theme is reflected in the
choice of plenary speakers and the construction of special sessions. Two of the
invited speakers are Deaf linguists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work presented at
TISLR is basic research, but it has an impact on areas of applied linguistics
and curriculum development for sign language studies at all levels. In addition
to their contributions to the conference theme, the Deaf plenary speakers serve
as role models for other Deaf students and professionals. They encourage other
Deaf people to seek higher education degrees and to participate in, and conduct,
research in the sign languages that they know so well. In all sessions of the
conference, an innovative communication policy will be implemented. TISLR 10
will actively encourage all participants who can present their talks in American
Sign Language (ASL) to do so. A committee of Deaf and hearing individuals who
have experience teaching and presenting in ASL will be available to help
individuals who have the potential to present in ASL but have not done so to
date. Since this change in communication policy toward direct communication is
one that was requested by Deaf colleagues, it is expected that this policy will
make sign language linguistics more accessible and more attractive to the Deaf
Community at all levels.