* 0926824
* BRIGE: Biomedical Applications of High Internal Phase Emulsions
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Elizabeth Cosgriff-Hernandez, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Ted A. Conway
* 07/31/2012
* USD 174,999.00

0926824&lt;br/&gt;Cosgriff-Hernandez&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded
under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROJECT SUMMARY: We propose to generate high
porosity bone scaffolds that are both&lt;br/&gt;biodegradable and injectable
using high internal phase emulsions (HIPEs). Current fabrication techniques can
be used to generate either a porous scaffold or an injectable scaffold. A highly
porous scaffold that is injectable and cures in situ to suitable mechanical
strength will represent a significant advancement in orthopaedic tissue
engineering. This innovative fabrication platform will provide exceptional
control over the architecture, which can be utilized to tune scaffold properties
to enhance tissue regeneration. A limited number of studies have demonstrated
the potential of polyHIPEs as scaffolds; however, the synthetic routes used in
these studies limited the biocompatibility, biodegradability, or injectability
of the candidate scaffolds. We propose to use an entirely new synthetic design
based on addition reactions of multifunctional polyesters to harness the full
potential of the polyHIPE scaffolds. Furthermore, we will utilize molecular
hydrophobicity prediction software to identify relationships between
compositional chemistry and scaffold architecture that will enable rationale
design of polyHIPE scaffolds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: These
studies will provide the proof-of-concept and design strategies for
the&lt;br/&gt;application of emulsion templating in a wide range of biomedical
applications. Technical: Completion of the proposed Tasks will generate high
porosity scaffolds that are both biodegradable and injectable using emulsion
templating. A highly porous scaffold that is injectable and cures in situ to
suitable mechanical strength will represent a significant advancement in
orthopaedic tissue engineering. Fundamental: Systematic study of these scaffolds
will delineate the individual effects of molecular hydrophobicity, viscosity,
and surfactant on HIPE formation and architecture of the resulting foam. The
ability to predict foam architecture based on compositional and processing
variables is critical in rational design of tissue engineering scaffolds. On a
grander scale, the predictive models and methodology developed in this research
are applicable to other clinical specialties in which high porosity foams show
promise in improving patient care (e.g. wound dressings, endovascular
intervention, fixation devices).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Broad
educational and outreach activities will be woven through every level of this
innovative research program to address the national need to increase the
participation of underrepresented groups in the scientific and engineering
workforce. This integrated educational and outreach platform will focus on
strategies that enhance recruitment, retention and promotion of women and
minorities in engineering. Collaborative activities with a minority serving
institution in conjunction with continued involvement with the Texas A&amp;M
LSAMP program will create new opportunities for underrepresented groups to
participate in innovative research. The proposed studies will enable technical
and fundamental advances in tissue engineering while training these students for
engineering careers and instilling a commitment to diversity. The research
program will be used to foster critical thinking and equip students with state-
of-the-art experimental skills in chemistry, polymer science and engineering. In
addition,&lt;br/&gt;reports, theses, manuscript drafting, presentations at
weekly group meetings, and opportunities to present at regional and national
meetings will foster effective communication skills. Finally, the principles and
results of this research will be incorporated into courses taught by the PI to
educate students and encourage interest in biomedical
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;