* 0926678
* UBM-Group UNLV Mathematical Biology Program
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Paul Schulte, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 08/31/2015
* USD 240,000.00

Researchers in the Departments of Biological and Mathematical Sciences are
creating an interdisciplinary curricular and research experience in mathematical
biology for undergraduates. Students with an initial introductory background in
mathematics (including calculus) and biology are taking further coursework in
biomathematics, including new courses with interdisciplinary modules. They also
join a multidisciplinary group of faculty and students collaborating on a series
of core research projects in population biology, water transport in plants,
biomechanics and locomotion, or genetic responses to environmental cues, and
give formal oral or poster presentations based on their findings at an annual
one-day conference of graduate and undergraduate students. A seminar series
entitled "Mathematics and Biology - An Interface for the 21st Century" is
exposing both students and faculty to the work of prominent researchers in
mathematical biology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of these
activities lies in their helping to expose undergraduate students to a more
unified perspective of biology and mathematics. Students start out as primarily
biology or mathematics students, but the interaction with faculty and students
from both fields and their collaborating on research subsequently forms a
fertile environment to encourage the interest and ability of students to work at
this interface of fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the
project is its contribution to the development of scientific infrastructure for
the future. In order for future scientists to conquer the challenges at the
interface between mathematics and biology, the project aims to influence their
development at an early stage - before, for example, they have become the
traditional biologist who does not have the background to even consider applying
mathematics to their research. In keeping with this goal, flexible program entry
points allow for early participation of students with less background in
mathematics or biology, and research projects are designed to be accessible and
compelling to students relatively new to the research experience. This project
represents a start at modifying the early development of students and directing
a number of them into a growing realm where they have familiarity with both
mathematics and biology and can begin to contribute to this important
interface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is partially supported by funds
from the Division of Mathematical Sciences in the Directorate for Mathematical
and Physical Sciences.