* 0926111
* Extended Time Scale Simulation Studies of Nanoscale Friction
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Michael Falk, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Mary M. Toney
* 08/31/2013
* USD 279,998.00

This award funds the development of new techniques for applying atomic scale
simulation to study the physics of nanoscale friction. These techniques aim to
extend the time scales accessible with simulation, which are currently limited
to less than a microsecond. This renders current methods unsuitable for
simulating processes that take place at sliding rates considerably slower than
0.1 m/s. For comparison, AFM experiments and MEMs sliding take place at sliding
speeds of 10-6 ? 10-9 m/s. These simulation methods will also be extended to
inherently non-equilibrium simulations. It is anticipated that such long-time
non-equilibrium simulations will be useful for testing theories of friction
against simulations in which a single-asperity contact is realistically modeled.

The goal of this project is to expand our knowledge regarding the fundamental
physics and chemistry of friction on the nanoscale. Such knowledge is critical
for the design of micro- and nano- electromechanical devices (MEMS/NEMS),
interpreting the results of atomic force microscopy (AFM) for surface
characterization and developing effective methods for lubrication in precision
applications. Investigations will enable the analysis of transitions in
frictional response with respect to sliding rate and temperature. These methods
will also lay the groundwork for investigations into the effect of adsorbates
such as hydrocarbons and the influence of surface chemistry on friction and wear
and have the potential to be extended to a variety of other systems including
studies of fracture, fatigue, adhesion and other non-equilibrium materials
processes. The project will support a graduate student and postdoctoral
researcher. The investigator will also coordinate with the outreach activities
the JHU MRSEC and PREM grant activities to bring an underrepresented minority
student into the lab each summer to gain research experience working closely
with the PI and graduate student.