* 0926766
* The Hawaii Ocean Time-series (HOT): Sustaining ocean ecosystem and climate observations in the North Pacific Subtropical Gyre
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2009,09/30/2013
* David Karl, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 09/30/2013
* USD 6,201,878.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This new award will support the Hawaii Ocean Time-series (HOT) research program
under the leadership Dr. Matthew Church, a stellar young scientist, for a 4 year
period (August 2009-July 2013). The University of Hawaii will be the nexus for
the entire HOT project, working with investigators at Oregon State University,
Scripps Institution of Oceanography, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute, and
Montana State University to accomplish this important research on the changing
biogeochemical, ecological and physical oceanographic processes being
experienced in the changing climate of central gyres of the world's oceans. A
project in NSF's portfolio on global climate and environmental change, this
interdisciplinary research will include the exploration and documentation of the
dynamics of the ocean's carbon cycle, the changing pH of the ocean, and the
impacts on ecosystems of this "acidification." The project relies on monthly
shipboard and near-continuous moored platform measurements to document
variability in ocean properties and processes over time scales ranging from
semi-diurnal to decadal.

Since 1988, and under the leadership of Dr. David Karl, many teams of scientists
have examined ocean ecosystem and climate variability at Station ALOHA (22°45'N,
158°W) in the North Pacific Subtropical Gyre (NPSG). Hallmarks of the earlier
HOT research are an increased understanding of the sensitivity of biogeochemical
cycling to large scale ocean-climate interactions, markedly improved
quantification of the reservoirs and fluxes of ocean carbon and associated
elements, identification of how changes to the North Pacific hydrological cycle
influence ocean physics and biogeochemistry, and the creation of long-term data
sets needed for assessing and predicting future climate perturbations on the
ocean ecosystem.

In preparing for this new award for the HOT research program, the investigators
have worked with the broader oceanographic community to clarify and evolve the
long-term objectives of the HOT program. There will be the explicit integration
of the physical oceanographic components with the biogeochemical/ecosystem
parts, and the overall effort will be centralized at the University of Hawaii
while retaining the necessary multidisciplinary expertise for core elements of
the research via sub-awards. This new award will allow the teams of scientists
to pursue new research questions on ocean ecological and biogeochemical
processes, while maintaining the high quality suite of measurements required for
continued assessment of dynamics in ocean carbon and nutrient pools and fluxes,
physical climate, plankton community structure, ecosystem productivity,
particulate matter fluxes, and inherent optical properties. The new award will
enhance the value of the program dataset for examining how low-frequency climate
signals such as those associated with El Niño/Southern Oscillation (ENSO) and
the Pacific Decadal Oscillation (PDO) influence the ecological habitat structure
of the NPSG. Such efforts will continue to aid on-going biogeochemical and
numerical ocean circulation models required for predicting how future habitat
perturbations may influence ecosystem dynamics in the NPSG.

Education, outreach, and training will play an important role in the HOT program
activities. The cruises, the new data collected, and the historical context of
the time-series provides a unique learning platform for high school,
undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral students and teachers from Hawaii and
around the world. The monthly HOT cruises provide short-duration (4 day)
opportunities for students and teachers to gain first-hand exposure to ocean and
climate sciences. The new HOT award will support 2 graduate and 2 undergraduate
student researchers, working with HOT scientists and gaining experience
analyzing time series datasets. They will also develop valuable oceanographic
sampling and laboratory skills as they pursue their own scientific projects. In
addition, this HOT project and its people will help support the research of
numerous other independent ocean scientists who can rely on the program's
infrastructure (ship facilities, laboratories, equipment) to conduct their own
independently funded research within a rich framework of understanding and
environmental data collection.

The data of the HOT project are readily accessible and freely available on the
Internet. For example, the HOT surface carbon dioxie and pH records were
recently included in the Fourth Assessment Report by the Inter-governmental
Panel on Climate Change.

With this new award, HOT will forge a stronger partnership with the Center for
Microbial Oceanography: Research and Education (C-MORE), an NSF-funded Science
and Technology Center at the University of Hawaii. C-MORE provides complementary
infrastructure and scientific approaches for collaborative science, education
and research training opportunities with HOT, including connections to programs
designed to entrain women and under-represented ethic groups in the sciences.
For example, HOT scientists will mentor undergraduate students of Native Hawaii
ancestry through the CMORE Scholars program. In addition, HOT scientists and
staff will participate in CMORE's Teacher-at Sea program that offers local area
high school teachers opportunities to participate in the monthly HOT cruises.