* 0926848
* An Investigation of Abyssal Mixing and Interior Transports in the North Atlantic
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/2009,10/31/2014
* Ruth Curry, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 10/31/2014
* USD 3,106,336.00

Ongoing efforts to develop a quantitative picture of the Atlantic meridional
overturning circulation (AMOC) have largely focused on the western boundary
current system and transports of water masses formed by buoyancy loss in the
northern seas. By contrast, the structure and strength of the interior abyssal
circulation and its buoyancy gain have been poorly sampled and are not known in
much detail. These are, however, fundamentally important to the global ocean
circulation and to ocean budgets of mass, heat and tracers. A process study will
be conducted to provide quantitative estimates of abyssal mixing and circulation
in order to assess the strength of, and linkages between, the horizontal and
vertical components of the North Atlantic interior abyssal circulation. Analysis
of climatological property fields suggests that a logical region to accomplish
this lies along the eastern flank of Bermuda Rise and in the topographic basin
to its southeast. Several lines of evidence suggest that these interior flows
are highly structured and remarkably vigorous, and by implication, that the
diapycnal mixing feeding them is particularly strong. That source region is
situated on the western flank of the mid Atlantic Ridge (MAR) where rugged
topography provides conditions favorable for mixing. The project is comprised of
two elements: 1) An array of moored profilers designed to measure the
geostrophic transports along the southeastern flank of Bermuda Rise, a primary
pathway for the interior circulation, and 2) A shipboard survey to obtain
microstructure and velocity profiles, plus detailed bathymetry. These will be
used to construct estimates of turbulent buoyancy fluxes across a range of
topographic features and a characterization of the basin-wide diapycnal forcing
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit&lt;br/&gt;Each component of the
proposed experiment will provide direct measurements of a poorly quantified
portion of the interior abyssal ocean, i.e., the structure and strength of
horizontal flows along Bermuda Rise, and the diapycnal forcing that feeds those
flows. Together, they will provide a basis for evaluating consistency between
the observed circulations and the underlying dynamical theory. This attention to
the interior basin will both complement and supplement the emerging quantitative
picture of the AMOC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically the process study will
accomplish the following:&lt;br/&gt;1 Quantify the structure, strength, and
variability of the intermediate-to-abyssal interior flow field along Bermuda
Rise. Diagnose the relative contributions of northern (high tracer concentration
and low nutrients) and southern (low tracer concentrations and high nutrients)
sources to these flows. &lt;br/&gt;2 Assess the regional structure and strength
of turbulent mixing that feeds the interior flow field. Apply these to improve
dynamically-based parameterizations of diapycnal forcing.&lt;br/&gt;3 Evaluate
consistency between the magnitudes of the observed vertical and horizontal
fluxes.&lt;br/&gt;4 Synthesize transports from various measurement programs in
temperature and density classes, to construct volume flux budgets for cold to
warm limb transformation and abyssal circulation in the western North Atlantic
basins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts&lt;br/&gt;The results of this
process study and synthesis will provide benchmarks for evaluation of ocean
assimilation and reanalysis products. None of the current ocean models and
analysis products exhibits much structure below 4000 m. Abyssal geostrophic flow
fields in general circulation models have been shown to improve significantly
when realistic representations of diapycnal mixing are incorporated. This effort
will provide regional constraints for a dynamical parameterization of diapycnal
forcing designed for testing and use in ocean models. Finally, the project will
provide opportunities for student participation in the field and in the analysis
of observational data.