* 0926845
* Coordinated Pricing and Inventory Management
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Xin Chen, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Edwin Romeijn
* 06/30/2012
* USD 288,696.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This grant provides funding for the development of mathematical models
integrating production, inventory and pricing decisions in a host of
centralized/decentralized supply chain systems as well as the development of
efficient algorithms to solve these models. A common theme throughout this
proposal is to build and analyze comprehensive inventory and pricing models
taking into account a variety of real-world issues and design efficient
computational algorithms for solving these models. A major emphasis of this
proposed research is to develop inventory and pricing models that incorporate
knowledge of pertinent consumer behavior and supply chain risk management models
that integrate operations and finance decisions. The PI also plans to analyze
and design collaboration mechanisms for complex decentralized supply chains that
may include retailers competing or cooperating on inventory and pricing. If
successful, the proposed research will greatly advance our knowledge base of
important and challenging supply chain models. Equally important, the proposed
research has the potential to provide new tools and methodologies to effectively
manage supply chains and thus improve companies' competitive advantage. The
advanced mathematical models and algorithms to be explored in this proposal will
serve as a basis for the development of the much needed theory that will allow
to cut across traditional organizational barriers within a firm and across
companies and improve supply chain efficiencies.