* 0926150
* American Genetic Association Symposium:   The Genetics and Genomics of Environmental Change
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2010
* David Rand, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 05/31/2010
* USD 25,000.00

Environmental change has been a constant challenge for all organisms throughout
the history of life on earth. The striking environmental variation observed from
the poles to the equator, from season to season, and from day to night has been
met by both physiological and evolutionary adaptations that enable organisms to
survive and reproduce. In recent years there has been growing interest and
concern over how humans are imposing environmental change on the planet, and how
organisms are responding to that change. The goal of the 2009 American Genetic
Association Annual Symposium is to bring together leading researchers in the
fields of evolutionary genetics and environmental change to discuss current
problems and prospects at the interface between these two areas. The application
of evolutionary logic and genomic technologies to the new problems in
environmental change will be a major theme of the Symposium. Leading researchers
in evolutionary, population, and quantitative genetics will discuss how these
fields integrate with ecological and geological perspectives on climate change.

The 2009 Symposium will be held at Brown University, and funds are requested to
enable the participation of graduate students and postdoctoral fellows. Without
a healthy representation of younger researchers from diverse backgrounds, the
long term impact of this Symposium will be diminished. In addition, rapid
advances in genome sciences are opening a wide range of questions that can be
addressed with non-model organisms; may of these will serve as critical
indicator species of environmental change in the future. Finally, the Symposium
is highly integrative and will bring together geneticists, evolutionary
biologists, paleontologists, ecologists, geologists and environmental scientists
to forge a broad new synthesis.