* 0926420
* Collaborative Research: Nonparametric Bayesian Modeling of Reliability of Nonelectronics
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Tao Yuan, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Edwin Romeijn
* 08/31/2013
* USD 154,443.00

This grant provides funding for the investigation of reliability in
nanoelectronics. Nanoelectronics is a driving force for strong economic growth
in the United States. Reliability is recognized as one of the most critical
factors in determining the success of nano fabrication and manufacturing. This
collaborative project will be led by a nano device engineer and a reliability
specialist. The objective of this interdisciplinary research is to investigate
effective and practical nonparametric Bayesian methods to assess the reliability
of nanoelectronic products during the early design and development stages.
Specially, the proposed research tasks consist of two closely-related
components: (i) an analytical study to develop practical nonparametric Bayesian
methods for estimating important reliability measures of nanoelectronic devices,
and (ii) an experimental study to validate the models by fabricating and
characterizing newly developed nonvolatile memories based on nanocrystals
embedded high-k thin films.

Upon the successful completion of this project, new methods and tools that are
critical to design and manufacture reliable nanoelectronic products will be
developed. This will be the first systematic study in modeling and predicting
reliability of nano products based on experimental data and nonparametric
Bayesian methods which offer great flexibility and capability to address
challenges in real products influencing yield and cost. The result will enable
manufacturers to assess reliability of new nano products and involved costs in
the early design and development stages, which would expedite products to the
market. Furthermore, the new nonvolatile memory devices have practical
applications in future generation integrated circuits (ICs) and data storage.
This multidisciplinary research project will provides students with both
theoretical and experimental education in reliability, semiconductor devices,
thin film materials, and high-tech fabrication processes.