* 0926908
* Comparing Engineering Design Methods: a Protocol Analysis-Based Design Cognition Approach
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* John Gero, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Collopy
* 06/30/2012
* USD 386,058.00

The research objective of this award is to determine the cognitive differences
of different engineering design methods. The understanding of engineering design
based on scientific evidence is still in its infancy. The approach is to utilize
protocol studies, under development in design cognition, using on a principled
coding scheme founded on Gero?s Function-Behavior-Structure ontology of
designing. Individuals will be taught a range of design methods. Design teams
will be formed and given open-ended design tasks. Design teams will be studied
using the protocol method while employing one of the taught methods. The
resulting design proposals will be evaluated. The protocols will be segmented
and coded using the principled coding scheme. The resulting codings and the
ensuing linkographs will be analyzed for cognitive structures using statistical
techniques including clustering and Markov chain analysis. In addition, entropy
analyses of the linkographs and the change in entropy over time will be
calculated. The results from these analyses will form the basis of the
comparison of the cognitive differences between the engineering design methods
studied. A correlation between engineering design cognitive behavior and design
outcomes will be carried out. Deliverables will include: empirical data on
engineering design behavior in the form of videos of design sessions of teams
using different design methods; transcriptions of the design sessions; coded
data; linkographs; and the results of the analyses. These represent different
levels of granularity from data through to highly processed information.

If successful, the results of this research will provide support for a science
of engineering design by providing a principled method and a base of results
that can be utilized to compare methods and models. The award will demonstrate
analytical techniques for the analysis of engineering design protocols using
engineering design domain knowledge, techniques which can be used across the
entire domain of engineering design. The results will provide the foundation for
the evaluation of engineering design tools and techniques.