* 0926473
* Earthquake Surface Fault Rupture Interaction with Building Foundations
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Jonathan Bray, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 09/30/2013
* USD 297,798.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The effects of earthquake surface fault rupture on building foundations are
investigated in this research with the goals of developing sound analytical
procedures for evaluating the hazard, providing guidance regarding effective
design concepts for buildings that are built near active faults, and advancing
promising ground improvement techniques for mitigating this hazard.

Recent earthquakes have provided numerous examples of the devastating effects of
earthquake surface fault rupture on structures. Several major cities are built
in areas containing active faults that can break the ground surface (e.g., Los
Angeles, Salt Lake City, San Diego, San Francisco, and Seattle). Along with the
often spectacular observations of damage, examples of satisfactory performance
of structures have been observed. These examples of satisfactory performance
indicate that similar to other forms of ground failure, effective design
strategies can be developed to address the hazards associated with surface fault
rupture. A rational analytical, design, and mitigation framework for addressing
the surface fault rupture hazard is required.

This research focuses on evaluating the responses of different building
foundations at sandy soil sites with different relative densities and
thicknesses that are subjected to reverse or normal fault movements. The surface
fault rupture problem is investigated as a soil-structure-interaction phenomenon
using the explicit finite difference method with the nonlinear effective stress
UBC-SAND soil model. Well-documented field case histories and two comprehensive
centrifuge studies are being used to gain insight and to establish benchmarks
for the analysis. After calibrating the analytical model, a comprehensive
numerical investigation of the effects of earthquake surface fault rupture on
building foundations is performed. Several promising mitigation techniques are
also being explored. The analytical results will provide both fundamental
insights and practice-oriented recommendations.

Several government agencies and professional committees are re-examining
existing policies or developing new policies to address the surface fault
rupture hazard. Advancements in surface fault rupture hazard mitigation lag
behind those for other forms of ground failure, because of the overreliance on
avoidance. However, not all faults can be avoided, and not all faults require
strict avoidance if mitigation techniques can be shown to be effective in
handling the ground deformation associated with minor fault movements. Effective
mitigation and design procedures are required, and their use requires robust
analytical procedures. The results of this research project meet a critical need
in society by helping engineers and urban planners address this hazard.
Additionally, due the complexity of the phenomena, important advances in the
understanding of the failure of soil and of soil-structure-interaction are being
made.