* 0926427
* Collaborative Research: The dynamics of sediment-laden river plume and initial deposition off small mountainous rivers
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Wayne Geyer, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2012
* USD 392,596.00

Abstract &lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This new
award is for a multi-scale modeling study of the dynamics and sediment-transport
processes related to the highly turbid outflows from small montane rivers. The
project will contribute to the 3D wave-averaged Community Sediment Transport
Modeling System (CSTMS, a suite of models based on a coupled ROMS/SWAN
framework). The enhancements will address critical intra-wave processes and are
primarily two-fold: a new formulation on the interaction of surface waves and
stratified shear flow, and parameterizations of the influence of convection on
vertical sediment flux that may significantly alter the distribution of sediment
deposition. The theoretical formulation for wave-current interaction is based on
a multiple scale expansion that allows arbitrary vertical current variation. The
resulting formulation represents a significant modification to the numerical
coupling between ROMS and SWAN. A 2DV wave-resolving RANS model which is capable
of resolving sediment-laden plume dynamics, such as hyperpycnal flows and
convective instability, will resolve the interaction between a sediment-laden
plume and surface waves, then tested against the theoretical formulation and
enhanced CSTMS in idealized simulations. A 3D turbulence-resolving simulation
tool for fine sediment transport will be extended to study instabilities,
coherent structures and turbulence-salinity-sediment interactions at fine scales
in order to reveal physical mechanisms responsible for the occurrence of
convective instability and to improve the turbulence closure of the RANS model.
The enhanced CSTMS will be utilized to carry out domain-scale (up to 5 km)
scenario studies using typical physical settings of small montane rivers in
order to determine how the small-scale convective, turbulent, density-driven and
wave-driven processes interact at the scales of actual river outflows and affect
sediment deposition. The results of this study will lay the groundwork for the
design of future field programs and more comprehensive model-data comparisons.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research represents a combination of fundamental fluid
dynamics (stratified hydraulics, instability, wave dynamics, turbulence-sediment
interaction) and sediment-transport processes (frontal trapping, hyperpycnal
flows, wave-supported gravity-flows), in context with a geophysical regime of
global significance. While the importance of the contribution of small
mountainous rivers to the total sediment discharge into the global oceans has
been recognized since the early 90's, the dynamics of sediment-laden river
plumes and the corresponding sediment transport processes remain poorly
understood. The contributions from this research will thus occur both in the
elucidation of the individual mechanisms and in their integrated impact on the
cross-margin transport of sediment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
proposed research will impact various disciplines such as sedimentary geology,
earth-surface processes research, and coastal engineering. The proposed modeling
activity will be incorporated as an element of the Community Surface Dynamics
Modeling System, a comprehensive suite of models quantifying the processes that
modify the earth's landscape. These modeling efforts will also benefit several
ongoing international research activities on field studies of hyperpycnal flow
of small montane rivers in New Zealand and Taiwan. Hands-on laboratory
experiments on sediment-laden plume will be developed by undergraduate scholars
from underrepresented groups in collaboration with RISE program at University of
Delaware (UD). Undergraduate scholars will also participate in outreach programs
at UD to introduce the importance of sediment source-to-sink in our everyday
life to middle/high school students and teachers. Two graduate students will be
supported by this project for their PhD studies at UD. A post-doctoral
investigator at WHOI will gain valuable experience as a participant in this
project.