* 0926270
* EAGER:Unveiling Trends in Global Nanotechnology Research and Development
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2009,04/30/2012
* Hsinchun Chen, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 04/30/2012
* USD 250,348.00

Nanotechnology is a fundamental research area that holds the promise of
revolutionizing a wide range of significant applications for everyday life. In
the 30-year history of nanotechnology, its research and development has
experienced rapid but uneven progress in different countries and institutions as
well as research directions. The recent dynamics of the nanotechnology research
landscape and the factors that have caused these changes are of the interest to
nanotechnology researchers and policy makers. This research proposes to apply
bibliographic analysis, citation analysis, and content analysis methods on the
paper and patent publications of emerging countries and institutions in
nanotechnology to unveil changes in research focus and outputs. In addition, in-
depth analysis will also be conducted to quantify the effects of public funding
and knowledge diffusion in these countries/institutions? development of
nanotechnology. &lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will draw attention to the
exceptional regions and areas that may have a long term impact on the
nanotechnology field and extend our understanding of the important factors
leading to success. Lessons learned will help policy makers, such as
governments, funding agencies, and other interested parties to devise strategies
for excellence in nanotechnology research and development. The proposed
framework can be applied to other rapidly changing research fields for similar
studies. The analytical methods and visualization techniques developed in this
process could also be used in the education of students majoring in
nanotechnology. &lt;br/&gt;