* 0926549
* BRIGE: Optimization-Based Prediction of Seated Posture in Pregnant Women
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* James Yang, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Ted A. Conway
* 08/31/2012
* USD 186,867.00

0926549&lt;br/&gt;Yang&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Summary: This project will
investigate the effects of pregnant women's altered shape and size on their
seated posture. The effects will be simulated by developing a digital human
environment. The foundation of this human simulation environment will be an
induced optimization-based posture prediction model. &lt;br/&gt;A suite of
simple web-based models will be developed and combined with experimental
laboratory exercises for use in a freshman course designed for the Women's
Studies minor at Texas Tech University, with the goal of attracting women
students to the engineering disciplines. The PI will collaborate with the Cross
Cultural Academic Advancement Center, Texas Tech University to develop a summer
workshop at the PI's lab (Human-Centric Design Research Laboratory) for the
Native American Summer Bridge Institute (NASBI). The week-long summer workshop
proposed in this education module will focus on computer-based digital human
modeling and simulation from an engineering point of view in order to attract
Native Americans to pursue degrees in engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The proposed research seeks to provide
a scientific foundation for investigating the seated posture of pregnant women
and to develop a unique optimization-based model for the prediction of seated
posture in pregnant women. Digital human modeling and simulation has
revolutionized the way new products are designed, built, operated, and
maintained. Expected benefits include improved quality and the reduction of
product development time and costs. During pregnancy, a woman's body undergoes
significant physical changes that can impact her safety in vehicles and
workstations. There are a number of modeling and simulation packages including
JACK, RAMSIS, SAFEWORK, ANYBODY, etc. with posture prediction capabilities.
However, none of them has incorporated the needs of pregnant women. Moreover,
currently available packages are either based on empirical data or model few
degrees of freedom (DOF). This project will develop a new optimization-based
model that yields significant advantages: 1) no prerecorded data is required; 2)
the human model can react to infinitely many scenarios; 3) a computationally
efficient approach permits real-time operation; 4) there is no penalty to the
speed of operation when a large number of DOFs are used; and 5) added
functionality, such as obstacle avoidance, manipulation of multiple end-
effectors (feet, hands, and head), or stipulation of orientation for various
body segments, is easily achieved by incorporating additional constraints in the
optimization problem. &lt;br/&gt;The research addresses the following questions:
1) how do changes associated with pregnancy affect women's seated posture; 2)
what are the low-back biomechanical loads for pregnant women sitting at a
workstation; 3) what are the risks related to layout design for pregnant
occupants; and 4) what design improvements can be made to permit comfortable
posture? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The proposed work has
ramifications in a potentially broad range of areas, such as (i) modeling
posture in the morbidly obese; (ii) designing automobile/airplane interiors to
better accommodate the needs of pregnant women; and (iii) modifying regular
workstation design for pregnant women. &lt;br/&gt;This project will create ways
to make science and engineering more inclusive to underrepresented groups
through the development of an innovative course and outreach program. To achieve
this goal, a family of simple web-based models will augment students' classroom
instruction by way of experiment-based laboratory exercises. These models will
be intentionally designed for students in the Women's Studies minor at Texas
Tech University in order to attract women to careers in engineering. A summer
workshop will be developed in the PI's lab for the Native American Summer Bridge
Institute at Texas Tech University targeting Native American high school
students. Texas Tech University began its annual NASBI in 2008. The program
invites about 40 Native American high school students and their parents to
participate in activities that introduce them to academic courses, campus
activities, cultural exploration, and college life. The proposed workshop will
demonstrate advances and advantages of digital human modeling and simulation.
Active recruitment to engineering studies will occur during this event with full
participation of the research group.