* 0926557
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Congregational Engagement in Faith-Based Community Organizing
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Kristin Geraty, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2010
* USD 7,498.00

SES-0926557&lt;br/&gt;Brian Steensland&lt;br/&gt;Kristin
Geraty&lt;br/&gt;Indiana University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using qualitative
research methods to study the origins of religious congregations? political
mobilization, this study aims to discover how people of faith engage in public
life. It investigates the cultural processes that transform previously
nonpolitical (or marginally political) religious congregations into serious
political actors. At issue is why some congregations engage in and advocate for
systemic solutions to social problems while nearby congregations engage in more
typical forms of charity work or do not engage in public life at all.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study draws on approximately 80 in-depth interviews
with community organizers and key informants within religious congregations;
participant observation at training sessions, worship services, meetings,
actions and campaign events; and textual analysis of extensive archival
material. The project compares a sample of congregations in suburban Chicago who
engage in broad-based community organizing with a sample of demographically
similar congregations that either engage in community life in other ways or do
not engage at all. The community organization?s institutional membership
includes Catholic, mainline and evangelical Protestant, Jewish, and Muslim
congregations and is affiliated with a national network of community
organizations.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In a political and economic climate with
fewer and fewer resources available to address citizens? concerns, non-partisan
faith-based community organizations provide an important avenue for addressing
local issues such as housing, education, and healthcare. This project will shed
light on how people of various faiths navigate and negotiate the obstacles that
result from ecumenical and interfaith endeavors.