* 0926659
* GEOTRACES Atlantic Section: Measurement of Helium Isotopes and Tritium
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2010,09/30/2013
* William Jenkins, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 09/30/2013
* USD 592,297.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The guiding mission of the GEOTRACES
program is to identify processes and quantify fluxes that control the
distributions of key trace elements and isotopes in the ocean. The key
observational strategy for GEOTRACES is an internationally-coordinated global-
scale ocean survey of key trace elements and isotopes (TEIs), and the first U.S.
section as part of that survey is in the North Atlantic. Knowing rates and
fluxes is a vital step in the development of mechanistic and predictive models
of ocean biogeochemical cycles of TEIs, particularly within the framework of
global change (both past and future). Much of what we have learned about large
scale oceanic rates and fluxes has been inferred from the observation and
modeling of tracer distributions, both radioactive and transient. Measurement of
appropriate transient tracers alongside of core TEIs would be an effective
strategy for achieving GEOTRACES goals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project,
researchers at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution will make helium isotope
and tritium measurements to provide useful biogeochemical rate information for
the more centrally important TEI measurements made on the first U.S. GEOTRACES
global survey section. The primary contributions that tritium and 3He
measurements can make to the program include: (1) Quantifying transit timescales
and TEI dilution in the MOC: 3H and 3He are useful tracers for determining deep
western boundary current tracer transport rates and interior mixing dilution
scales, an important issue for many TEIs; (2) A shallow water chronometer: Using
the tritium-3He clock, the time elapsed since fluid parcels have been subducted
on timescales ranging from 6 months to several decades can be determined; (3) A
TEI thermocline reflux gauge: 3He is a unique "nutrient-like" transient tracer
that can be used as a "flux gauge" to determine the rates at which thermocline-
remineralized TEIs are returned to the upper ocean; and (4) Gauging TEI
hydrothermal dilution scales: Volcanic 3He injected during hydrothermal activity
is a powerful conservative tracer of dilution in these plumes, allowing
diagnosis of nonconservative behavior in some TEIs, and permitting flux
estimates associated with hydrothermal activity on basin and global scale.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; Broader Impacts: The proposed work is in support of the
GEOTRACES program, and as such contributes to the broader societal goals and
intellectual objectives espoused by that program. The primary issues related to
this are pertinent to understanding the carbon cycle and predicting/mitigating
climate change, as well as the marine food web and anthropogenic impacts on the
oceans.