* 0926879
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Returning to the South: Building the New South Sudan
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2011
* Leonie Newhouse, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Thomas J. Baerwald
* 08/31/2011
* USD 11,400.00

Large-scale migration creates enormous pressure on the communities to which
migrants head, whether they are camps that must temporarily accommodate refugees
or the home communities to which people return after conflicts or disasters have
ended. An estimated 2,000,000 people have returned to southern Sudan since the
2005 peace accord between the northern and southern parts of that nation. These
returnees are the objects of numerable political and policy interventions on
their behalf, and enormous energy has been expended in efforts to track, count,
and monitor the returns process. Despite these efforts, very little ethnographic
data exists regarding how their return is experienced on the ground. The ongoing
return migration to southern Sudan presents a compelling opportunity to examine
the processes through which local belonging is brought into a more politicized
arena through its relation to the question of independence. By focusing on the
daily practices of living, this doctoral dissertation research project will
examine how high-volume return migration transforms the socio-spatial
organization of local places in and around Bor, a town in the eastern state of
Jonglei. The doctoral student will collect in-depth qualitative data through a
variety of methods in order to explore the ways in which memory is mobilized to
make claims to and about local places. She will seek to identify the micro-scale
practices through which meaning is mapped to places by those who stayed and by
return migrants; and she will document the way in which return migrants figure
in the political project of securing an independent state for the southern
Sudanese nation. By combining archival research, extended interviews, and
participant observation, the student will provide data about returns across
registers, including the technical register of policy documents, the register of
self-representation, and the register of daily, lived practice. It is expected
that return migrants and those who stayed make use of memories in distinct but
malleable and fluid ways to delineate boundaries of interiority and exteriority.
Furthermore, the investigator expects the making of such boundaries to have
profound material and political effects that will play a critical role in post-
conflict southern Sudan.

The research aims to theorize the role of spatial and scalar processes in the
construction of an emergent southern Sudanese nation. It also will analyze the
spatial characteristics of the post-conflict political environment in a southern
Sudanese town by focusing on the relationship between memory experience,
contested daily practices, and particular places. The project is expected to
help fill a gap in existing research on repatriation by including perspectives
of key population groups, such as return migrants, internally displaced people,
and those who remained in place during the conflict, all of whose lives are
deeply affected by return migration movements. By conducting research as return
migrations occur, the project will help to capture the critical early stages of
return, which have been less studied in the literature. It will provide new
insights regarding the processes through which spatial practices of co-
inhabitance coalesce, and how belonging comes to be defined through them. This
ethnographic study of the initial impact of high volume return migration on
receiving communities also will provide critical qualitative data about problems
encountered with the process and point to ways to avoid exacerbating tensions in
future repatriation and return efforts. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research
Improvement award, this award will provide support to enable a promising student
to establish a strong independent research career.

