* 0926362
* Harnessing Light to Control the Autonomous Functionality of Soft Active Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Anna Balazs, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 08/31/2013
* USD 280,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). Using theory and simulation, our goal is to design coatings
that permit the controlled spatial-temporal modulation of surface properties
and, thereby, impart biomimetic functionality to a broad range of systems. In
these studies, we will take advantage of the distinctive behavior of polymer
gels undergoing the Belousov-Zhabotinsky (BZ) reaction. The BZ gels are
currently the only known polymer networks to display autonomous mechanical
oscillations. Furthermore, the BZ reaction is photosensitive and by varying the
light intensity, we can manipulate the response of the material. It is this
interplay between the chemo-responsive polymer network and the photosensitive
reaction that we will exploit to direct the self-sustained movement of the gels.
By coating a surface with thin films or tethered filaments of these BZ gels, we
can confer to the resulting systems such properties as autonomous sensing,
actuation and reconfiguration. In these applications, light provides useful
advantages as a control mechanism: it permits a means for remote regulation, is
a clean energy source and can be easily turned on or off.&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, the findings will reveal nonlinear dynamical phenomena that can
arise from a coupling of chemical, optical and mechanical energy, and establish
design rules for creating millimeter-scale devices that effectively operate
under their own power to perform valuable functions. In addition, the study will
produce computational models that enable users to design and predict the
properties of soft materials that encompass active components. To encourage the
participation of more students in undergraduate research and to let undergrads
already engaged in research become familiar with the activities of their
colleagues, the PI will organize a day-long Undergraduate Research Poster Fair
for the nearby universities. Students from local high schools will also be
invited to attend. The undergraduate researchers would be particularly effective
at relating to this younger cohort and could play an important role in
encouraging the 9-12th graders to pursue science and engineering in
college.&lt;br/&gt;