* 0926287
* Developing a Landscape Theory for Biological Networks:   Principle Concepts and Physical Perspectives
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Jin Wang, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 08/31/2012
* USD 795,472.00

The objective of this project is to understand fundamental mechanisms of
function, robustness, and evolution of biological networks. The PI will study
biological networks in several integrated steps. First, he will develop a
universal concept of potential landscapes and establish a theoretical framework
based on it to understand robustness, evolution, and function of biological
networks in a global and physical way. Second, the PI will develop efficient
computational methods to study functions and properties of the underlying
landscape for large realistic biological networks. In this way, the PI will be
able to deal with large degrees of freedom statistically and surpass any
computational bottleneck of search for the vast state space. Third, the PI will
explore specific biological networks of cell fate decision in the developmental
process and the dynamics of a predator-prey synthetic ecosystem, through the
landscape framework, to uncover structure-function relationships. The PI will
explore the origin of directionality of cell differentiation. The PI will also
explore how the single celled bacteria can be programmed to exhibit complex
behavior, and how well controlled exchanges of information, in the form of
signaling molecules that regulate gene expression, manifest themselves in the
dynamics of interacting populations. The major intellectual merit of this
project lies in the understanding of global physical principles, function and
robustness of living systems through the development of a universal concept and
theoretical framework of landscape across different levels of biological
organization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact associated with the
project is through education, training and outreach activities. The PI will
integrate his research with his education efforts by designing an
interdisciplinary course and a seminar series on biological networks to educate
students from different backgrounds. He will initiate domestic and international
collaborative joint research and co-education activities on biological networks.
The PI will mentor a post doctoral researcher and help him to prepare for
further academic or industrial career advancement. This project will also
involve some local high school students for summer research projects for
outreach education. The PI plans to write popular articles to the public to
introduce the landscape concept in a pictorial way so that people can easily
grasp the basic ideas.