* 0926859
* Collaborative Research: Using Biogeochemical and Genetic Tools to Unravel the Environmental Controls of Nitrogen Fixation and Denitrification in Heterotrophic Marine Sediments
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Robinson Fulweiler, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2013
* USD 239,272.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

Although the various pathways of nitrogen exchange at the sediment-water
interface are critical to our understanding of ecosystem functions, existing
nitrogen budgets underestimate the amount of nitrogen fixation taking place in
the open ocean and marine sediments. Recent findings regarding the role of
nitrogen fixation and denitrification in coastal systems suggest that nitrogen
fixation may play a more significant role than previously believed. To address
this, marine chemists from the Marine Biological Laboratory, Boston University,
and the University of Rhode Island are examining the role of nitrogen fixation
and the environmental controls of the N2 flux in coastal shelf sediments. Using
a mixture of field sampling and laboratory analyses, these scientists will
identify the organisms responsible for nitrogen fixation and trace the fate of
nitrogen fixed in marine sediments. The results from this research will enhance
the understanding of the environmental factors that control the nitrogen balance
of marine ecosystems and the oceans as a whole. In addition to this research
providing a greater understanding of the marine nitrogen cycle, it will provide
outreach and education opportunities for the Girls Scouts of Rhode Island, as
well as, support for multiple graduate students.