* 0926671
* A Robust Methodology for the Standoff Condition Assessment of FRP-Retrofitted Concrete Systems
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Oral Buyukozturk, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 08/31/2013
* USD 254,999.00

Fiber-reinforced polymer (FRP) strengthening and retrofitting of reinforced
concrete elements, such as beams, columns, slabs, and bridge decks have become
increasingly popular. To remotely assess in-situ integrity of such retrofitted
systems an efficient and effective nondestructive testing technique (NDT) is
needed. In this research a robust standalone NDT approach utilizing an airborne
acoustic wave focused on the damaged area will be developed to detect the damage
and flaws underneath the FRP plates/sheets. Laboratory specimens with various
defect configurations will be subjected to acoustic arrays from close as well as
long distances. Dynamic responses produced by the defects will be collected by
laser Doppler vibrometry (LDV). The proposed method is based on the concept that
debonding damages and concrete voids in the FRP-concrete system cause local
vibration anomalies that are considerably different from those caused by intact
regions and that they are direct functions of the damage dimensions and
mechanical properties.

The proposed research represents a multi-disciplinary effort integrating
knowledge from mechanics of composite concrete, wave propagation in solids,
acoustic and laser technologies, and computer science. It involves numerical
simulation, pattern recognition, signal processing and imaging in conjunction
with complex composite material system behavior. Thus, the project will have a
strong intellectual component with potential to advance scientific knowledge in
these multi-disciplinary areas, and significant contribution toward the
development of a robust non-contact technique for integrity assessment of FRP-
bonded concrete structure. The findings from this research will be extensively
disseminated through research publications and integrated educational materials
through internet. The research activity will provide advanced training and
research opportunity to the students working on this project.