* 0926198
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Constructing AIDS Treatment in South Africa: Discourse, Power and Policy
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2009,02/28/2011
* Charles Faubion, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Ezekiel Kalipeni
* 02/28/2011
* USD 11,750.00

This project examines the history and consequences of conflict between the South
African government and the domestic social movement led by the Treatment Action
Campaign over the provision of antiretroviral (ARV) therapy to people living
with AIDS. After a bitter conflict between the government and the ARV social
movement, treatment is now being extended to all South Africans, yet there
remain gaps in coverage that appear to be following previously existing
geographies of vulnerability and marginality. This project examines how social
movements engaged the treatment invective to their advantage, changing the
popular HIV/AIDS narrative in the process. Further, this research will analyze
if the current AIDS treatment structure embodies the equity-based agenda of the
ARV social movement. The project will triangulate discourse analysis, political
economy, and critical ethnography to examine treatment through an equity lens.
This project will allow for an understanding of the history of, and
possibilities for, equitable ARV therapy. In addition, the material reality of
treatment access will be exposed through a political economy analysis attentive
to the historical development of contemporary HIV/AIDS public health policy. By
analyzing the discourses surrounding HIV/AIDS, particularly the moments when the
dominant discourse was inverted, this research will reveal how a social movement
created the space for a new AIDS narrative. Additionally, through an analysis of
policy documents this project will illuminate the political economy of ARV
treatment in reference to the dominant treatment narratives in the country.
Lastly, interviews and participant observation with public health clinic workers
will be conducted in accordance with purposive sampling techniques to ground the
project ethnographically.

The intellectual merit of the project lies in supplementing theorizations of
discursive power, understanding forms and expression of state power, and
measuring social resistance within contemporary health geography. Empirically,
this project takes special interest in establishing how AIDS policy can ensure
equitable access at a time when ARV policies are being extended globally. This
project will provide a detailed description of current ARV therapy in South
Africa. The broader impact of this project lies in offering nuanced
understandings of AIDS treatment policy such that all HIV-positive people in
South Africa and elsewhere, not just those in privileged environments, are able
to access health care. In an era when most countries are extending ARV therapy
to HIV-positive citizens in need, this is a needed contribution to the
literature. AIDS is perhaps the single greatest threat to human well-being in
sub-Saharan Africa, so this study contributes to knowledge about how best to
prevent and treat the disease, as well as advocate for people with HIV. As a
Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide
support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
career.