* 0926768
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Historical Ecology of Coral Reef Ecosystems in the Hawaiian Archipelago
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* John Kittinger, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 08/31/2011
* USD 11,978.00

Existing research on coral reef ecosystems has attributed historical declines of
coral reefs to a small set of direct human activities, or proximate impacts,
including the primary threat of overexploitation of marine species. Global-scale
studies have revealed regional differences in the trajectories, timing and
extent of coral reef ecosystem decline, highlighting the need for in-depth
regional case studies in historical ecology. What remains largely unexplored in
a historical and regional context are the underlying social factors that are
fundamental to proximate drivers of coral reef ecosystem decline.

Ph.D. student John Kittinger under the supervision of doctoral advisor Dr. Hong
Jiang, will study the social factors that contribute indirectly to coral reef
decline, including shifts in demography, technology, economy and the socio-
cultural institutions that structure human-environment interactions for coral
reefs. The objective of their research is to examine the historical relationship
between social change and coral reef ecosystem condition over the past 1000
years in a regional case study on the Hawaiian Archipelago. This research will
involve two phases, including: 1) reconstruction of coral reef ecosystem
condition over long time scales, and 2) analysis of the relationship between key
social factors and ecosystem condition through time at two spatial scales
(island level and archipelagic level). This quantitative approach will elucidate
social-ecological linkages in coral reef ecosystems and will help identify the
social factors critical to ecosystem resilience. This research will investigate
the applicability of theory on human-environment interactions formulated in the
context of terrestrial and agrarian systems (e.g. theory on land use/cover
change) to marine environments and will also advance quantitative approaches to
integrated social-ecological systems analysis.

The research is novel in scale and approach in that it will adequately
characterize social systems associated with coral reefs for long time periods
(decades-centuries), previously identified as critical for understanding of
long-term trends in coral reef ecosystem condition. From a conservation
perspective, understanding historical trends is critically important in
determining the current state and long-term trajectory of coral reef ecosystems
and the threats to achieving desired future ecosystem states. The over-arching
contribution of the research is the identification of the elements and processes
that comprise social-ecological resilience, which is critical in understanding
how to achieve long-term sustainability of marine resources and prevent
collapse. This will be achieved through an integrated, transdisciplinary
approach to historical social-ecological systems analysis. It is also expected
that the research will help understand the human dimensions of global
environmental change for coral reef ecosystems, which will enable the
formulation of appropriate conservation strategies in the Pacific islands and
beyond.