* 0926592
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Effects of Gender and Family on Intentions to Further Migrate
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2011
* Louise Roth, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/2011
* USD 10,000.00

Everyday, thousands of unauthorized migrants are repatriated to Mexican cities
along the U.S.-Mexico border. While suspended in this interstitial space,
unauthorized migrants must make a decision: cross again unlawfully, turn back,
or choose some third alternative like stay in the city where they have been
repatriated. This research seeks to better understand the decision-making
process behind further migration intentions. At issue are the factors that lead
some repatriated migrants to state that they will attempt another crossing to
the U.S., some to state that they will return to Mexico, and still others to
state they do not know. The role of gender and family considerations will be
examined. For one year, the CO-PI will conduct 60 to 80 in-depth semi-structured
qualitative interviews with repatriated migrants at a migrant shelter in
Nogales, Sonora as well as engage in direct and participant observation at the
shelter. Secondary data will also be used to situate the qualitative findings
within the larger context. This research will help inform the sociological
discipline, as there is very little research on repatriation and there is no
research to date that assesses how gender and family processes affect
repatriated migrants? intentions regarding further migration. The research will
also offer an empirical foundation for future research and will have broader
impacts for immigration policy, humanitarian aid to migrants, the Southwestern
community, and the people of Nogales, Sonora. &lt;br/&gt;