* 0926272
* MOSART II
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Philip Sadler, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,913,345.00

MOSART II conducts a longitudinal study of the impact of MSP professional
development activities on teacher knowledge and relevant pedagogical content
knowledge. The project expands an existing secure, online assessment system to
offer MSPs involved in science education professional development the capability
of pre- and post-testing participants using valid and reliable instruments based
on the National Research Council's Science Content Standards. MSPs participating
in MOSART II benefit from automated reports profiling aggregated pre-test
performance of participants and, following post-test administration, reports of
gain by content standard. MSP evaluators have access to detailed data for
further analysis.

MOSART II engages 22-30 MSP projects in assessing participating teachers three
times over the course of a year (e.g. prior to, soon after and at the end of the
academic year following intensive MSP professional development). The resulting
regression models associate teacher gains with individual attributes and with
key differences in MSP professional development offerings. It allows for the
determination of growth or diminishment of effect following teachers'
application of what they have learned to their own classroom. This study
characterizes the range in degree of impact that can be expected from
professional development activities and the particular program attributes that
are associated with larger gains in teacher knowledge. Controlling for teacher
background aids in more accurate modeling of gains and determining if particular
professional development approaches work better for different groups of
teachers.

MOSART II generates evidence relevant to the following research questions: 1.
What are the effects of MSP professional development experiences on
participating teachers': (a) subject matter knowledge (SMK), as measured by
gains in performance on misconception-oriented standards-based assessments, and
(b) pedagogical content knowledge (PCK), as measured by gains in the accuracy of
predicting the most common misconceptions held by their students? 2. What are
the characteristics of MSP professional development experiences that are
associated with gains in teachers' SMK and PCK? 3. Are there groups of teachers
that are more or less affected by MSP professional experiences? 4. What is the
relationship between teacher SMK and PCK, as measured by these assessments?

MOSART II expands upon nearly 1500 test items developed in its previously funded
Misconceptions Oriented, Standards-Based Assessment Resource for Teachers
(MOSART) work, adding items of greater difficulty to the existing test forms to
improve the psychometric properties for the assessment of teacher SMK. As MSP
projects involve teachers with a wide range of knowledge and teaching
experience, this enhancement serves to increase the sensitivity and reliability
of instruments in measuring teacher knowledge. In addition to the earth, life
and physical science assessment bank, a nature of science assessment component
is being added.

Ultimately, the MOSART II online assessment system provides for more uniform
administration, monitoring of compliance, collection of teacher background data,
and allows for characterization of key MSP program differences. The use of this
online system by MSPs allows unprecedented access to their standardized test
results. By keeping the identity of individuals and specific MSPs confidential,
aggregated scores can be used to test various hypotheses about the effectiveness
of different models of professional development.