* 0926579
* DynSyst_Special_Topics: Temporal Coarse-Graining of Molecular Dynamics Using the Parametrized Locally Invariant Manifolds Method and Data Warehousing Techniques
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Kaushik Dayal, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 07/31/2013
* USD 418,710.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A systematic computational methodology
for temporal coarse-graining of Molecular Dynamics (MD) will be developed. Our
primary interest is the mechanics of nanostructures and complex materials, and
the aim is to define the constitutive response of these systems at
technologically relevant timescales. Our strategy builds on ideas from three
separate disciplines: dynamical systems, data warehousing, and nonequilibrium
MD. In particular, dynamical systems concepts will be used to formulate the
calculation in terms of the phase-space structure rather than time-stepping;
data warehousing techniques will enable the storage and manipulation of the
phase-space structure to make this practical; and nonequilibrium MD will provide
a framework to formulate and interpret these
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Molecular dynamics is a powerful tool to predict
material behavior at the nano- and micro-meterscales. However, there is an
immense separation in time-scales between atomic motions (femtoseconds) and
engineering interest (greater than microseconds). Hence, numerical simulations
are unable to reach timescales of practical importance. It is this gap that our
work addresses with a combination of theory and computation, informed by the
needs of practical engineering. Our work is inherently interdisciplinary and
closely ties together the subjects of dynamical systems, data warehousing, and
materials science. The work has the potential for a transformative impact on the
cost-effective design of material behavior for diverse applications, ranging
from electronic to civil infrastructure.