* 0926702
* UBM Institutional: Integrated Research in Biomathematics at Trinity University
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2016
* Saber Elaydi, Trinity University
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 08/31/2016
* USD 900,000.00

This proposal builds upon a growing interdisciplinary focus on Mathematical
Biology at Trinity University previously supported by two consecutive HHMI
grants. Here, we seek to increase the number of faculty conducting
interdisciplinary research programs to catalyze more sustainable, widespread
interdisciplinary learning among Mathematics and Biology majors. Participating
mathematics and biology faculty will work in teams with students from both
disciplines on projects including (1) Modeling the heat shock response of barely
aleurone layers; (2) Homology detection in large DNA sequence datasets; (3)
Quantitative description of protein localization; (4) Modeling competition as a
determinant of invasion success; (5) Modeling spatial distributions of mammals;
(6) Mathematical modeling of mitochondrial function and death of substantia
nigra dopaminergic neurons; and (7) Chemostat propagation of mixed bacteriophage
Lambda-Escherichia coli K12 populations as a model system of predator-prey co-
evolution. These projects represent expertise from a number of biological and
mathematical subdisciplines, including genetics, ecology, cell biology,
neuroscience, statistics, probability, dynamical systems, difference equations,
mathematical biology, algebraic geometry and systems and data modeling.

Success in most future scientific endeavors will require interdisciplinary
thinking. A truly interdisciplinary research environment is difficult to
achieve, however, even among current PhD programs. At the undergraduate level,
interdisciplinary collaborations have traditionally been even more limited due
to the perception of incomplete disciplinary backgrounds and ongoing cognitive
development of young researchers. To meet this challenge at the intersection
between mathematics and biology, the Integrated Research in Biomathematics
(IRBM) at Trinity University initiative will build on the relationship between
our departments by forming research partnerships involving faculty and students,
as well as deepening our curricular collaboration. Specifically, we propose to
establish research groups consisting of undergraduate and faculty researchers
from both of these disciplines that will apply biological and mathematics
approaches to a wide spectrum of biological questions. To support these and
other students, the departments will offer new interdisciplinary courses, as
well as increase the collaboration in existing courses, culminating in the
creation of a new minor in biomathematics. Through these changes we will engage
undergraduates with a wide range of interests and preparation, while developing
a larger community of like-minded researchers, all in an effort to prepare these
students for the future of interdisciplinary research.

