* 0926039
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Reproductive Strategies of Male White-Faced Capuchins (Cebus capucinus) in the Santa Rosa Sector of the ACG, Costa Rica
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2011
* Katharine Jack, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 08/31/2011
* USD 12,330.00

The research objective of this study is to examine how and why dominant males
sire the most offspring by collecting behavioral data on males, hormonal data on
both sexes, and genetic data in three groups of C. capucinus in the Santa Rosa
Sector of the Área de Conservación Guanacaste, Costa Rica. Sexual selection
theory suggests that because fertile females are a limited resource, males
should compete over access to them and therefore display only low levels of
cooperation. White-faced capuchins (Cebus capucinus) live in groups of multiple
related females and immigrant males. While the social system of C. capucinus is
based on close bonds among group females, it also involves cooperative alliances
among group males. Within-group male-male aggression and overt mating
competition are rare, with all males participating in the mating system. The
socioecological model predicts that when within-group competition is low and
between group competition is high, males should have equal reproductive success.
Yet, contrary to theoretical predictions and behavioral observations, dominant
males sire the majority of offspring. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
This study is one of few projects involving the simultaneous collection of
hormonal data on males and females. In combination with behavioral and genetic
data, these data will to contribute to on-going research on reproductive skew
theory, to understand proximate causes of variation in male reproductive
success, to test the applicability of the Challenge Hypothesis, and to increase
the availability of comparative data which can provide insight into human
evolution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project will contribute
to the database of long-term (25+ years) research on the capuchins of Santa
Rosa, while also providing invaluable training for local and foreign assistants
in the use of field techniques. This doctoral dissertation research project will
contribute to the academic training of a female graduate student.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;