* 0926751
* Collaborative Research: A Pilot Study of the Spatiotemporal Scales of Diversification in the Pandora Moth/Ponderosa Pine System Using Dendrochronology and Evolutionary Biogeography
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2009,01/31/2013
* Stacy Jorgensen, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 01/31/2013
* USD 133,363.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Natural disturbances such as fires and pests are the primary factors influencing
landscape patterns and processes over broad parts of the Earth. In the montane
forests of the North American west, insect outbreaks and fire constitute the
dominant disturbance agents, while climate change may be an increasingly
important complicating factor. Disturbances are influenced by processes
occurring across a variety of spatial and temporal scales. They therefore can
produce spatio-temporal patterns that can be studied in a nested hierarchical
fashion. Interactions between species, such as among plants and their insect
pathogens, may also be so characterized. The investigators will examine how
abiotic and biotic disturbances interact using the ponderosa pine-pandora moth
model system. In particular, they are interested in how disturbance ecology
drives diversification in both organisms across multiple spatial and temporal
scales. Ponderosa pine ecosystems are chosen as they constitute one of the most
important commercially logged forests in the western United States. The native
pandora moth is the most widespread insect defoliator of ponderosa pine trees,
and is an important concern of forest managers. Pandora moth outbreaks produce
characteristic tree-ring patterns that can be detected through the
dendrochronological techniques also used to detect and date fire events and
climatic conditions. Tree-ring reconstructions will be developed for pandora
moth, climate, fire, and stand-age structure from ten strategically located
plots within the range of the ponderosa pine-pandora moth system. The ten
resulting chronologies will be examined for cyclic patterns with wavelet
analysis to help distinguish the relative influences of episodic insect
outbreaks, drought, and fire. The investigators will also conduct
reconstructions of all of these environmental variables to document the spatial
and temporal scales over which they operate, providing specific reconstructions
for forest managers at each site. Spatial patterns of genetic diversity and
relationships among populations of the pandora moth will be determined from DNA-
based genetic markers and analyzed in conjunction with the other analyses.

The findings have the potential to result in a large network of insect outbreak
histories, one that eventually will span the entire spatial extent of the pine-
moth system. This network will enable analysis of insect outbreak dynamics on
spatial scales that have not previously been explored, and will provide an
important framework that can be used to generate and test hypotheses regarding
the interaction of multiple disturbances, and the processes driving
diversification in ponderosa pine and pandora moth. The results produced by this
study will provide a framework for future investigations into the disturbance
ecology and evolutionary biogeography of plant-herbivore systems. The research
will result in a broad network of tree-ring chronologies that will fill gaps in
the International Tree Ring Data Bank holdings. This project also provides
resources for the involvement of a team of undergraduate and graduate students
as well as K-12 teachers in the field research and laboratory analyses.