* 0926893
* BRIGE: A Complex Adaptive Systems Analysis Approach for Integrated Water Resources Sustainability
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Francisco Olivera, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Ted A. Conway
* 08/31/2012
* USD 186,866.00

PI: Zechman, Emily&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
0926893&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Policies to sustainably manage water resources are
increasingly difficult to identify under conflicting objectives, a finite supply
of resources, and escalating needs. Evaluation of management strategies must
consider not only the design of interdependent infrastructure and environmental
responses, but also the behavior and choices of consumers and decision-makers,
as their actions impact system sustainability. A comprehensive modeling approach
that captures these dynamics will provide better understanding of the complete
urban water resource system and facilitate the development of more effective
policies to address problems of water scarcity, water pollution, flooding, and
ecosystem degradation. The goal of this proposal is to develop and test a
coupled system of hydrologic watershed, surface water, water demand, and agent-
based models (ABM) to simulate the complex interactions of individual home-
owners and policy-makers with the natural and engineered water resources
systems. &lt;br/&gt;Specific project objectives are: (1) Develop a modeling
framework that couples watershed, surface water, and end-use models with agent-
based modeling; (2) Demonstrate the applicability of the proposed integrated
water resource model using a case study; and (3) Increase the presence of
underrepresented groups in engineering and provide career-development
opportunities for three researchers. The modeling framework will link a
hydrologic watershed model, a surface water model of the receiving water body,
an end-use model, water conservation models, and Low Impact Development (LID)
models with ABM. Agents representing consumers will choose water conservation
behaviors and lot-level LID strategies, and agents representing policy-makers
will evaluate the sustainability of the comprehensive water resources system and
choose economic schemes to improve conditions. Long-term simulation capabilities
will be developed to study the evolution of water resources sustainability under
population growth and land-use changes. The modeling framework will be applied
for a case study in central Texas. As plans for dealing with an expected water
shortage in this region are still being developed and debated, this area
provides a relevant case study with issues including the need for conservation
and storm water management; expectations for ballooning urban growth; and
designs for large-scale infrastructure improvements. &lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL
MERIT: The proposed research will result in several contributions to the area of
infrastructure management. The new modeling methodology enables the integration
of social aspects with an environmental and water resources system. ABM provides
computational capabilities to consider the social and behavioral aspects of
sustainable management, and can be applied to enable more effective policy
development and design decisions for many infrastructure systems. The modeling
framework that is developed will provide the basis for future extension to
comprise a larger water system, to implement more sophisticated adaptive agents
that identify optimal rules, and to couple optimization algorithms for
identifying infrastructure design. Research findings from the case study
proposed here will shed useful insights for planning infrastructure and policy
in other water-stressed basins. &lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: This project will
provide mentoring, research opportunities, and teaching opportunities for a
post-doctoral researcher, a doctoral graduate student, and an undergraduate
student. The undergraduate researcher and post-doctoral researcher will be
recruited from under-represented groups. As part of the project, the post-
doctoral researcher will gain teaching and mentoring experience and participate
in a grant-writing workshop, which will lead to a future proposal building up on
the proposed research. The proposed project will develop a research program in
an unexplored area, leading to further theoretical advances in simulating water
resource systems as complex adaptive systems. This research will have practical
value to state and local agencies for managing large watersheds.&lt;br/&gt;