* 0926232
* UBM-Group: Undergraduate Biology and Mathematics Training Program at NJIT
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Gareth Russell, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 08/31/2013
* USD 239,824.00

The Group Undergraduate Biology and Mathematics Training
Program&lt;br/&gt;(G-UBMTP) at the New Jersey Institute of Technology (NJIT)
will provide long-term research experience for undergraduate students majoring
in Mathematics and Biology, taking advantage of the unique strong ties between
the Departments of Mathematics and Biology at NJIT, and building upon the
achievements and curricular modifications of the preceding NSF-funded
Institutional UBM program. The goal of this Project is to continue the training
of students skilled in the combined application of experimental and quantitative
techniques. The proposal aims to train 6 students per year, broken into three
groups, with joint mentoring of each 2-student group by a pair of faculty from
the Department of Mathematical Sciences (NJIT) and the Federated Department of
Biological Sciences (NJIT/Rutgers-Newark). The program will start in the spring
semester, with students taking the required Introduction to Mathematical Biology
course, fulfilling other academic requirements, and starting rotations through
the laboratories of investigators involved in this Project, while attending
weekly group meetings and seminars. The trainees will spend 9 weeks of the
following summer working on the chosen research project, which will continue in
the Fall Semester. &lt;br/&gt;Special emphasis will be made on the development
of written and oral communication skills, with students required to make regular
presentations at weekly group meetings. Students will write a final report of
research results and findings, in a publishable format. The proposed research
projects cover a diverse set of Mathematical Biology areas, focusing on
different topics in Neuroscience, Ecology or Cell Biology, and will be guided by
11 investigators from the Departments of Biology and Mathematics, with an
additional pool of Mathematics and Biology investigators with interdisciplinary
experience ready to participate if need arises.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main
aim of the proposed Training Program is to provide an opportunity for NJIT
undergraduate students to participate in a variety of interdisciplinary research
projects combining Biology and Mathematics and to prepare the students to pursue
graduate studies or industrial scientific research in the increasingly
interdisciplinary fields of Cell Biology, Neuroscience and Ecology. To
accomplish this goal, this project will combine the resources and strengths of
the Department of Mathematical Sciences at NJIT and the Federated Department of
Biological Sciences (NJIT/Rutgers-Newark). The involvement of these two
Departments will further increase the collaboration between investigators
working within different academic disciplines, leading to new research projects,
and potentially resulting in new findings and discoveries. As a teaching and
research institution, NJIT is particularly well positioned to achieve these
goals, due to historically strong interdisciplinary links between the
Departments of Mathematics and Biology. In fact, several leading investigators
involved in this project hold or have held dual appointments in the Departments
of Mathematical and Biological Sciences. &lt;br/&gt;The successful outcome of
this proposal may also serve as a catalyst for increased interdisciplinary
collaborations at other institutions. Further, this Project will broaden the
training of groups underrepresented in science, since NJIT has one of the
highest proportions of students from underrepresented groups and minorities in
the country. The proposed Training Program will also increase the involvement of
women in research, as about 40% of the participants of the preceding
Institutional UBM program at NJIT were women. The recruitment of women and
minority students will remain one of the priorities for this Project. Finally,
the broad dissemination of the results of the student research projects is an
integral part of this proposal, and a special emphasis will be made on the
training of oral and written presentation skills of the trainees, which are
indispensable for the future career of a scientist and for the successful
communication of research results to a larger community.