* 0926798
* Indentation-Induced Damage Initiation and Evolution in Single- and Poly-Crystalline Ceramics
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2014
* George Pharr, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 09/30/2014
* USD 315,000.00

A joint experimental and modeling effort is proposed to study the initiation and
growth of crack and the interplay between fracture and plasticity in single- and
poly-crystalline ceramics. First, the validity of indentation-cracking method
for toughness measurement will be examined, and a parametric map will be
constructed to delineate the dependence of the ratio of crack size and contact
radius on indenter geometry, applied load, toughness, and hardness. Second, by
experimentally examining the behavior of several SiC materials during load and
depth sensing spherical indentation tests and comparing it to microstructurally
based finite element simulations based on crystal plasticity with coupled
intergranular and transgranular microfracture using a cohesive zone approach, a
detailed picture of the coupled deformation and micro-fracture processes will be
developed from which it will be possible to make predictions about how to tailor
a microstructure to optimize its energy absorption.

The ability to quantitatively predict the initiation and propagation of fracture
and the interaction between fracture and plasticity is a critical step towards a
mechanistic understanding of deformation and failure properties, as well as
ductility and toughness enhancement methods, of ceramic single crystals and
polycrystals. The proposed work will provide an excellent opportunity for the
graduate and undergraduate students to participate in an experimental/modeling
synergistic research that includes micromechanics modeling and computation, and
advanced mechanical testing and microstructural characterization. New
educational materials will be developed and disseminated through two graduate
level classes. The PIs will participate in the existing programs at their
institute (supported by NSF and Department of Energy) for education/outreach
activities, which are designed to inspire interests of high school and college
students in science and engineering careers, as well as for recruiting students
from underrepresented groups.

