* 0926371
* COLLABORATIVE- RAPID: Information processing under stress: A study of Mumbai police control room first responders during terrorist attacks of 11/26/08
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2011
* Raghav Rao, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Vijayalakshmi Atluri
* 06/30/2011
* USD 38,100.00

The Mumbai attacks of 11/26/08 were one of the worst terror incidents in India.
In the modern world, the security of citizens depend upon the success of anti-
terrorist operations by security forces in all major countries around the world,
not just India. This proposal focuses on a critical operational unit in
successful anti-terror response - the police control room. These attacks provide
a unique and time-limited opportunity to examine and understand the information
processing performed by information first responders under conditions that are
far from equilibrium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit&lt;br/&gt;Though
critical to emergency response, little is known about the information processing
limitations of trained informational first responders and their supporting
technology during a severe, novel and unexpected disaster. Early findings
suggest that exposure to terrorist attacks impairs memory performance and raises
anxiety levels. This study will inform theory about the emergence of information
processing limitations in such situations. The simultaneous terrorist operations
at multiple sites in this incident provide an opportunity to understand the
consequences of multiple streams of information on information processing in
these situations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unlike the 9/11 attacks in the US, the
11/26 attacks were an ongoing, drawn out event with the situation unfolding in
real time, creating unique decision-making challenges. Further, this proposal
looks at information processing within police control rooms in developing
countries, an under-studied area with implications for security for US citizens.
The project will be completed in collaboration with police research
organizations in India. Structural equation modeling will be used to analyze
paths and causal relationships from the data. Analysis of variance and
covariance, and t-tests would be used.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impact&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the research will be to improve society's
ability to understand the impact of extreme stress and time pressure on the
dimensions of performance of informational first responders. This will help in
the development of organizational and technical support systems for processing
front-line information to improve our ability to withstand terror attacks and
other forms of severe, unexpected disasters.