* 0926348
* Collaborative Research: Testing Linkages Between Plankton Community Structure and Export of C, Po, and Th in the Sub-Arctic NE Pacific: Field and Lab Studies
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2013
* Gillian Stewart, CUNY Queens College
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 12/31/2013
* USD 290,930.00

In this project, an interdisciplinary research team from CUNY Queens College,
University of Rhode Island and the Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences will
investigate and directly test hypotheses on ecosystem processes that link
variability in plankton community structure to particle production, export, and
POC-Po210-Th234 interactions in the upper sub-arctic NE Pacific Ocean. They will
use field and lab studies, and a combination of geochemical (Po210, Th234
tracers) and biological (primary production, sediment traps, plankton community
structure) techniques that will lead to an improved understanding of these
important and complex upper ocean processes, which have wide applicability to
the interpretation of current and recent results (e.g., VERTIGO, MEDFLUX, HOT,
BATS). An important focus will be on the natural radionuclide Po210, which is
bioaccumulated in the marine environment, and which recent studies indicate has
promise and utility as a tracer of carbon export. This study is designed to
refine our understanding of the mechanisms that control variability in export
fluxes of Po210, Th234, and POC from the upper water column, rather than using
these radionuclide disequilibria to exclusively estimate POC export fluxes.
Specifically the team will investigate the relationships between POC, Po210,
210Pb, and Th234 associated with specific types and size-fractions of sinking
particles in the field, and then use controlled laboratory studies to test
hypotheses and interpret the field data. This will improve our understanding and
provide a valuable comparison of Po210 and Th234 as particle tracers. The
research is guided by the following two key questions: 1) How variable is the
partitioning of POC, Po210, and Th234 between suspended and settling particles
and the dissolved pool in response to seasonal variability in the euphotic zone
plankton community? 2) How do rates of mobilization and decomposition of POC,
Po210, and Th234 vary with the packaging and export of materials produced by the
planktonic community in the surface ocean under low and high flux conditions?

Field work will be conducted at the Ocean Station Papa (OSP) time series site,
during low and high flux seasons when export is dominated by salps (February),
copepods (May), and phytodetritus (August). This well-studied high-nutrient/low-
chlorophyll site provides a wealth of necessary supporting data and logistical
infrastructure. One of the most exciting outcomes from this proposal would be an
experimental and field demonstration of strong and consistent relationships
between planktonic food webs and the rates of C, Po210, and Th234 packaging,
sinking, and remineralization. This study will illuminate the role of euphotic
zone ecosystem processes in predicting the eventual fate of export flux in the
mesopelagic. The project is expected to yield information that could be used to
guide future use of radionuclide tracers, including mechanistic justifications
for which tracer to use, when and where to use each tracer, as well as insight
into which particulate C fraction Po210 and Th234 are tracing.

Broader Impacts: This project is relevant to several national and international
research programs. These include; GEOTRACES, whose focus is the global-ocean
distribution of trace elements and isotopes in seawater; and IMBER, whose focus
in on the functioning of ocean ecosystems. It will also build upon the results
of earlier process studies at OSP including SUPER (Subarctic Pacific Ecosystem
Research), VERTEX (VERTical EXchange) and the Canadian JGOFS study. The
participating institutions will make provision for graduate and/or undergraduate
student involvement in all aspects of the research.