* 0926017
* GOALI: ZnO Nanowires as Building Blocks for High Performance Transparent Electronics
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Hongbin Yu, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* john zavada
* 08/31/2013
* USD 366,000.00

The objective of this GOALI proposal is the fabrication of high mobility, ZnO
nanowire field-effect transistor, with both n-type and p-type doing, on polymer
or glass substrate for transparent and flexible electronics applications. The
approach is to: 1) Synthesize single crystal n- and p-type ZnO nanowires during
high temperature deposition on a growth substrate, 2) Perform systematic
analysis of the defects in ZnO nanowires, and understand the dopant compensation
mechanisms, 3) Characterize and simulate transport properties of parallel
aligned nanowire arrays through field effect transistor, and 4) Explore mass
integration of parallel-aligned ZnO nanowire arrays onto transparent glass or
plastic substrates at low temperatures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit lies in the transformative concepts and approaches that will greatly
increase the performance, especially device speed, of transparent electronics.
Through a collaborative effort between Arizona State University and Structured
Materials Industries, Inc., integration of robust and reliable ZnO NW devices
onto polymer substrates will be pursued, beginning with designed synthesis
process to understanding their solid state chemistry, and then scaling up for
subsequent device integration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the
proposed activity is the low temperature integration of high mobility materials
(synthesized at high temperatures) onto transparent substrates. The educational
aspect will have far reaching consequences; for example, the program will train
personnel (including student from a rich pool of underrepresented minorities in
Arizona) in a technologically important and futuristic area, so that they can
apply their science and engineering skills in the US industries and research
laboratories upon completion. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;