* 0926001
* DynSyst_Special_Topics: Dynamics and Control of Bio-molecular Systems using Geometric Model Reduction and Stochastic Variational Integrators.
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Jerrold Marsden, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 08/31/2013
* USD 450,002.00

The proposed research will develop novel geometric model reduction methods along
with computational methods for the dynamical simulation and eventual control of
stochastic mechanical systems involving multiple-scales. These new dynamical and
simulation tools will be applied to specific molecular and biomolecular systems.
An exciting development in geometric model reduction has been the development of
the radii of gyration as coarse variables along with the discovery of specific
fine variables that act as triggers that induce conformation changes. A further
development of and deeper understanding of such triggers will be important in
the eventual control of biomolecular conformation changes and reactions. Going
along with these geometric model reduction techniques is the theoretical and
computational development of stochastic asynchronous variational integration
methods and their applications to the simulation and control of stochastic
mechanical systems spanning many temporal-
scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Structure-preserving integrators for stochastic
multiscale Hamiltonian systems (possibly with constraints) characterized by
multiple time scales and a large number of degrees of freedom are in great
demand in computational chemistry, molecular dynamics and biophysics. The
proposed work will have a direct and substantial impact on those fields by
integrating a new class algorithms in the classical molecular dynamics open
source code LAMMPS. Bio-molecules are in general robust to noise; at the same
time, these molecules may be responsive to low energy structured actuation. By
allowing for the computation of these organized mechanisms, the proposed
research will facilitate the development of a new paradigm and novel
experimental methods for the control and design of bio-molecules. The proposed
research through the identification of resonant frequencies of molecules
specific to the membrane of malignant cells and/or known pathogens has the
potential to facilitate the discovery and development of a new class of non-
invasive and nontoxic therapies. New cancer therapies based on the injection and
electro-magnetic excitation of carbon or gold nanotubes/nanorods are already at
the clinical trial stage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;