* 0926796
* The Design and Analysis of Aluminide Surface Layers for Low Temperature Synthesis
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Ridwan Sakidja, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Gary Fischman
* 07/31/2012
* USD 316,000.00

The focus of the research is to develop an understanding of an innovative low
temperature synthesis pathway for oxidation resistant aluminide coatings without
degradation of alloy steel properties that occurs with high temperature
processing. The mechanism that enables the development of a large Al flux at low
temperature must be resolved to provide the fundamental understanding that will
allow for a robust process control. The Al5Fe2 phase appears to be an important
component of the reaction pathway and is characterized by a high lattice defect
content. A quantitative coating growth kinetics analysis will be conducted to
confirm the role of the Al5Fe2 phase in enhancing low temperature synthesis. An
examination of the stability of the Al5Fe2 phase will allow for an understanding
of the defect structure and diffusion kinetics. While the rapid kinetics is an
advantage in initial coating synthesis, it is a concern during service since it
results in depletion of Al and the loss of oxidation protection. In order to
address the lifetime extension the multicomponent diffusion pathways will be
assessed so that a novel kinetic biasing strategy can be employed to develop in-
situ diffusion barriers and compliant layers as part of an integrated coating
design. The advancement in the understanding and control of low temperature
aluminide coating synthesis reactions resulting from the research will yield a
deeper fundamental knowledge of the governing kinetic mechanisms. The
introduction of a novel kinetic biasing strategy in order to develop an in-situ
diffusion barrier will provide a key missing component that is required in order
to implement low temperature synthesis as an effective means to protect alloy
steels in energy conversion applications to allow for increased power generation
and efficiency. The coating design strategies developed in this research have a
general application as a cost effective means to enhancing the resistance of
structural materials to degradation under aggressive environments at high
temperature. An important component of the project effort will be the education
of a graduate student. Further, lecture demonstrations on coating synthesis will
be incorporated into outreach programs for high school and incoming
undergraduate students.