* 0926301
* Novel Experimental and Theoretical Approaches to Understand Biomechanics of Atherosclerotic Plaque Rupture
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Michael Sutton, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Robert Carter
* 07/31/2013
* USD 323,559.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;Atherosclerotic plaque rupture is the leading
cause of acute cardiovascular events such as heart attack and stroke. Many
studies of atherosclerosis use mice as an animal model, since plaque structure
and composition can easily be altered using genetic engineering, drugs, or diet.
However, spontaneous plaque rupture is rare in atherosclerotic mice,
necessitating new approaches to relate the pathology of mouse plaques to their
biomechanical properties and stability against rupture. This project will apply
two novel approaches to study the biomechanical behavior of mouse
atherosclerotic plaques: 1. measurement of local surface strains on normal
arteries and plaques under tensile loading using three-dimensional digital image
correlation (3D-DIC), a non-contacting optical method; 2. direct measurement of
the forces necessary to cause detachment of the plaque from the underlying
vessel wall, in order to estimate plaque-artery fracture energy. A primary goal
of the project is to correlate biomechanical measurements with underlying tissue
structure, particularly with those features which have been clinically
associated with plaque rupture in humans. An additional goal is to apply
analytical methods derived from classic fracture mechanics to the problem of
plaque rupture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this research will provide
new experimental tools and computational approaches to study atherosclerotic
plaque rupture, with an emphasis on small animal models. Application of 3-D DIC
to measure local strains on the micrometer length scale is likely to find broad
utility in mechanical studies of biological tissues. The project will offer an
introduction to mechanical testing and data analysis to area high school
students by providing an educational/laboratory experience module for the
SCienceLab outreach program developed by the USC Center for Science Education.
This SCienceLab module will be the first in the program to focus on engineering
concepts. The project will also help to strengthen the newly established
Biomedical Engineering Program at USC. &lt;br/&gt;