* 0926127
* Customizable Domain-Specific Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Glenn Reinman, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2015
* USD 9,999,997.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of
2009&lt;br/&gt;(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Customizable
Domain-Specific Computing&lt;br/&gt;To meet ever-increasing computing needs and
overcome power density limitations, the computing industry has entered the era
of parallelization, with tens to hundreds of computing cores integrated into a
single processor; and hundreds to thousands of computing servers connected in
warehouse-scale data centers. However, such highly parallel, general-purpose
computing systems still face serious challenges in terms of performance, energy,
heat dissipation, space, and cost. In this project we look beyond
parallelization and focus on domain-specific customization as the next
disruptive technology to bring orders-of-magnitude power-performance efficiency
improvement to important application domains. &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit
of this project includes development of a general methodology for creating novel
customizable architecture platforms and the associated compilation tools and
runtime management environment to support domain-specific computing to: 1)
achieve orders-of-magnitude computing efficiency improvement for applications in
a specific domain; and 2) demon-strate that such improvement can be obtained
with little or no impact on design productivity, so that it can be deployed in a
wide range of application domains. Our proposed domain-specific customizable
computing platform includes: 1) a wide range of customizable computing elements,
from heterogeneous fixed cores to coarse-grain customizable cores, and to fine-
grain field-programmable circuit fabrics; 2) customizable high-performance radio
frequency interconnects; 3) highly automated compilation tools and runtime
management software systems for application development; and 4) a general,
reusable methodology for customizable computing applicable across different
domains. By combining these critical capabilities, we shall deliver a super-
computer-in-a-box that is customized to a particular application domain to
enable disruptive innovations in that domain. This approach will be demonstrated
in several important application domains in healthcare. &lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact of this project will be measured by the new digital revolution enabled by
customized computing. We will demonstrate the feasibility and advantages of the
proposed research in the domain of healthcare, given its significant impact on
the national economy and quality of life issues. In particular, we focus our
effort on revolutionizing the role of medical imaging and hemodynamic modeling
in healthcare, providing much more cost-efficient, convenient solutions for
preventative, diagnostic, and therapeutic procedures to dramatically improve
healthcare quality, efficiency, and patient outcomes. The broader impact of this
project also includes the integration of research and education, exposing
graduate, undergraduate, and high school stu-dents to the new concepts and
research from this project via several new courses jointly developed and shared
by researchers in our newly established Center for Domain-Specific Computing
(CSDC). Summer research fellowship programs to support high school and
undergraduate students will be provided by CSDC. Our goal is to train a new
generation of students who are prepared for customized parallelization and
computing, and can effectively apply such techniques to many areas of our
society, thus furthering the digital revolution. Special efforts are being made
to attract underrepresented students at all levels via partnerships with campus
organizations focused on diversity, such as the UCLA Center for Excellence in
Engineering and Diversity.&lt;br/&gt;This research will be carried out as a
collaborative effort between four universities: UCLA (the lead institution),
Rice, UC Santa Barbara, and Ohio State. The research team consists of a group of
highly accomplished researchers with diversified backgrounds, including computer
science and engineering, electrical engineering, medicine, and applied
mathematics. For more information, please visit http://cdsc.cs.ucla.edu.