* 0926350
* Peptide aptamers to investigate and disrupt protein function in plants
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2011
* Stanton Gelvin, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 05/31/2011
* USD 300,000.00

PI: Stanton B. Gelvin (Purdue University) CoPI: Vitaly Citovsky (State
University of New York, Stony Brook)

Aptamers are small synthetic peptides of random amino acid sequence. When
expressed in cells, aptamers can specifically bind to target proteins and
inhibit function. They can thus be used to define the functional roles of
proteins in various cellular processes, as well as defining specific domains
within these proteins that are important for the proteins to mediate these
roles. Furthermore, the aptamer sequences can be used as functional
identification "marks" of plant proteins that naturally interact with the target
proteins. An expression vector and libraries of millions of random aptamers will
be developed for use in transient transformation experiments. The vector will
allow expression and screening of aptamers first in yeast, and subsequently in
plants. The constructions will incorporate bimolecular fluorescence
complementation (BiFC) technology to detect aptamer-protein interactions, and
Gateway technologies to facilitate mobilization of aptamers among various
vectors. As proof of concept, tagged plant proteins important for development,
and Agrobacterium virulence proteins important for Agrobacterium-mediated
transformation will be probed with the aptamer library. This initial work will
test whether random aptamers can be used to identify interacting proteins in two
different organisms, yeast and plants. This project will provide research tools
and resources for the plant science community to determine the functions of
plant proteins, and protein-protein interactions in planta. Data will be
released sequentially through a project website at Purdue University (accessible
via http://bio.purdue.edu/people/faculty/index.php?refID=128) and the aptamer
library will be provided to the ABRC for distribution.