* 0926042
* Cyclic Stress-Strain Characteristics of EPS GeoFoam
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Aurelian Trandafir, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/2010
* USD 61,494.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of
2009&lt;br/&gt;(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Block-molded expanded
polystyrene (EPS) geofoam is a type of cellular geosynthetic with a long history
of successful applications in geotechnical engineering. Characterized by an
extremely low density, EPS geofoam has become the material of choice in a
variety of geotechnical problems requiring lightweight fill for slope
stabilization, embankments on soft soils, earth retaining structures, bridge
approaches, bridge abutments, and buried pipes. During recent years, increasing
consideration has been given to the compressible inclusion function of EPS
geofoam associated with its low stiffness, which makes geofoam an ideal material
for reducing the seismic lateral earth pressures against rigid non-yielding
retaining structures (e.g., below grade building walls, bridge abutments, or
restrained walls). Vertical EPS panels installed against such structures may act
as seismic buffers reducing the seismic wall thrust during an earthquake. Recent
findings from numerical simulations and physical shaking table tests addressing
the seismic behavior of buried structure walls with EPS buffer are quite
promising indicating significant reduction in the dynamic wall thrust compared
to the rigid case with no geofoam inclusion. Although the behavior of EPS
geofoam under monotonic loading conditions has been extensively studied in the
laboratory using triaxial compression tests, little research has been done until
present on the cyclic stress-strain behavior of this material. Currently
published dynamic properties of EPS geofoam obtained from strain-controlled
resonant column and cyclic uniaxial tests, and commonly employed by
investigators in numerical seismic analyses, are characterized by degradation of
dynamic shear modulus and increase in damping ratio with increasing cyclic shear
strain amplitude. However, results from a preliminary laboratory study based on
stress-controlled cyclic uniaxial tests indicate a logarithmic decrease in the
damping ratio of EPS geofoam with increasing axial strain amplitude.
Furthermore, for cyclic axial strain amplitudes greater than about 0.8%, the
material seems to exhibit a visco-elasto-plastic behavior associated with the
occurrence of permanent plastic strains. These experimental outcomes demonstrate
that the cyclic stress-strain characteristics of EPS geofoam are currently
poorly understood. In this context, the main objective of this research is to
use laboratory triaxial tests to investigate in detail the behavior of geofoam
under cyclic loading. This experimental investigation will be based on stress-
controlled cyclic triaxial tests, and will focus on non-elasticized EPS
materials commonly used in geotechnical applications. Particular emphasis will
be placed on the influence of the following parameters: confining pressure,
initial (static) deviator stress, cyclic deviator stress amplitude, loading
frequency, EPS density, and specimen size. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: This research will provide a better understanding of the fundamental
stress-strain behavior of EPS geofoam under cyclic loading that is invaluable in
optimizing the seismic buffer function of this material in geotechnical
earthquake engineering applications. Specific questions to be addressed include:
1) What is the threshold cyclic axial strain amplitude for the onset of the
elasto-plastic stress-strain behavior? 2) How are the dynamic properties of EPS
geofoam affected by the confining pressure and initial deviator stress? 3) In
what manner the permanent plastic strains accumulate with increasing number of
loading cycles? 4) How does the specimen size influence the cyclic stress-strain
behavior of EPS geofoam?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project will
significantly expand our knowledge on the cyclic stress-strain behavior of EPS
geofoam for a variety of material densities, initial stress conditions, and
loading frequencies commonly encountered in practice. A reference website
summarizing the geofoam dynamic properties obtained from the proposed laboratory
work will be developed and advertised to the investigators involved with the
assessment of the seismic behavior of EPS geofoam in various geotechnical
earthquake engineering applications. The project will provide a University of
Utah graduate student with training experience in laboratory triaxial testing
and will expose an undergraduate student to various geotechnical research
activities. &lt;br/&gt;