* 0926282
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Understanding the Acequia Irrigation Communities of New Mexico as Complex Social-Ecological Systems
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2009,01/31/2011
* Elinor Ostrom, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 01/31/2011
* USD 11,150.00

Social-ecological systems occur wherever humans interact with their environment
to sustain their well-being. Examples include communities of fishermen, forest
users, and irrigators, many of which have functioned for centuries in a
relatively decentralized manner. In each of these systems, groups of users may
face a variety of disturbances or disruptions, such as droughts, state policy
intervention, or economic development and urbanization. Scholars focusing on
these issues have not fully explained how such decentralized systems that in the
past responded successfully to age-old disturbances, have not kept pace with the
occurrence of novel disturbances brought on by changing biophysical and
political or economic regimes. This doctoral dissertation research project will
help to fill these gaps by analyzing a set of community-based irrigation systems
in northern New Mexico known as "acequias". It will integrate several scientific
approaches, including institutional, social network, historical, and econometric
regression analyses, as well as geographic information systems and remote
sensing technologies, in order to understand how the acequias in an area known
as the Taos valley have historically responded to floods and droughts, and more
recently to state intervention and economic development. The research will
involve collecting data through interviews with irrigators in the valley,
archival data regarding historic water use and important legislation, state-
produced hydrographic surveys of the area, and Landsat satellite imagery to
measure the systems' abilities to maintain agricultural production over time.
These data will be used in the creation of databases of the social network used
to manage water, and of important institutional, demographic, and biophysical
information. These databases will be used to help understand the outcomes
produced when the systems interact with social and ecological
disturbances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given that many of the world's natural
resources are managed by local user groups, it is important to understand how
and whether they are resilient or vulnerable to different types of disturbances.
This research will help to answer theoretical questions as well as applied
policy questions. It will explore how user groups are able to manage
geographically extensive resources from the bottom up, without centralized
control. It will help understand what properties of social-ecological systems
increase, or hamper, their ability to respond to disturbances such as floods and
droughts. Additionally, it will further understanding of vertical linkages
between multiple forms of government, and the effects these have on natural
resource management. Finally, it will explore the effects that urbanization and
economic development have had on these traditional community-based systems. As a
Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide
support to enable a promising student to establish an independent research
career.