* 0926885
* BRIGE: Experimentally-Validated Atomistic-Scale Modeling and Simulation of Electrodeposited Single Palladium Nanowires
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Albert To, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 07/31/2011
* USD 187,000.00

The research objective of this BRIGE award is to develop a deeper fundamental
understanding of the interaction of nanoparticles during the growth process of
electrodeposited single palladium nanowires and their resulting nanostructure
under different experimental conditions. To achieve this objective, the
following tasks will be carried out: 1) develop a predictive
nanoelectromechanics-based atomistic model for the simulation of
electrodeposited nanowires, and 2) calibrate and validate the
nanoelectromechanics-based atomistic model with high-resolution characterization
experiments. Initial development of the predictive model will utilize current
understanding of nanoelectromechanics of nanoparticles in an aqueous solution.
Subsequent model refinement will entail obtaining nanostructure characteristics
from different characterization experiments. Calibration of model parameters
will require comparing the statistics of the nanostructure descriptors obtained
from the characterization experiments and simulations
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The successful completion of the proposed research
will establish an integrated simulation and experimental method for developing a
predictive atomistic model for electrodeposition problems for the first time. An
additional outcome of the proposed research will be the knowledge of how the
interaction of nanoparticles leads to certain nanostructure such as dendritic,
grainy, or plain under different experimental conditions. A longer term goal
will exploit the rich variety of nanostructures in the nanowires to increase
energy conversion efficiency in thermoelectric and hydrogen storage devices.
Results from the proposed research will be integrated into educational and
outreach activities, which will serve to broaden the participation of high
school and college students including the underrepresented ones in engineering
and science careers. These activities include demonstrating new nanotechnology
concepts to students in both the Pittsburgh and San Francisco areas as well as
introducing a new graduate course in computational nanomechanics.&lt;br/&gt;