* 0926641
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  The Hobby-Eberly Telescope Dark Energy Experiment
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2015
* Robin Ciardullo, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2015
* USD 523,471.00

AST-0926815/0926641/0928636 Gebhardt/Schneider/DePoy

The Hobby-Eberly Telescope Dark Energy Experiment

The solution to the problem of dark energy will require a fundamental shift in
our understanding of the Universe, and acceptance of any model will require
significant corroboration by observations. The Hobby-Eberly Telescope (HET) Dark
Energy Experiment, HETDEX, offers a technically clean and observationally robust
approach to measuring the effects of dark energy. HETDEX includes an upgrade of
the HET for a wider field of view, deployment of the Visible Integral-field
Replicable Unit Spectrograph (VIRUS), and completion of a wide field survey
which will use 1400 hours of observation to obtain nearly a million redshifts of
Lyman-alpha emitting galaxies. Significant parts of the project are already
underway with support from a variety of sources, including substantial private
donations.

The survey will determine the local Hubble expansion at redshift 2.4 and measure
the angular diameter distance out to that redshift, both to an accuracy of 0.8%,
and determine the growth of structure to 2%. Nearly all other dark energy
surveys target lower redshifts, while HETDEX was designed to provide high-
redshift information on the evolution of dark energy, as well as being
sufficiently powerful to measure dark energy effects even at late times. HETDEX
further will measure the curvature of the Universe to about 0.1%, an order of
magnitude better than current projects, and a strong complement to other current
and planned studies. Although HETDEX is optimized for measures of the expansion
history, there is significant ancillary science from the survey, such as a
collection of spectra of a quarter of a million stars and 1.4 million other
galaxies. Given its capabilities, VIRUS will remain a, if not the, primary
instrument for HET for many years.

The significant insights on dark energy, the large database with substantial
ancillary science, and the unique and powerful integral field spectrograph on
the HET will have a broad impact throughout the astronomical community. The
attraction of the dark energy enigma enables HETDEX to include significant
public outreach involving the McDonald Observatory Visitors Center and Stardate
radio, including an interactive display for visitors and the involvement of K-12
teachers, as well as a popular webpage at http://www.hetdex.org.