* 0926474
* Pb Isotopes in the Southern Ocean: A Study of Pb Systematics and Continental Weathering During the Eocene/Oligocene Transition
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Ellen Martin, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 07/31/2013
* USD 295,809.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a research effort
to construct deep water Pb isotopic records across the "Greenhouse-icehouse"
(Eocene/Oligocene boundary) transition using six Ocean Drilling Program sites
located in the Southern Ocean. The project goals are to expand understanding of:
1) seawater Pb systematics in this region, and 2) continental weathering
processes during the evolution of the Antarctic cryosphere. In terms of
systematics, records extracted from bulk sediments will allow study of the
stratification of the water column with respect to Pb, providing information
about the input and transfer of Pb to deep waters. In addition, the PI will
evaluate whether Southern Ocean inputs are dominated by Pb advected into the
basin with water masses from the Atlantic and Pacific, or by Pb derived
internally from local weathering. A comparison between seawater and detrital Pb
isotopes will also be used to evaluate the intensity of chemical versus
mechanical weathering during growth of the Antarctic Ice Sheet, with a detailed
evaluation across a weathering pulse identified by Nd isotopes. Provenance
studies based on crossplots of seawater Pb isotopes will yield information about
source regions and input sites. This award will also support graduate and
undergraduate research experiences, outreach activities within the local
community, and material for classroom discussions and exercises.