* 0926934
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Shareholder Value and the New American Workplace: Investor-Driven Downsizing, 1980-2007)
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Frank Dobbin, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2010
* USD 4,234.00

SES-0926934 Frank Dobbin Jiwook Jung Harvard University

Even before the current economic meltdown, waves of downsizing, starting in the
late 1970s, had swept corporate America, eroding workers' expectations of
economic security. But not only did downsizing become more prevalent during this
period; its basic nature changed. Previously, firms had cut jobs temporarily, to
adjust the size of their workforce during a downturn. Since the late 70s, firms
have increasingly cut jobs in both good and bad times, and without any intention
of hiring workers back. This dissertation research examines the mechanisms
driving this new downsizing: it analyzes both downsizing announcements and
actual implementation of the announced downsizing plans. The co-PI will examine
announcements from more than 700 large U.S. corporations between 1980 and 2007,
and detailed post-announcement information about workforce size and composition,
obtained from the annual reports that establishments submit to the Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission. Current findings show that at work in the new
downsizing is a shift in ideology, from an emphasis on corporate growth and
conglomeration to an emphasis on profitability and shareholder value, an
ideology that both reflects and intensifies an increased influence of
shareholders and the financial sector generally on firm behavior. The research
advances the existing literature on corporate downsizing by focusing on the
mechanisms behind downsizing, rather than its impact on corporate performance
(as most economic studies have done). By analyzing both announcement and
implementation of downsizing, the research is able to examine discrepancies
between the two, in a way that studies focusing one on or the other cannot. As a
broader implication, the research speaks to the new public concern, after the
financial system meltdown, about the relationship between that system and
employment. By elucidating the pre-history of the current situation and the
mechanisms by which the financial sector influences employment, and assessing
the magnitude of the influence empirically, the research helps lay a rational
groundwork for the current heated discussions about regulating the financial
sector.