* 0926091
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Student Engagement in Post-secondary Planning and Educational Outcomes.
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Audrey Devine Eller, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2010
* USD 9,718.00

SES-0926091&lt;br/&gt;Patrick J. Carr &lt;br/&gt;Audrey E. Devine
Eller&lt;br/&gt;Rutgers University-New
Brunswick&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding students' transition out of high
school is key to understanding U.S. class structure, mobility, and the
intergenerational transmission of privilege or inequality. This dissertation
empirically tests whether students? decisions are made at one critical moment or
rather occur slowly, over time, unfolding through daily interactions as students
negotiate institutional and social structures. The research observes how student
decisions are shaped by their school context; access to information and
counseling at the school; parents? desires, influence, and economic stability;
teachers and role models; peer relationships; and their own goals and desires
for the future. Using ethnographic methods the research analyzes how these
separate but interconnected social realms shape the pathways students take and
impact educational outcomes. In the first stage of research, the co-PI
interviewed a random sample of guidance counselors across New Jersey. The co-PI
is currently conducting ethnographic research at a racially and
socioeconomically diverse high school in New Jersey. This school is academically
strong yet has no dominant post-secondary destination, enabling investigation of
variation in educational outcomes, especially the different pathways that lead
to a 2-year or 4-year college. Data were first collected in focus groups and
observations during classes, after school activities, and sports events. Most
importantly, twenty 11th graders were randomly selected from among the middle 80
percent of the class by GPA to participate in longitudinal ethnographic
research. These students are interviewed and shadowed through school and out-of-
school activities until their graduation. The co-PI will also interview their
parents, teachers, and counselors. This project contributes to sociological
debates about structure and agency by showing the complexity of individual
decision-making within social and institutional structures.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impact of
college access on students? lives is immediate and direct, for completing a
bachelor's degree is increasingly becoming the only way to gain access to the
middle class. Findings from this project can be used to develop clear policy
recommendations for educators. Findings will be disseminated to the study school
in an internal report, in research reports and policy papers prepared for
publication in academic and popular presses, and through the researcher?s
teaching.