* 0926962
* Quantifying the Risk Posed to Tall Steel Frame Buildings in Southern California from Earthquakes on the San Andreas Fault
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Swaminathan Krishnan, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 08/31/2013
* USD 275,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The recently released Uniform California
Earthquake Rupture Forecast by the Working Group on California Earthquake
Probabilities concludes that there is a high probability that an earthquake of
magnitude 6 or larger will occur on the southern section of the San Andreas
fault in the next 30 years. The research objective of this award is to do a
region-wide quantitative risk analysis of six steel buildings in the 20-story
class for the hazard posed by the San Andreas fault. For this, end-to-end
computer simulations of ground motion from 36 earthquakes and damage to the six
buildings will be carried out. The earthquakes vary in magnitudes from 6.0 to
8.0 and originate at three hypocenter locations on the fault. Two rupture
propagation directions will be considered. The Los Angeles metropolitan region
will be divided into 636 analysis sites on a uniform grid of about 3.5km
spacing. Three steel moment frame and three steel braced frame building models
will be analyzed at each site for damage caused by the 3-component motion of the
36 scenario earthquakes. The results will be probabilistically analyzed to
quantify the expected annualized economic loss for each building at each of the
sites. Remedial measures that prevent collapse of the buildings will be
investigated. The study will resolve long-standing questions related to failure
modes, degradation characteristics, and collapse mechanisms of steel moment
frame and braced frame buildings. This will also provide a quantitative measure
of the economic risk due to the seismic activity on the San Andreas fault to the
hundreds of high-rise buildings that exist in Southern
California.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will lead to fundamental
understanding of tall steel building response and performance under strong
ground motion. It will provide necessary data needed for formulating seismic
hazard mitigation strategies and for better land-use planning to keep the
impending San Andreas earthquakes from becoming catastrophic. The proposed
Caltech Virtual Shaker e-analysis facility, established for wider dissemination
of the methodology developed in the project, will allow practicing structural
engineers to evaluate the performance of various innovative structural systems.
The project will educate and train graduate and undergraduate students in
earthquake engineering to advance the profession. Demonstrations about the
application of high-performance computing for solving some of the most
challenging earthquake engineering problems faced by society will be made to
motivate K-12 students.