* 0926949
* Modeling and Simulation of Complex Stochastic Systems and Cascading Failures, with Applications to the Electric Power Grid
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2014
* James Calvin, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Edwin Romeijn
* 07/31/2014
* USD 356,000.00

The goal of the project is to study complex stochastic systems, with one
particular focus on cascading failures. Systems such as the electric power grid
and fault-tolerant computing systems suffer from such failures, and the
effective design and operation of these systems critically depend on accurate
modeling and effcient analysis techniques. The investigators plan to produce
effcient analytical and simulation methods for analyzing such systems. Because
these systems are designed to fail only very rarely, standard simulation methods
are ineffective, necessitating the use of effciency-improvement techniques,
which the investigators plan to develop. Another aspect of the project is
producing simulation methods with properties that make them appropriate to use
within stochastic optimization algorithms. In addition to having low bias and
variance, these estimators will use a bounded amount of memory and will not
require an a priorixed simulation run length. Cascading failures affict many
complex systems, including those that make up the nation's critical
infrastructure, such as the electric power grid and communication
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The techniques that the investigators propose to
develop will lead to a better understanding of this potentially devastating
phenomenon and more generally will aid in designing and optimizing systems
operating under uncertainty. The investigators will enhance a software package
they developed to incorporate the new modeling and analysis advances, taking
into account special structure inherent to some of these infrastructures, such
as the electric power grid. Other broader impacts of the proposed work include
educating and including in research underrepresented minorities and
undergraduates and outreach to local high schools.