* 0926584
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Adaptation in Watershed Management Among Andean Rural Communities
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,02/28/2011
* David Lopez-Carr, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 02/28/2011
* USD 11,950.00

In the Andean region of South America, understanding how communities organize
and cooperate is particularly important for water management as many rural
communities receive minimal government support and the communities themselves
must decide if and how they will protect their watersheds and distribute their
water. Despite research on the factors that facilitate collective action in
resource management, there is limited knowledge on the specific conditions that
enable local communities to adapt to uncertain changing conditions such as land-
use changes and climate change.

Ph.D. student Felipe Murtinho under the supervision of his doctoral advisor Dr.
David Carr at the University of California Santa Barbara will explore the
factors that determine whether local water user associations in the Fúquene
watershed in Colombia take measures to manage their micro-watershed in order to
adapt to the degradation of their water resources. Fúquene is an ideal place to
examine how local communities adapt to water degradation because in most
communities access to safe drinking water depends on the management decisions of
the user associations. In addition, this region faces uncertain water conditions
due to land-use changes and climate variability. Specifically, this research
will address the two following questions: what conditions either facilitate or
impede a water user associations' initiatives to adapt to changing micro-
watershed conditions?, and if a water use association undertakes an initiative,
what specifically do they do, and why do they choose certain adaptation
strategies over others? The proposed research uses quantitative and qualitative
methods including in-depth interviews to key informants and multi-level
statistical models with information from water user associations and households?
surveys, meteorological data, municipal socio-economic information and land-
use/land cover maps. The project results will provide explanations about how and
why different characteristics at three different scales (households, the
associations, and the broader governing context) impact the decision of the
associations to adapt to changes in water conditions.

This study explores resource management and collective action when local
communities face environmental changes. The results will contribute to the
literature on adaptation to environmental change by identifying key factors that
determine how, and under what conditions water user associations adapt to
changes in water sources degradation. The research focuses particularly on
identifying at what scale adaptation processes are triggered: do adaptation
initiatives depend on households/associations characteristics? Or, is support
from local governmental agencies or non-governmental organizations (NGOs) a
determining factor in associations' decisions to adapt? Answers to these
questions have important policy implications as they may provide insights of how
and where government agencies and NGOs could allocate scarce resources to
increase the capacity of local communities to adapt to changing environmental
conditions such as climate change.