* 0926316
* Electrochemical Infiltration of Selective Laser Sintered Preforms
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* David Bourell, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Zhijian Pei
* 08/31/2013
* USD 300,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of the proposed
research is to employ electrodeposition techniques in the design of a
manufacturing route for creation of fully dense metal-nonmetallic selective
laser sintered parts. The approach will be to adapt and modify conventional
electrochemical deposition/coating techniques to apply to internal deposition on
porous preforms to fill in interconnected porosity. A significant part of the
research involves establishment of a sound scientific understanding for
electrochemical infiltration/deposition of metal within porous selective laser
sintered preforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the benefits of this work
will include the development of a truly novel method to effectively achieve
infiltration. This will facilitate transition of selective laser sintering from
a rapid prototyping method to a rapid/additive manufacturing technique. Porosity
removal represents the major scientific barrier to development and maturation of
a new manufacturing route for creating low-cost, metal-infiltrated composites
with complex geometry at room temperature. One of the major advantages of
electrochemical infiltration is the lower processing temperature. Low
temperature reduces both energy consumption and associated carbon-footprint and
also minimizes undesirable structural changes. The results of the proposed
research will also impact domestic competition for a variety of parts in
manufacture by providing a vehicle for low-cost production. The proposed process
would significantly reduce tooling and manufacturing costs.