* 0926953
* Do clay mineralss influence the burial and preservation of organic carbon on geologic timescales?
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Martin Kennedy, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 08/31/2013
* USD 273,009.00

The sequestration of organic carbon in sediments is one of the principle long-
term regulators of the carbon cycle. It influences important parameters such as
the level of atmospheric oxygen as well as the temperature of the biosphere
through greenhouse gas regulation via CO2. The record of carbon burial in
geological deposits identifies past perturbations in the carbon cycle and
provides a critical perspective on the range of variation and insight in to the
dominant controls. The purpose of this research is to investigate the mineral-
surface-control mechanism responsible for carbon preservation in modern
sediments and see if it applies to the rock record. This research involves the
study of selected organic rich sediments from the Green River Shale, Monterrey
Formation, and Ocean Drilling Program cores from the Demerra Rise in the
Atlantic Ocean. These samples span a broad range of depositional environments,
water chemistry, and diagenetic conditions. Mineral surface area, cation
exchange potential, and organic carbon contents will be measured and examined
for correlations. Sedimentary Fe and S and information on organic and isotopic
biomarkers will also be used to examine depositional redox conditions. Broader
impacts of the work are high and include international collaboration, strong
integration of research and education that includes building a master's level
course around the research project, and student training. The work also has
implications for the exploration of petroleum source rocks.