* 0926147
* Workshop: Tools for Text: Annotation Methods for Political Science Research
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* John Wilkerson, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2010
* USD 49,281.00

Digitization is dramatically altering research demands and opportunities in
political science. Governments around the world now release large volumes of
digitized text on a daily basis, while national projects in many countries are
now digitally scanning centuries of historical government documents. Online
media developments are also dramatically increasing the amount and diversity of
accessible digital political content, from the advent of 24 hour news coverage
in mainstream media outlets, to campaign websites, political blogs, social
networks and even YouTube.

These developments are creating unprecedented research opportunities for
political scientists. However, a central constraint to the study of text is the
need to convert textual data to useful information about political patterns.
Ultimately, scholars are interested in text for what it can tell us about the
topics government addresses, relations among government actors, or which frames
seems to carry the most weight, to name just a few examples. To answer these
types of questions, approaches to categorizing text must be developed and
applied.

This workshop will equip newer faculty and advanced graduate students with the
knowledge and skills required to incorporate well-established text annotation
methods into their teaching and research. The workshop will be held at the
University of Washington in Seattle and will include several introductory
presentations by experts in different methods, including intensive focus on
training and application of these tools. Participants will leave with an
understanding the range of options available, the strengths and limits of
different approaches, and actual experience in applying and evaluating them.