* 0926701
* STCI: Development of Stork Data Scheduler for Mitigating the Data Bottleneck in Petascale Distributed Computing Systems
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Joel Tohline, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2013
* USD 495,514.00

This proposal will be awarded using funds made available by the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5), and meets the
requirements established in Section 2 of the White House Memorandum entitled,
Ensuring Responsible Spending of Recovery Act Funds, dated March 20,
2009.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The STCI Development of Stork Data Scheduler for
Mitigating the Data Bottleneck in Petascale Distributed Computing Systems
project will enhance the Stork data scheduler to mitigate the end-to-end data
handling bottleneck in petascale distributed computing systems and make it
available for a wide range of user community as production quality software. New
functionalities of Stork will include: data aggregation and caching; early error
detection, classification, and recovery; integration with workflow planning and
management; optimal protocol tuning; and data transfer performance prediction
services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The Stork data
scheduler will make a distinctive contribution to petascale distributed
computing in the areas of planning, scheduling, monitoring and management of
data placement tasks and application-level end-to-end optimization of networked
I/O for petascale distributed applications. Unlike existing approaches, it will
treat data resources and the tasks related to data access and movement as first
class entities just like computational resources and compute tasks, and not
simply the side effect of computation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact:&lt;br/&gt;This project will impact not just traditionally compute
intensive disciplines from science and engineering, but also new emerging
computational areas in the arts, humanities, business and education. The PI will
be collaborating with other leading institutions in the area of distributed data
management such as LBNL, ISI/USC, UNC, UCSD, and University Chicago/Argonne to
integrate Stork with their data management solutions and disseminate it to their
user communities. The comprehensive education component of the project will
include science projects and summer training camps on data-intensive computing
with K-12 students (where 99% are minority students), undergraduate and graduate
student training, international student/intern exchange program, and minority
workshops.