* 0926245
* Self-Controlled Surface-Selective Atomic Layer Deposition for Integrated Vertical Nanowire Field Effect Transistors
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Xudong Wang, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2012
* USD 159,038.00

The objective of this proposed research is to gain fundamental understanding of
how gaseous surface passivation molecules interact with nanowire arrays in an
atomic layer deposition system. Specifically, the goal will be accomplished by:
(1) understanding how the passivation molecules diffuse among ZnO nanowires with
different densities; (2) determining the passivation ability of the chosen
passivation precursor with respect to the sticking coefficient of the
precursors; (3) correlating the surface selective accuracy to the reactivity of
the precursors. In addition, integrated vertical NW FETs will be fabricated
characterized to optimize the deposition condition for the best dielectric layer
quality and device performance. The final outcome of this project is expected to
realize a ?smart? thin film deposition technique that can ?self-choosing?
deposition area. This research would lead to a general, simple and low-cost
fabrication technique for large-scale integrating semiconductor nanowires into
three dimensional nanoelectronic systems. Understandings established in this
research would pave the path to a novel technique for selectively
functionalizing nanowire surfaces in large scale by vapor deposition methods.
The research discovery will be integrated in the PI?s graduate course about
Nanomaterials and Nanotechnology. This research will provide an excellent
opportunity for training graduate and undergraduate students with fabrication
and characterization technologies in the frontier of nanoscience. The advanced
atomic layer deposition facility and techniques established in this research
will be shared with PI?s colleagues to enhance the infrastructure for advanced
materials and nanotechnology research and education. A partnership will be
established between the PI?s group and K-12 school teachers and students through
this research program.