* 0926544
* An Interdisciplinary Study of the Role of  the Consciousness  on Decision-making
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Christof Koch, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Donald Hantula
* 09/30/2013
* USD 1,071,673.00

We often make choices without knowing why or in some cases even without being
aware that we made a choice at all. Moreover, we sometimes find ourselves having
made choices that, with hindsight, we do not believe we should have made. For
example, we might find ourselves with a cookie in our mouth despite firm
intentions to diet; or we might find ourselves strongly liking or disliking a
person without any knowledge of why.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These examples are
puzzling because we tend to think that all choices are deliberate and based on
information of which we are fully aware. Clearly, this is not the case. In fact,
it may be the exception. Yet there must always be some signature of our choice,
and of the ingredients that went into it, in our brains. In this research
project, the Principal Investigators will conduct a series of studies that
systematically explore what happens our brains when we make various kinds of
decisions, some conscious, some non-conscious, using state-of-the-art tools from
cognitive neuroscience: high resolution magnetic resonance imaging, and rare
electrical recordings of the brain from neurosurgical patients. These studies
will result in an unprecedented dissection of the different components that
contribute to how we make decisions and provide novel insights into the role of
consciousness in human behavior. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The studies will help to
answer some important outstanding questions in neuroscience, psychology, and
economics. How quickly do we make decisions? Are consciously made choices slower
than ones made in the absence of consciousness? Do animals make conscious
choices? How conscious are the choices made by people who are addicted to drugs,
to shopping, or to gambling? Can we consciously override strong preferences of
which we are not aware? Answering these questions will allow us to understand
the mechanisms behind decision-making. It will also give us a deeper
understanding of the nature of consciousness and what it contributes to human
behavior. Finally, the insights obtained from our studies will lay the
groundwork for engineering intelligent decision-making in computers, robots, and
distributed systems.&lt;br/&gt;