* 0926680
* Performance-Based Design and Assessment of Buildings under Extreme Snow Loads
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Abbie Liel, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 09/30/2013
* USD 181,000.00

The objective of this research is to develop a new framework for performance-
based design and assessment of buildings subjected to large snow loads. Snow
storms in recent years in the U.S. have caused structural failure, requiring
costly repairs, interrupting business, damaging building contents and
endangering life safety. Performance-based methods can improve the current
approach to snow engineering by explicitly accounting for the risks of snow-
induced collapse and building closure in decisions about structural design. The
research approach progresses from the development of a probabilistic modular
framework to relate snow hazard to structural response and building performance,
to nonlinear simulation modeling and probabilistic assessment of the risk of
collapse and building closure in structures subjected to snow loads, and to the
application of snow load design procedures in a multi-hazard context.
Deliverables include the demonstration of the application of the performance-
based framework for snow design to typical flat-roof and special arena-type
structures, tools for evaluating snow design decisions and building code
provisions, documentation of research results, and a colloquia series for
undergraduate researchers in civil engineering at CU.

This research seeks to develop a new tool for design of buildings to resist snow
loads, based on improved characterization of risks of structural failure and
building closure. These advancements will facilitate decisions to minimize risk
to life and property, leading to improved design of individual buildings and
reexamination of code provisions for snow loading. These developments are
particularly timely due to increasingly variable weather patterns associated
with global climate change. The project will engage a diverse group of
undergraduate researchers to promote student interest in structures and hazards
research and in pursuing graduate students in civil engineering. Undergraduate
and graduate researchers will participate in a new department research colloquia
organized by the P.I to increase engagement in the department and wider
scholarly community.

