* 0926819
* A New Perspective on Energy Harvesting Nanowires: The Role of Chemistry and Structure of Nanowires
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Yoke Khin Yap, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 08/31/2014
* USD 280,000.00

The development of self-powered electronic devices is of great interest to
worldwide researchers and high-tech industries. Recent investigations show that
zinc oxide nanowires can function as energy harvesting modules to power
nano/micro-scale devices. These nanowires are able to convert the mechanical
energy to electrical output due to their semiconductor and piezoelectric
properties. Currently, the underlying nanoscale mechanisms by which chemical
composition and structural features in ZnO nanowires affect the output
electrical signal are unknown. The proposed research aims to fill this gap. The
electrical and mechanical coupling of ZnO wires will be studied by straining the
nanowires using a novel force and electrical measurement system (AFM/STM) inside
the transmission electron microscope (TEM) where the microstructure of ZnO
nanowires can be simultaneously monitored in high resolution. The new
understanding on this phenomenon is not limited to ZnO nanotubes, and can be
extended to other energy harvesting materials.

The proposed research has the potential to convert mechanical motion energy
(such as body motion, muscle stretching, blood pressure), vibration energy (such
as acoustic/ultrasonic wave), and hydraulic energy (such as flow of body fluids
including blood and contraction of blood vessels) into electric energy. This
means that electronic devices such as pacemakers or laptops can be powered up
without the need to recharge their batteries. A week-long demonstration of
energy harvesting experiments in TEM has been planned to impact under-
represented minority and economically-disadvantaged K-12 students in the state
of Michigan. The research results will be used as a case study in a new
technical course, which the PI has developed to bring senior undergraduate and
graduate students from electrical engineering, materials science, physics,
chemistry, and mechanical engineering into the classroom. The videos of
microscopy experiments will also be made available to the community via the
World Wide Web.