* 0926833
* BRIGE: Architectures and Circuits for Simultaneous Spectrum Sensing and Data Reception in Cognitive Radio
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Nathan Neihart, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 07/31/2012
* USD 172,035.00

In certain emergency situations the existing communication infrastructure may be
damaged or simply overloaded. Through the use of cognitive radio networks,
emergency personnel would maintain the ability to communicate, share data, and
coordinate large numbers of people. The PI's long term research goals are to
make significant contributions in the area of realizing a viable, fully
integrated cognitive radio that is capable of operating over the frequency range
of 1 - 10 GHz. A critical component of such a system is the spectrum sensing
front. A major limitation in current spectrum sensing front ends is their
limited range of operating frequencies (typically less than 1 GHz) and large
sensing overhead. This proposal discusses research aimed at a spectrum sensing
front end that is capable of performing simultaneous spectrum sensing and data
reception while operating over the frequency range of 1 - 10 GHz. This project
will be divided into the following four tasks: development of a simultaneous
spectrum sensing and data reception algorithm, development of a wideband
spectrum sensing architecture, development of narrowband, tunable circuits for
the chosen architecture and validation and demonstration

The intellectual merit of the proposed research is significant and will provide
new algorithms and architectures capable of reducing the sensing overhead to
near zero while extending the possible operating range by an order of magnitude.
The circuits that will be developed will not only benefit cognitive radio
applications, but many other present and future wireless communication devices,
for instance multi-standard radio architectures such as software defined radio,
cell phones, and wireless networking devices. Multi-standard devices are
becoming increasingly important to industry due to the constant push to increase
functionality and decrease cost of current mobile devices.

The broader impacts of this project will include increasing the participation of
underrepresented groups, enhancing education and research knowledge, and
providing a benefit to society. A primary goal of the BRIGE program is to
increase the participation of underrepresented groups in Science and
Engineering. The graduate student that will be supported by this award is an
African American Ph.D. student by the name of Jeremy Brown. Jeremy has a keen
interest in analog circuit design and has taken numerous courses on this
subject, thus qualifying him to work on this project.

The PI is currently teaching a senior/graduate level course on radio-frequency
integrated circuit design and is in the process of proposing a graduate-level
extension to this course focusing on more advanced topics in wireless system
design. The results of this research will be directly integrated into the
curriculum of both classes, allowing many different students to benefit from
state-of-the-art curriculum.

There are also many different social impacts of the proposed research. The
development of a wideband spectrum sensing front end is but the first step
towards the PI's longer term goals of realizing a fully integrated cognitive
radio that is capable of operating over the 1 - 10 GHz band. This type of radio,
in turn, will have many revolutionary applications. For example, as stated
above, emergency responders can use cognitive radio networks to increase the
communication efficiency and the overall safety of the emergency responders.
These same benefits can apply to military applications as well. Further, by
fully integrating the radio, they will become less expensive and see wide-spread
deployment, similar to what has been seen in cell phones.