* 0926880
* BRIGE: Stent-Induced Arterial Strain and Stress as a Determinant of Restenosis
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Linxia Gu, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Ted A. Conway
* 07/31/2013
* USD 197,535.00

0926880 Gu

Stent implantation has been widely used in the treatment of stenosed arteries to
open the blocked artery and restore blood flow. Nearly 1.2 million patients
undergo coronary stent implantations each year in the United States. The major
complication of this intervention is instent restenosis, the reoccurrence of
stenosis. Nearly one-third of stented patients require further intervention
within six months due to the occurrence of restenosis. It has been speculated
that stent design features contribute to the development of restenosis. In order
to further understand the progression mechanism of restenosis, models capturing
the correlation between stent features and restenosis statistics are needed.

The goal of this work is to develop computational models that will provide a
fundamental understanding of the impact of stent implantation on vascular
mechanics and the development of restenosis. The models will be reinforced
through experimental validation. Computational models will be developed to
capture the detailed interaction between stent design parameters, plaque
properties, and artery configurations. Computational results combined with
restenosis statistics will determine the impact of stents on restenosis rate.
In-vitro experimental data will be utilized to provide a benchmark for
validation and verification of the computational models. Restenosis involves
sophisticated biological and mechanical interactions between the arterial wall,
plaque, blood flow, and implanted stent. This project will explore the factors
that initiate and control restenosis from the view of solid mechanics. The PI
will investigate the relationship between the stent-induced arterial
stain/stress and the statistics of vascular re-narrowing. Preliminary
computational results indicate that stent-induced arterial strain and stress
concentrations correlate with locations of cell proliferation, which led to the
restenosis. This correlation requires further investigation by considering the
influence of various stent designs, plaque and artery properties, and the
statistics of restenosis rate.

Intellectual merit: This proposed research will provide a better understanding
of the physics of stent-plaque-artery interactions with respect to changes in
restenosis rate. The findings obtained in this project will elucidate the
mechanism by which altered arterial stress and strain lead to vessel re-
narrowing. The restenosis rate will be expressed by stent design parameters
(i.e. strut thickness, strut width, pattern design, and its total length),
combined with vessel and plaque properties such as symmetrical or asymmetrical
plaque, degree of stenosis, and the contact area. Validated analytical models
will lead to the development of novel coronary stent platforms and new treatment
of restenosis. The proposed research is transformative in that it may open up an
entirely new avenue for studying the initiation and progression of restenosis in
the stented vessel as well as the development of arthrosclerosis.

Broader impacts: The new knowledge obtained through this project will provide a
fundamental design tool for implanted stents, prompt changes in clinical
practice, and improve the prevention and treatment of restenosis, which would
have a tremendous positive impact on the patients that undergo stent
implantations. This proposed research will develop preliminary results and
collaborations that will lead to formulation of future grant applications. Both
graduate and undergraduate students, especially women, will be recruited for
this project from our university's pipeline programs. The PI will also provide
seminars, short courses, or lab tours for young women and their teachers in an
effort to continue to inform middle and high school students about the relevancy
of engineering program to clinical problems. It is expected that the proposed
activities will help attract and retain women to the engineering program.