* 0926289
* BRIGE:  Sustainable Healthy Schools:  A Framework for Managing the Environmental Health of Public School Infrastructure
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Deborah Dickerson, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 07/31/2012
* USD 174,275.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this BRIGE
award is to initiate the first phase of a research program to develop a civil
infrastructure asset management system to predict and optimize public school
management of facility components that impact environmental health: asbestos-
containing materials and lead-based paint. According to the U.S. Department of
Education National Center for Educational Statistics (NCES) report, Condition of
America's Public School Facilities, approximately one-quarter of the nation's
schools, housing 11 million children, require extensive repair. Nearly forty
percent of the schools reported unsatisfactory environmental conditions. Given
the constrained financial resources facing our national educational system,
school decision makers are in need of systematic methods of evaluating risks
associated with facility condition and prioritizing maintenance
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research
will produce a set of objective and repeatable condition assessment
methodologies, condition index algorithms, and material deterioration models for
asbestos-containing materials and lead-based paint. These methodologies and
models will be instrumental in achieving the research program future aim of
developing a multi-objective life-cycle optimization conceptual framework for
predictive and optimized maintenance of public school environmental health. This
framework would allow for enhanced decision-making in selection of maintenance
and capital outlay alternatives regarding all environmental health aspects of
the public school infrastructure. This research will advance discovery in the
field of civil infrastructure systems through its application to a novel domain,
the nation's public schools, modeling and asset management strategies that have
been successfully applied to other segments of the national infrastructure:
roads, bridges, water supply, waste systems, and airports.