* 0926805
* Collaborative Research: High Resolution Bacterial Mat Sampler for Operation with Deep Submergence Vehicles
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* John Breier, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 09/30/2012
* USD 292,354.00

The PIs request funding to design, develop, test, and deploy a sampler capable
of recovering microbial mat samples from a variety of deep-sea ocean ecosystems
with a spatial sampling resolution on the order of a centimeter or less.
Compared to current deep-sea benthic sampling tools, this instrument has the
potential to collect better samples, and, more significantly, expand the
questions asked by researchers investigating microbial ecosystems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microbial mat ecosystems are critically important for a
wide variety of biogeochemical transformations in an even wider variety of
habitats. These productive microbial communities are highly structured into
layers of activity that respond to the particular geochemical gradients that are
supplying them. In the deep ocean, microbial mats abound around hydrothermal
systems, as well as other sites such as cold methane seeps or organic-rich
environments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
microbial mat sampler is a tool that is greatly needed and will have a positive
impact on every researcher studying microbial mats in the deep-sea. The
collaboration with the Picker Engineering Program at Smith College is innovative
and seems like an excellent way of inspiring young women in the sciences. What a
fantastic idea: to get young college students directly involved in the real
world application/design of scientific equipment. One of the PIs is an early-
career scientist with substantial expertise in the design of deep-sea samplers.
&lt;br/&gt;