* 0926190
* Collaborative Research: Next-Generation Model Checking and Abstract Interpretation With a Focus on Embedded Control and Systems Biology
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* James Glimm, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 08/31/2015
* USD 1,858,340.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of
2009&lt;br/&gt;(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Summary: Formal
Analysis of Complex Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A Collaborative Proposal
Involving CMU, CUNY, NYU, Stony Brook, UMD, Cornell,
JPL&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Expedition, under the directorship of
Lead PI Edmund M. Clarke, will develop new computational tools to help
scientists and engineers analyze and understand the behavior of the complex
models they develop for application domains ranging from systems biology to
embedded control. Building on the success of model checking and abstract
interpretation (MCAI), two well-established methods for automatically verifying
properties of digital circuit designs and embedded software, this research
project will extend the MCAI paradigm to systems with complex continuous
dynamics and probabilistic behaviors. Challenge problems providing technology
drivers and testbeds for the research include: understanding the precursors and
course of pancreatic cancer; predicting the onset of atrial fibrillation; and
obtaining deep design-time insights into the behavior of automotive and
aerospace control systems. Ultimately, this Expedition is expected to provide
vital tools that will enable health-care researchers to discover better
treatments for disease and will allow engineers to build safer aircraft and
other complex systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The world-class team of scientists
and engineers assembled for this Expedition includes two Turing Award winners, a
recipient of the National Medal of Science, and awardees of other prestigious
research prizes. Outreach consists of the development of a new, highly ambitious
and highly cross-discipline educational program called Complex Systems Science
Engineering, an annual Minority-Focused Intersession Workshop for Undergraduates
on Understanding and Analyzing Complex Embedded and Biological Systems to be
hosted at member institution Lehman College, CUNY; substantial financial support
for undergraduate research; student involvement in the NASA JPL Research
Affiliates Program; and other research opportunities for undergraduate and
graduate students and postdoctoral trainees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More
information: http://www.mcai2.org/&lt;br/&gt;