* 0926058
* Std Research: The whys and hows of establishing new model systems in biology and neuroscience
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Jason Robert, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 09/30/2012
* USD 262,457.00

This research project in the philosophy of biology is supported by the Science,
Technology and Society program at NSF and jointly by the SBE and BIO
directorates by way of a Dear Colleague Letter, Impacts of Biology on Society.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A growing body of studies shows clearly that we have to
think much more carefully as a research community about the organisms and models
chosen for study particularly with regards to the purposes informing the choice
and whether those organisms and models really are the right ones for the tasks
at hand. Important decisions must be made about whether and how to expand the
variety of model systems in biology and behavioral science, about how to
prioritize new model systems within specific domains, and about how to justify
such prioritization exercises in biology more generally. The focus of the
research will be on two areas of science in which scientists are actively
attempting to expand the repertoire of model systems: evolutionary developmental
biology (evo-devo) and cognitive neuroscience. This examination will be
primarily philosophical, though deeply embedded in the details of the relevant
science, historically well-grounded, collaborative, and supported by qualitative
data collection, synthesis, and analysis. Historians and philosophers of science
have made significant contributions especially to the history of the
establishment of current experimental models, as well as to the philosophical
criticism of historical and contemporary experimental approaches. But this
foundational scholarship has not provided any prospective analysis of possible
and desirable future trajectories in response to historical analysis and
philosophical criticism. This project seeks to fill this gap in the history and
philosophy of biological and behavioral research with model organisms. In a
context of demands for 'translational research' to provide a clinical or
economic or other return-on-investment for public funding of science, scientists
are increasingly called upon to justify their research not just to each other,
but also publicly, enthusiastically, and, above all, honestly. The proposed
research will begin to equip biologists with new knowledge about the benefits
and limitations of particular research programs and about strategies for
expanding the knowledge-base of biological and behavioral science.