* 0926711
* Will Ocean Acidification Diminish Particle Aggregation and Mineral Scavenging, Thus Weakening the Biological Pump?
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Uta D Passow, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2013
* USD 705,703.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The pH of the ocean is predicted to decrease by 0.2-0.5 pH units in the next 50
to100 years as a result of increasing atmospheric CO2. To date almost all the
research on impending ocean acidification has focused on the impacts to
calcifying organisms and the carbonate system. However, ocean acidification will
also affect other significant marine processes that are pH dependent.

In this project, researchers at the University of California at Santa Barbara
will investigate the impact of ocean acidification on the organic carbon or
'soft tissue' biological pump. They predict that a decline in oceanic pH will
result in an increase in the protonation of negatively charged substances,
especially of Transparent Exopolymer Particles (TEP), the gel-like particles
that provide the matrix of aggregates and bind particles together. A decreased
polarity of these highly surface-active particles may reduce their "stickiness"
resulting in decreased aggregation of organic-rich particles and a decreased
ability of aggregates to scavenge and retain heavy ballast minerals. A reduction
in aggregation will lower the fraction of POC enclosed in fast-sinking
aggregates. Decreased scavenging of minerals by aggregates will result in
reduced sinking velocities and consequently a decline in the fraction of
material escaping degradation in the water column. Both processes ultimately
reduce carbon flux to depth. The resulting weakening of the biological pump will
alter pelagic ecology and potentially produce a positive feed-back pathway that
further increases atmospheric CO2 concentrations.

The research team will experimentally investigate TEP-production, aggregation
rates and aggregate characteristics, mineral scavenging and sinking velocity as
a function of ocean acidification, because these parameters are susceptible to
pH and central in determining sedimentation rate of organic carbon. They will
determine potential changes in the abiotic formation of TEP or in the release
rate of TEP or TEP-precursors by phytoplankton that have been adapted to
increased CO2 regimes for multiple generations, up to 1000 doublings.
Additionally, they will experimentally test potential changes in the aggregation
rate of adapted phytoplankton and natural particles, and measure impacts on
scavenging rates of ballast minerals by aggregates. Effects of various
acidification levels on aggregate characteristics, including size, composition,
density, and sinking velocity will also be determined. These results are
expected to provide parameterization for a predictive model that will be used to
investigate the impact of changing ballasting or aggregation on carbon flux.

Broader impact: Climate and environmental change are a global challenge to
society. We need to know if possible positive feed back mechanisms to the
biological pump will further increase atmospheric CO2 in order to prepare for
and hopefully manage future climate changes. This project will also foster
international collaboration between scientists in the US and Europe and
contribute appreciably to the training of (female) students. Results will be
made available to local K-12 classrooms and to the general public to increase
public awareness of the potential impacts of ocean acidification on marine
ecosystems.