* 0926732
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Did Native Americans Fundamentally Alter Western Forest Structure? A Reconstruction of Vegetation and Fire History from Northwestern California
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Jeffrey Crawford, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 08/31/2011
* USD 12,000.00

Broad disagreement exists regarding the scale and degree of historic Native
American disturbance in the western forests of the United States. There is a
continuum from those who argue for minimal impacts restricted to the immediate
vicinity of permanent villages and camps, to those who argue that Native
American influences, through the use of fire, were widespread and that modern
management practices need to acknowledge this influence when formulating land
use policies. This debate is a central issue in distinguishing the role humans
may have had in influencing forest structure in the western United States.
Differing interpretations from scientists in different disciplines have led to a
lack of multidisciplinary studies directed at answering this important issue.

Doctoral student Jeffery Crawford, under the supervision of Dr. Scott Mensing at
the University of Nevada, Reno will use methods from both paleoecology and
anthropology to examine the record of fire and vegetation change at two low-
elevation lake sites in northwestern California that have a history of Native
American land-use. These lakes were selected because they are near well-
documented sites of long-term Native American habitation and should provide
clear evidence if local populations were manipulating large areas of forest.
This analysis will utilize multiple methods, including pollen and charcoal
analysis, tree-ring analysis, ethnographic studies, and archaeological studies.
Lake sediments collected from each site will be analyzed for pollen and charcoal
in order to provide a high-resolution record of the fire and vegetation dynamics
of each lake basin. A fire history of each basin will be constructed using fire
scar analysis of tree-rings. The fire-scar results will be compared with
charcoal results from lake sediments to calibrate charcoal abundance to a known
fire record in order to reconstruct a long term fire history. Any anomalous
vegetation or fire patterns will then be compared to the regional
climatological, anthropological and archaeological records in order to determine
how Native American migration patterns or technological changes may have
influenced landscape fire and vegetation patterns.

The results of this study will begin to fill the knowledge gap regarding the
intensity and scale of Native American land-use in western forests. The results
will be directly applicable to Northwestern California forests, but will be
broadly applicable to forests throughout the west by explicitly measuring the
impacts of Native Americans on western forests and the extent to which they may
have impacted landscapes beyond the local scale. These results can play a
transformative role in conceptualizing a wider range of conditions that
influenced forests prior to Euro-American settlement and help to guide future
forest management decisions.