* 0926513
* 2009 Interior of the Earth Gordon Research Conference
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2010
* Bruce Buffett, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 03/31/2010
* USD 23,800.00

&lt;br/&gt;We seek funds to partially support the 2009 Gordon Conference on the
Interior of the Earth, which will be held June 14-19 at Mount Holyoke College in
South Hadley, Massachusetts. This meeting is the seventh in a series of highly
successful Gordon Research Conferences that focus on the structure, dynamics and
evolution of the Earth?s interior. NSF funds will be used to attract
participants from a diverse range of institutions, backgrounds and scientific
disciplines. Past meetings have alternated between a ?deep? and ?shallow?
emphasis, loosely defined by the depth of the transition zone. The forthcoming
conference will focus on the deep Earth. A wide range of topics will be
addressed from a multi-disciplinary perspective. Invited speakers from the
fields of geochemistry, geodynamics, mineral physics and seismology will define
the forefront of knowledge and set the stage for a freewheeling discussion and
debate of the most pressing scientific questions. Specific session topics
include the interpretation of seismic tomography, geochemical heterogeneity,
plate tectonics and the radial structure of convection, the core-mantle boundary
region, the structure and dynamics of the core, the early Earth, planetary
interiors and magnetic fields, as well as future trends in scientific computing
and numerical simulations. The conference will also provide the opportunity for
junior scientists and graduate students to present their work in poster format
and exchange ideas with leading researchers. The study of the Earth?s Interior
is not defined by one particular discipline, but requires input from many
branches of the Earth Sciences. The format of the Gordon Research Conference is
particularly important in our field of study for encouraging open exchange of
ideas and fruitful discussion across disciplinary boundaries. The funds
requested here will help to keep our meeting vibrant and to facilitate the
participation of young scientists who add so much to the meeting and who have,
in this unique format, unparalleled opportunities for learning about the
frontiers of our field and for interaction with the established leaders.
&lt;br/&gt;