* 0926093
* Collaborative Research: Heterogeneous Integration of Patterned 3-D Nanotube Supercapacitators on CMOS
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Bingqing Wei, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2013
* USD 182,614.00

This cross-disciplinary research project aims at demonstrating a proof of new
concept on heterogeneous integration of carbon nanotube supercapacitors on
complementary metal-oxide-silicon integrated circuits as reliable on-chip energy
sources. Fundamental studies and key issues on design, fabrication and
heterogeneous integration of patterned carbon nanotube supercapacitors on the
complementary metal-oxide-silicon integrated circuits will be investigated.
Patterned carbon nanotube films will be assembled using a template-guide
enhanced dielectrophoretic technique which is compatible to the traditional
complementary metal-oxide-silicon technology. The fabricated nanotube films will
be utilized to construct supercapacitors, which have multi-directional power
flow capability as on-chip power sources.&lt;br/&gt;The collaborative effort
will result in the development of integrated supercapacitors as independent, on-
chip, power sources. It will provide an immediate transformative solution to
very large scale integrated systems with the significant reduction on size and
cost. It will improve system reliability and run-time and stimulate a large
variety of new applications ranging from implantable devices, remote healthcare
to smart buildings and ubiquitous computing and sensing. A concurrent and
integrated educational program is designed to train students in industry-like
environments and to enhance their problem-solving techniques and team-work
skills. The educational efforts include recruitment and retention of student
researchers in engineering education, enhancement of the engineering curriculum
at the two research institutions (University of Delaware and University of
Arizona), broader education in the society, and outreach to members of
underrepresented groups. Moreover, it emphasizes diversity in engineering
education and will result in tremendous social benefits.&lt;br/&gt;