* 0926964
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Returning the Commons: Resource Access and Environmental Governance in Southern Colorado
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,02/28/2011
* Thomas Perreault, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 02/28/2011
* USD 9,242.00

In 2002 the Colorado Supreme Court reversed decades of precedent in Lobato v.
Taylor by awarding the heirs of original Sangre de Cristo Land Grant settlers
access rights to a roughly 80,000 acre tract of land that had long been private
property and closed to usufructuary rights. This land was formerly the multi-use
commons area of the grant, located in the San Luis Valley of Southern Colorado,
but like the commons of other land grants in Colorado and New Mexico, had been
legally closed off to traditional uses for nearly 150 years. The court created a
new form of resource access by combining private property with the communal
patterns of land ownership and use in Spanish and Mexican land grant traditions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Doctoral student Keith Lindner, under the supervision of
Dr. Thomas Perreault at Syracuse University will investigate the impacts of
returned access to former common land, and the concurrent construction of
locally-based institutions and norms to govern resource access and use. The
project asks two central questions. First, what institutions and norms are being
constructed to govern resource access and use, and what factors are shaping
their emergence? Second, what significance does newly expanded resource access
have for livelihoods, economic practices, and cultural meanings? The
implementation of Lobato raises important questions for geographic literature on
environmental governance, livelihoods, economic strategies, and cultural
meanings among land-dependent communities. By systematically documenting the
institutions and processes of environmental governance in the San Luis Valley,
the project will investigate the role of law and local participation in
environmental management; changing livelihood strategies; migration patterns;
the viability and persistence of subsistence- and communally-oriented activities
in a market economy; and changing cultural meanings and identities. The research
employs multiple methodologies, including in-depth interviews, participant
observation, focus group workshops, and household surveys. Extensive fieldwork
will be conducted in the San Luis Valley, CO, with archival research in Alamosa
and Denver, CO and Santa Fe, NM. This research will produce scientific knowledge
on a new form of resource access and its socio-economic and cultural
implications, addressing important questions on the connections between resource
access, environmental governance, rural livelihoods, and community
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary significance of this research lies in
the documentation and evaluation of a new form of resource access in the San
Luis Valley that attempts to combine private property with usufructuary rights
to common property. This new institutional form is potentially significant for
other underrepresented groups, particularly Native American and Hispano
communities in the U.S. Southwest, who seek land and natural resource rights. A
full documentation and analysis of this form of resource access will benefit and
offer lessons to communities and land managers who aspire to manage lands
according to multiple uses through a combination of private property and
usufructuary rights. Further, the proposed research will benefit policymaking on
local environmental governance arrangements, particularly in situations of
management for multiple uses and in rural communities where desires exist to
exercise subsistence-based usufructuary rights. Documentation and analysis of
the new form of resource access in San Luis will help decision makers evaluate
the extent to which such an institutional form would be useful in other
contexts.