* 0926308
* BRIGE: Capacity allocation for networks of queues
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Antonius Dieker, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 07/31/2012
* USD 175,000.00

The research objective of this BRIGE award is to investigate the trade-off
between service capacity and quality of service within the modeling framework of
queueing networks. Service capacity will be measured by staffing levels, while
quality of service will be measured by expected customer delays. New methodology
will be developed in the context of stochastic processing networks, which will
be combined with numerical optimization techniques. Three application areas will
provide a testbed for the evaluation of the proposed methods: telephone call
centers, health care systems, and workforce management.

If successful, the results of this research will help improve the efficiency of
business processes in some of today's competitive service environments. Since
the staffing levels of service personnel constitute a significant portion of the
costs involved in many large-scale service systems, systematic allocation of
service capacity is particularly relevant in this context. Standard software for
process management and optimization uses simulation techniques to allocate
service capacity, and therefore essentially only computationally expensive
techniques are used in practice. The proposed research agenda identifies and
exploits mathematical models that can be used for allocating service capacity in
combination with simulation methods, which will potentially lead to more
efficient capacity allocation rules for service systems. The research project
will be integrated with a comprehensive plan to attract high school students
from underrepresented groups to careers in engineering. A key aspect of this
plan is the development of a computer program in which students are challenged
to manage queues in an amusement park.