* 0926092
* Collaborative Research: Management and Logistics Operations for the U.S. GEOTRACES Zonal North Atlantic Survey Section
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Gregory Cutter, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2013
* USD 419,334.00

Trace elements are known to play important roles as nutrients in biological
cycling, particularly in regard to enzymatic and catalytic processes in the open
ocean. Isotopes are valuable tracers of these and related processes, and of the
ocean's interaction with the atmosphere and the solid earth, which in turn play
a role in shaping many trace element distributions within the ocean.
Nevertheless, significant gaps exist in both our knowledge of the larger scale
distributions of these TEIs (trace elements and isotopes) in the ocean and in
our understanding of the processes responsible for those distributions. This
shortfall has implications for numerous scientific endeavors that are relevant
to a broad range of intellectual and societal issues, including the carbon cycle
and climate change, as well as the marine food web and direct anthropogenic
impacts on the oceans. Recent advances in sampling and analytical techniques
coupled with a better understanding of the roles of TEIs in ocean biogeochemical
cycles present us with an opportunity to rectify this problem. Moreover, we are
motivated by the prospect of ongoing global change and the need to understand
the present and future workings of the ocean's biogeochemical cycles.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, researchers at the Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and Old
Dominion University will be funded to handle the management and logistics
associated with the first US GEOTRACES zonal section in the North Atlantic as
part of a global survey. With this support they will: 1) organize and mount a 52
day research cruise; 2) manage on-board water sampling, including GO-Flo and
Niskin bottle operational QA/QC (quality assessment and control); 3) 0btain,
store, and ship back to the U.S. trace-metal clean water samples; 4) monitor
trace-metal clean sampling using on-board Zn measurements; 5) acquire, quality
control and manage hydrographic data (including CTD, transmissometer,
fluorometer, oxygen electrode data, discrete sample salinity and dissolved
oxygen measurements, and micromolar and nanomolar inorganic nutrients); 6) QA/QC
shipboard measurements and submit data to the GEOTRACES data repository; 7)
prepare a framework hydrographic report/synthesis for cruise participants and
publication; and 8) coordinate pre- and post-cruise meetings The cruise track
and station locations were designed to highlight key processes and identify the
major features of key TEIs distributions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
It is widely agreed that the ocean biogeochemical research community needs a
global picture of the key and ancillary GEOTRACES properties; the major impact
of this project will be in its service to that community. This service will
enable the development of better ocean biogeochemical models so that we can
assess the likely impact of future climate change and anthropogenic pollution,
and provide a basis for understanding changes observed in past oceans. The
development of a reliable platform and procedures for sampling trace metals and
isotopes will provide the community with a platform for future oceanographic
fieldwork. The development of teams that understand the proper sampling and
measurement techniques, many of whom will be graduate students and postdocs,
will supply the community with a pool of skills necessary to achieve the goals
of the next generation of ocean research programs.