* 0926802
* Freshwater Use by Sea Snakes
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2009,10/31/2013
* Harvey Lillywhite, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Inna Sokolova
* 10/31/2013
* USD 474,996.00

Living in seawater is challenging to marine animals such as sea snakes, which
evolved from terrestrial ancestors and are widely distributed throughout much of
the world's tropical ocean waters. Sea snakes were previously thought to drink
seawater and excrete the excess salts using salt glands. However, recent
research by the PI has shown that three species of "sea kraits" (a type of sea
snake) actually dehydrate in seawater and must drink freshwater in order to
remain in water balance. Marine snakes must acquire freshwater by drinking from
surface lenses that form on the sea during rainfall, or from freshwater springs
or estuaries along coastlines. The objectives of this research are to test
whether 'true sea snakes' also require fresh water for normal water balance.
These are a second lineage containing the majority of sea snake species (50+).
The investigators will measure rates of dehydration in sea water and in air;
observe, describe and document the drinking behaviors of sea snakes; and
correlate the distribution of sea snake abundance with the local availability of
fresh water. The long-range goal is to correlate the known geographic
distribution of sea snakes with historic and current patterns of rainfall in
both time and space, using geospatial analysis. Understanding the water
requirements of sea snakes will improve the understanding of the geographical
distribution of these animals, which is likely to change due to altering
patterns of precipitation related to climate change. These studies may also
assist in the understanding of recent population declines and local extinctions
of sea snakes, which are important top predators on coral reefs. Sea snakes
might be significant harbingers of climate change and could be possible
indicators of the health of coral reefs, which are in serious ecological crisis.
The unexpected water requirements of sea snakes might also have important
implications for understanding water balance in other important marine
vertebrates such as sea turtles. This project will foster international
collaborations and create opportunities for training and exchange of graduate
students between the United States, Costa Rica, and Australia.