* 0926481
* Horizontal convection: the role of turbulence
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Stefan Llewellyn Smith, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2013
* USD 519,857.00

Intellectual Merit: Horizontal convection is the generic designation for the
circulation resulting from differential heating along one horizontal boundary of
a fluid. It is a key feature of the ocean's Meridional Overturning Circulation.
The full problem of the Meridional Overturning Circualtion is complex and
difficult, involving thermal, haline, and mechanical forcing. Understanding the
simpler problem of (single-component) horizontal convection is an important step
in attacking the full problem. Mixing is critically important in producing a
pathway for cold water to be modified and return to the surface. Molecular
processes are far too puny to carry out this role. The role of turbulence in
horizontal convection is hence crucial.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The laboratory and
numerical experiments on horizontal convection will address five
hypotheses:&lt;br/&gt;1. Scaling for the boundary-layer thicknesses of previous
work is correct. 2. Dissipation is highly variable in space. 3. The boundary
between steady and unsteady regimes is a function of aspect ratio,
dimensionality, and rotation. 4. Small-scale variability of the boundary forcing
should shut down large-scale convection. 5. Combined buoyancy and mechanical
forcing changes the regime diagram.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
investigators will engage in educational activities at multiple levels. The
environmental fluid dynamics laboratory, in which the lead investigator works,
has a strong track record in undergraduate mentoring. They will recruit an
undergraduate and will work with UCSD's McNair Program and/or the Summer
Training Academy for Research in the Sciences (STARS) program, both of which
target students are from groups traditionally underrepresented in the sciences.
The research will involve two graduate students. Reaching pre-college students
will contribute to the professional development of high school teachers in the
San Diego Unified School District. In partnership with the NSF-funded Center for
Ocean Science Education Excellence/California they will sponsor a one-day
workshop for approximately 25 Earth sciences teachers. The investigators will
contribute to the Wiki page of the CFD code chosen for this work. These posts
will broadly disseminate key results of NSF-funded work in a venue that is
accessed by the larger CFD community, thus enhancing scientific and
technological understanding. The results of the project have applications in
industry and to environmental sustainability, as well as in related fields of
science, in particular limnology and climate science. The experiments carried
out here are relevant to natural ventilation of buildings. Improved
understanding of the fluid mechanics of natural ventilation, an anticipated
outcome of the project, can inform critical energy conservation efforts that may
ultimately benefit society economically, environmentally and politically.