* 0926841
* 2009 Liquids, Chemistry &amp; Biology of Gordon Research Conference
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2010
* Steve Granick, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
*  Ashok S. Sangani
* 04/30/2010
* USD 15,000.00

0926841&lt;br/&gt;Granick&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal requests partial
funding to support the 2009 Liquids, Chemistry &amp; Physics of Gordon Research
Conference: Today's Problems &amp; Tomorrow's Solutions Challenging Our Needs in
Liquids Research to be held August 2-6, 2009, Holderness School, Holderness, New
Hampshire. Liquids the study of their engineering, chemistry, and physics
affects us all. Controlling their structure and multiphase flow can either
inhibit or enable technological advances from energy dissipation in pipelines,
particle technology, and large engines, to body prostheses, MEMS and
nanotechnological devices. Thus, in the 21st Century, liquid flows will continue
to critically impact all aspects of our quality of life, health, wealth and
livelihood and there are significant challenges to be addressed, many requiring
paradigm shifts in both our approaches and thinking. The biennial Gordon
Research Conference in Liquids is the premier basic research meeting for this
research field and supporting scientists. Coming from all parts of the world,
leading scientists from universities, national labs and industries gather with
young scientists and newcomers to the field for one week of formal and informal
discussions on state of the art issues in this multidisciplinary and multi scale
subject. Today's Problems &amp; Tomorrow's Solutions Challenging Our Needs in
Liquids Research theme is our attempt to explore how underlying science,
including recent advances in our understanding of multiphase flow, physics,
chemistry and characterization tools can help solve the problems posed by
tomorrows applications. Simultaneously we wish to examine the converse problem:
how the perceived demands of tomorrow's innovative devices and applications can
reveal the blanks in our current understandings and research capabilities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit is that the speakers and discussion
leaders chosen for the 2009 GRC Conference on Liquids are amongst the most
eminent scholars and researchers in the world. Besides bringing many of the
established intellectual leaders of the subject together to brainstorm the
future, there is also a very strong commitment to fully involve practicing
engineers and young scientists from a range of related disciplines so that they
may not only learn of the latest research tools but also contribute to the
paradigm changes in approach which are necessary for underpinning and enabling
the future. The conference this year will emphasize the freshest topics from the
viewpoints of theory, experiment, and computer simulation. This conference aims
to cross-fertilize between different communities and to resist their
balkanization. An important aspect of the conference in 2009, as distinct from
past years, is the heavy representation by speakers and attendees in the field
of multiphase flow. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact is to support both
travel/registration support for students and young researchers who will markedly
benefit from the networking experience which the Gordon Conferences provide but
who could not otherwise be able to attend because of funding restrictions. On
the final day we will have a session in which the best posters are presented
orally. We will recognize the most outstanding posters, especially those
presented by graduate students and postdocs. Among the speakers and discussion
leaders, this conference has excellent representation from women. Applications
for support will be open to all interested individuals, but if this conference
becomes over subscribed, we will impose priorities in selecting attendees and
special consideration will be given to students and postdocs who are female, and
also under-represented ethnic minority or disabled individuals.