* 0926020
* Influence of Lightning, Wind, Trees, and Squirrels on Reliability of Power Distribution Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Anil Pahwa, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 08/31/2013
* USD 289,747.00

The objectives of this research pertain to modeling the effects of various
environmental factors on reliability of distribution feeders to identify parts
of the system with high probability of failures and to provide comparative
analysis of actual performance with expected performance. These models will
include representation of the effects of lightning, wind, trees, and squirrels
on outages in distribution feeders. Methodologies will be investigated to
compare observed performance of the systems with expected performance based on
selected models for performance benchmarking. The Westar Energy distribution
system will serve as a test bed to validate the models and methodologies. Based
on the research educational modules will be developed for inclusion in three
courses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits of the proposal are: 1)
innovative methodologies are presented for determining the effects of
environmental factors on power distribution systems, 2) it is based on synthesis
of two different disciplines within electrical and computer engineering to
address an important problem, 3) it advances the frontier of knowledge in the
field of reliability evaluation, 4) it proposes to tackle a real-life problem
with significant relevance to society with collaboration of industry, 5) the
proposed methodology can be applied to other components of distribution systems
as well as other engineering systems, and 6) a well organized plan of activities
is proposed for the project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the
proposal are: 1) participation of students from underrepresented groups, 2)
education and research training of all the participating students, 4)
enhancement of the research infrastructure through collaboration between
university and industry, 5) dissemination of the results through professional
journals and also web sites to reach broader audience, 6) integration of the
research results into courses, 7) advancement of the state of the knowledge in
distribution reliability analysis, and 8) higher levels of reliability of
electricity supply for the customers, which will increase productivity and
satisfaction. &lt;br/&gt;