* 0926849
* CORK  Optical Telemetry System
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Norman Farr, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2014
* USD 723,372.00

The PIs request funding to build, test and deploy an optical telemetry system
(OTS) designed for an instrumented seafloor borehole observatory. A series of
boreholes drilled on the flanks of the Juan de Fuca ridge in the northeast
Pacific have been instrumented as part of the ODP CORK program and are visited
on a regular basis for downloading data and for collecting physical samples of
subsurface fluids. This installed infrastructure provides a unique opportunity
for installing and testing an optical communications node in relatively
controlled conditions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CORK borehole monitoring reveals a
very broadband signal from tidal loading and ocean waves to teleseismic
activity. Present data rates are limited by several factors but communication
rate is the most constraining. Greater sample rates are required to properly
sample high frequency signals that include tsunamis and other oceanographic
phenomena. Highspeed underwater optical communications will remove this bottle-
neck and allow seafloor instruments to collect data at scientifically relevant
data rates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed CORK-OTS would simply plug into
the existing underwater connectors on the CORK and would provide additional
capability such as data storage and the ability for rapid data retrieval either
by periodic visits by a submersible or perhaps more importantly in a remote-mode
by using an optical receiver lowered by a cable from the sea surface.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work is
an enabling technology that will enhance the infrastructure for research and
education in all fields of oceanography. The PIs plan to establish new
collaborations with an international partner in Canada, the Pacific Geoscience
Center, and with academic colleagues at other universities. In addition, the
CORK-OTS may be deployed at other International Ocean Drilling Program sites
around the globe. The publication of the results of the proposed work in
journals and conferences will enhance science education and technology. The PIs
also plan to integrate the proposed research work in their educational
activities, which include the hiring of high school students and college
undergraduates during the summer periods in their laboratory. The development of
the underwater OTS may offer opportunities for commercialization of the
technology by government and industry for such use as environmental monitoring
and other potential applications.&lt;br/&gt;