* 0926776
* Nonlinear Acoustic Meta-Materials for Wave Propagation Management and Control
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Massimo Ruzzene, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 07/31/2013
* USD 401,795.00

The research explores nonlinear phononic behavior in periodic meta-materials,
with the intent of enabling the development of low-power wave-based devices with
novel functionality, enhanced performance, and adaptive tunability. Phononic
meta-materials with periodic microstructures exhibit extraordinary wave
properties such as band-gaps, response directionality, left-handedness, and
negative acoustic refraction, all of which can be employed for the design of
acoustic devices operating over a broad range of frequencies and length scales.
As devices miniaturize, nonlinear behavior becomes the norm and not the
exception, as witnessed in part by the complex potentials used to describe
small-scale interactions. This research investigates the effects of
nonlinearities on dispersion characteristics, band-gaps, and directionality and
specifically explores nonlinearities as means to achieve novel functionalities
that enrich the design space of periodic media. Stiffening and softening
effects, normal versus shear modes of response, amplitude-dependent dispersion,
and the presence of super- and sub-harmonics may in fact positively affect the
wave guiding characteristics of a given medium and may be exploited to achieve
tunability of the wave properties. Analytical and computational techniques will
be formulated to investigate the nature of nonlinearities in nonlinear phononic
systems, and to predict their wave mechanics effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
developed tools will enable the design of tunable pass-band filters with
controllable bandwidth and of acoustic meta-materials capable of directing and
focusing the acoustic energy towards specific directions. The application of
these concepts to filters, waveguides, logic ports, and ultrasonic transducer
arrays which perform a variety of acoustics-based signal processing functions is
very attractive particularly at frequencies where electronics suffer from severe
power limitations. The project is expected to significantly advance knowledge
and understanding in the general area of nonlinear meta-material wave mechanics,
which will be important for the development of high-frequency, tunable devices
for use in communication systems (mobile phones, GPS units, etc.), noise
isolation, energy-directing materials, tunable ultrasound for medical devices,
tunable acoustic microphones and receivers, and acoustic beamformers.
&lt;br/&gt;