* 0926505
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  The Role of Gender In Evaluations of Scientific Competence
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2010
* Erin Leahey, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2010
* USD 9,252.00

SES-0926505&lt;br/&gt;Erin Leahey&lt;br/&gt;Laura Hunter&lt;br/&gt;University of
Arizona&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Why, despite remarkable gains in many fields, are
women still noticeably underrepresented in scientific fields? Biased assessments
of competence may be partly responsible. This dissertation research will test
whether gender affects evaluations of scientific competence, by both self and
others. Just as women's capabilities are underestimated in other realms, they
may also be underestimated in science, thereby promoting the use of double
standards when evaluating men's and women's competence. To test this hypothesis,
the co-PI will design and execute two experiments. Both experiments will
investigate processes in three natural science fields -- biology, chemistry, and
physics -- because these fields differ in ways likely relevant to assessments of
competence, such as required skills and degree of gender integration. Thus, the
results will be applicable to multiple scientific fields. The first, laboratory-
based experiment will assess bias in self-assessments, and will rely on college
students (as potential scientists) for subjects. The second, survey-based
experiment will assess bias in the assessments of others, and will rely on
working scientists as respondents. Participating scientists will evaluate the
curricula vitae and a research proposal of a hypothetical junior scientist
(randomly assigned to be either male or female) and indicate whether they would
recommend the hypothetical scientist for hire. Both experiments will rely on
status characteristic theory and will test recently proposed extensions of the
theory's scope. Together, the experiments will allow the researcher to speak to
the relevance of gender in both self-assessments and assessments by others. As
such, it will be a particularly strong test of the role of biased assessments in
producing and perpetuating gender inequality in science. By testing a
potentially important mechanism "biased assessments" the proposed research will
advance our understanding of why women and men pursue, persist, and succeed in
science to different degrees. Furthermore, the tightly controlled nature of the
experimental design will permit a disentangling of competence assessments from
other potential mechanisms, such as attitudes toward science and individual
preferences, thereby allowing the researcher to adjudicate between competing
explanations. A primary goal of this research is to contribute to the
development of a more coherent framework for understanding the mechanisms that
produce gender inequality in science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research also has potentially broad policy and
educational implications. If the research finds that the same research proposal
is evaluated more favorably when it is assumed to be written by a man, the
procedures for reviewing grant and fellowship proposals (and even non-blinded
manuscripts) should perhaps be revised. If familiarizing female students with a
renowned female scientist increases their assessment of their own scientific
ability, the accomplishments of female scientists should perhaps be highlighted
in science education. Both of these efforts may ultimately help limit biased
evaluations in science.