* 0926887
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Profit and Philanthropy in Fair Trade and Socially Responsible Investment Organizations
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Curtis Child, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2011
* USD 9,993.00

&lt;br/&gt;SES-0926887&lt;br/&gt;Timothy Bartley&lt;br/&gt;Curtis
Child&lt;br/&gt;Indiana University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent decades,
organizations that actively pursue both profit-generating and socially
beneficial goals have grown in popularity. Often referred to as social
enterprises, they are micro-lending institutions, fair trade organizations,
socially responsible investment firms, nonprofit ventures, and social purpose
businesses. They work to simultaneously create social and economic value in a
direct, explicit way. The investigators will use the case of social enterprise
to examine what happens when historically incongruous logics, such as capitalism
and philanthropy, interact within organizations. The research investigates,
empirically, the challenges inherent to the practice of social enterprise and,
theoretically, how social enterprise might inform the scholarship on
institutional logics. To focus the analysis, the study asks two sets of
questions: (1) How do individuals and organizations address the challenge of
reconciling competing logics? (2) Why are some organizations able to tightly
couple incongruous institutional logics while others struggle to do so? To
investigate these questions, the co-investigator will complete 60 in-depth,
semi-structured interviews with members of 40 organizations: socially
responsible mutual funds and fair trade organizations (as well as a subset of
their more conventional counterparts) in the Bay Area, New York City, and
Boston. Social enterprise offers a theoretically rich site to investigate
institutional logics because it provides a difficult test case for their
reconciliation. While scholars agree that logics are multiple and overlapping,
research in economic, cultural, and organizational sociology provides
fundamentally inconsistent visions of their companionability. The study of
social enterprise will therefore provide an opportunity to speak to these
important theoretical matters in an empirically grounded way. Besides its
theoretical appeal to sociologists, this research promises to be of great
interest to policy makers, practitioners, and consumers who want to better
understand fair trade and social investing, as well as social enterprise
generally&lt;br/&gt;