* 0926166
* Collaborative Research:  Next-Generation Model Checking and Abstract Interpretation with a Focus on Embedded Control and Systems Biology
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,02/28/2015
* Bhubaneswar Mishra, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 02/28/2015
* USD 1,848,082.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

Summary: Formal Analysis of Complex Systems

A Collaborative Proposal Involving CMU, CUNY, NYU, Stony Brook, UMD, Cornell,
JPL

This Expedition, under the directorship of Lead PI Edmund M. Clarke, will
develop new computational tools to help scientists and engineers analyze and
understand the behavior of the complex models they develop for application
domains ranging from systems biology to embedded control. Building on the
success of model checking and abstract interpretation (MCAI), two well-
established methods for automatically verifying properties of digital circuit
designs and embedded software, this research project will extend the MCAI
paradigm to systems with complex continuous dynamics and probabilistic
behaviors. Challenge problems providing technology drivers and testbeds for the
research include: understanding the precursors and course of pancreatic cancer;
predicting the onset of atrial fibrillation; and obtaining deep design-time
insights into the behavior of automotive and aerospace control systems.
Ultimately, this Expedition is expected to provide vital tools that will enable
health-care researchers to discover better treatments for disease and will allow
engineers to build safer aircraft and other complex systems.

The world-class team of scientists and engineers assembled for this Expedition
includes two Turing Award winners, a recipient of the National Medal of Science,
and awardees of other prestigious research prizes. Outreach consists of the
development of a new, highly ambitious and highly cross-discipline educational
program called Complex Systems Science Engineering, an annual Minority-Focused
Intersession Workshop for Undergraduates on Understanding and Analyzing Complex
Embedded and Biological Systems to be hosted at member institution Lehman
College, CUNY; substantial financial support for undergraduate research; student
involvement in the NASA JPL Research Affiliates Program; and other research
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students and postdoctoral trainees.

More information: http://www.mcai2.org/