* 0926813
* Design of Transforming Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Huseyin Sehitoglu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 07/31/2013
* USD 280,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of
2009&lt;br/&gt;(Public Law 111-5). The research objective of this award is to
develop a science-based design methodology that can be extended to create
materials undergoing stress-induced phase transformation with superior
properties. The work proposes to advance knowledge in design of new transforming
materials that potentially exhibit extraordinary shape memory and fatigue
properties, and tailored hysteresis with potential applications in transducers,
actuators, and sensors. The proposed novel experiments and advanced DIC (digital
image correlation) techniques at macro- and micro- scales will simultaneously
utilize multiple lenses with high resolution capabilities to establish precisely
the onset of phase nucleation and growth, and local strains. The proposed
experiments are necessary to guide theoretical treatments.
The&lt;br/&gt;experiments will provide a critical check on theory, which
considers forward and reverse energy paths, and the stress hysteresis is
predicted based on the underlying energetics. The work will develop further
understanding of mechanical response of emerging, next generation shape memory
materials with Ni, Fe, Mn and Ga constituents. This methodology paves the way
for designing materials with transformation reversibility tailored for specific
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Overall, the work will lay the foundation for
a better understanding of the mechanical response leading to the development of
new shape memory alloys. At the same time, in the case of iron- based alloys,
the transformation during processing and in-service controls the mechanical
response; predictive models are essential but missing. The educational impacts
include the introduction of a course in the engineering curriculum that
specifically links the theory and experiment addressing the issues associated
with phase transformations. The plan is to incorporate the results of our
research in a short course that is offered biannually in the areas of cyclic
deformation and fatigue.