* 0926632
* BRIGE: Minority Education and Research in Biomedical Microdevices - An Optically Controlled Cell Culturing and Harvesting Platform
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Aaron Ohta, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 07/31/2012
* USD 174,635.00

BRIGE: Minority Education and Research in Biomedical Microdevices - An Optically
Controlled Cell Culturing and Harvesting Platform

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

Some of the major obstacles preventing the successful creation of stem cell
therapies include accurately and reproducibly controlling the differentiation of
stem cells, and creating a sufficient amount of cells for therapeutic
procedures. These obstacles can be overcome by carefully controlling the growth
conditions of stem cells, but current cell culture techniques do not provide
enough accuracy and reproducibility. Furthermore, limitations in current cell
culture protocols hamper fundamental cellular studies, such as the interaction
between cells and how it affects cellular growth and replication. Increased
control over cells in culture has the power to unlock the potential of cell-
based therapies, increase fundamental knowledge of cellular processes, and
enable studies of individual cell behavior in response to stimuli, such as in
drug screening.

The intellectual merit of the proposed research is the design and fabrication of
an optically controlled cell culturing and harvesting platform that will enable
the controlled culture of specific single cells with an unprecedented degree of
accuracy. The optically controlled cell culturing platform can be used to
isolate specific cells of interest for further culturing, harvest specific cells
from a larger culture population, or position cells in specific patterns and
locations for controlled cell culturing. These functionalities will enable the
improvement of stem cell treatments by enriching the desired cells in culture.
In addition, many other types of cell cultures will benefit from the enrichment
capability of the optically controlled cell culturing platform. Furthermore, the
platform will enable more detailed fundamental research into cell-cell
interactions between homogeneous and heterogeneous populations of cells.

The broader impacts of the proposed research will enable biologists to study
cells in culture with an unparalleled degree of control. This has the potential
to further the understanding of cellular processes. Furthermore, more accurate
cell culture conditions have the potential to overcome major obstacles in stem
cell research, enabling the use of stem cells in therapeutic applications for
diseases and conditions such as Alzheimer?s disease, heart disease, type I
diabetes, stroke, and spinal cord injuries. To perform the proposed research,
graduate and undergraduate students from underrepresented groups will be
recruited from the successful Native Hawaiian Science & Engineering Mentorship
Program and the student chapters of the Society of Women Engineers and IEEE
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society at the University of Hawaii. The
proposed research will give the Native Hawaiian and female students an
opportunity to work on a cutting-edge research project in biomedical
microdevices, creating a graduate-level education and research program that will
train a future generation of role models for underrepresented minority groups.
Outreach to K-12 students and the community will foster interest in biomedical
microdevice research at the University of Hawaii at Manoa.