* 0926909
* BRIGE - The role of vaporized perfluorocarbon nanoemulsions in enhanced ultrasound-induced lesion formation for cancer therapy
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Tyrone Porter, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Ted A. Conway
* 08/31/2011
* USD 174,783.00

0926909 Porter

Intellectual Merit Focused ultrasound (FUS) is a noninvasive medical procedure
for the treatment of localized solid tumors. FUS can heat tissue rapidly, which
leads to coagulative necrosis. The volume of coagulated tissue is known as a
lesion, and FUS therapy can destroy solid tumors with millimeter precision.
However, the treatment of most clinically relevant solid tumors requires
placement of multiple lesions, which can take hours instead of minutes to
achieve. It is well documented that bubbles accelerate FUS-mediated lesion
formation and increase the lesion volume. As a result, the time and acoustic
energy required for effective treatment of solid tumors can be significantly
reduced. One challenge to using bubbles is that uncontrolled bubble formation
and activity can lead to unpredictable heating and lesion formation. We have
developed a phase-shift nanoemulsion (PSNE)to nucleate bubbles with a high
degree of spatial and temporal control. The rate of lesion formation as well as
the lesion volume depends upon the size and density of the bubble field. By
understanding the relationship between the PSNE concentration, applied acoustic
pressure, activity of the bubble field, and lesion formation, we can design a
system to more efficiently treat cancer with focused ultrasound.

The objectives of the proposed research are to 1) elucidate the relationship
between PSNE density, acoustic pressure, and the evolution of bubble clouds, and
2) investigate the relationship between the size and activity of the cavitation
field and the spatial evolution of lesions. In vitro studies will be performed
with polyacrylamide gels mixed with albumin and populated with PSNE. The gels
are optically transparent, thus allowing for observation and measurement of the
spatial evolution of bubble fields and lesions. Optic and acoustic techniques
will be used to monitor for PSNE vaporization in polyacrylamide gel phantoms and
measure the size of the resultant bubble field. Experimental results will be
compared with predictions of lesion formation provided by theoretical models of
bubble-enhanced heating in viscous Newtonian media. The knowledge gained from
the proposed research will improve our understanding of the manner in which
cavitating bubbles redistribute acoustic energy and enhance heat deposition
during ultrasound hyperthermia.

Broader Impacts A graduate course on the fundamental principles and applications
of medical acoustics will be developed. The course will cover acoustic wave
propagation and absorption in viscoelastic media, and bioeffects associated with
acoustic cavitation, including enhanced heat deposition in tissue and
permeabilization of cell membranes for drug and gene delivery. One graduate
student will receive training on the synthesis of nanoemulsions and acoustic
techniques and numerical methods for investigating the role of cavitating
bubbles in ultrasound-mediated hyperthermia. Additionally, research
opportunities will be made available for underrepresented minority undergraduate
students during the summer months. Finally, outreach efforts will be made to
expose underrepresented minority students from local high schools to fundamental
acoustics, energy conversion, phase transitions, and basic engineering design.
This will be achieved in two stages: (1) lectures and hands-on demonstrations
will be developed to describe basic acoustics and optics, and (2) students will
construct and test the acoustic properties of a custom-designed ultrasound
contrast agent.