* 0926704
* Development of Scanning Photothermal Microscope for Nanoscale Sub-surface Structural Defect Characterization
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Xinwei Wang, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary M. Toney
* 08/31/2013
* USD 268,844.00

The objectives of this project are to conduct research on break-through sub-
surface structural defect characterization based on laser-coupled scanning probe
photothermal concept to achieve depth profiling with nanoscale spatial
resolution. The proposed sub-surface characterization features nanoscale spatial
resolution using frequency-modulated near-field laser focusing and thermal
expansion sensing. Research will be carried out to study the physical phenomena
in sub-surface characterization, including near-field laser focusing, nanoscale
heating, thermal transport, and elastic surface displacement. A physical model
will be developed for dynamic surface displacement under periodical nanoscale
laser heating.

Upon accomplishment, the proposed research will open a new compelling way for
sub-surface structural defect characterization with nanoscale spatial resolution
while most of the existing scanning probe technologies are for characterizing
surface properties. The surface displacement sensing in the proposed
characterization takes advantage of the atomic force acoustic mechanism and
features fast response. By varying the modulation frequency of the laser beam
incident on the scanning probe tip, we will be able to vary the characterization
length and diagnose sub-surface defect of different depth. Furthermore,
deliverables will include a comprehensive physical model to interpret the
characterization data to obtain quantitative information about the size and
depth of structural defect. The strong capability of the proposed sub-surface
characterization will make it have broad applications in structural diagnostics
of nanostructured materials and evaluation of sub-surface structure in nanoscale
material processing. Results of the proposed research will be disseminated
through broad publications. Furthermore, the research results will be integrated
into new course development and conventional class teaching at Iowa State
University. Extensive undergraduate participation via summer research will be
arranged. Outreach services to K-12 students will be facilitated through the
ESPP program of Iowa State University.