* 0926349
* Preparing Cities for Climate Change: An International Comparative Assessment of Urban Adaptation Planning
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* JoAnn Carmin, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 08/31/2012
* USD 238,524.00

The research objective of this project is to conduct an international
comparative assessment of urban adaptation planning. Cities throughout the world
are experiencing chronic problems and extreme events that are being attributed
climate change. Although there is a critical need for cities to protect their
built, natural, and human environments, there is notable variability in the
approaches they are taking. At one extreme, some cities are developing dedicated
and integrated climate adaptation plans. At the other extreme are cities that
have not established any plans or initiated any adaptation measures whatsoever.
Drawing on theories of diffusion and capacity, and case study and survey
methodologies, this comparative international research examines: (1) the types
of plans for climate adaptation being adopted in cities; (2) factors associated
with differences in the approaches urban municipalities are taking toward
climate adaptation planning; and (3) the ways that the efforts of
nongovernmental and community-based organizations complement, circumvent, and
replace government adaptation initiatives. The results from this inquiry will
expand our understanding of the forces and factors shaping decisions related to
urban climate action. They also will deepen our knowledge of how civil society
actors affect the capacity local governments. Disaster risk reduction is a
critical component of climate adaptation planning. Therefore, as a consequence
of studying adaptation, this research will enhance our understanding of the
social and political dimensions of planning for natural disasters. To ensure
that the policy-relevant results reach decision-makers in cities, the findings
will be summarized in a report and disseminated to members of climate and local
government networks. The research findings also will form the basis for case
studies that can be used in graduate-level courses and will contribute to the
development of a web tool designed to assist cities in their adaptation
initiatives. In addition to generating policy and educational materials,
graduate students will have opportunities to gain experience conducting research
in international settings.