* 0926451
* IRES:  Sustainable development of water and sanitation systems in rural Honduras
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Sharon Jones, Lafayette College
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 08/31/2013
* USD 149,775.00

This International Research Experiences for Students (IRES) project, funded
under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5),
provides an intensive summer experience for US undergraduate engineering
students to develop improved methods to assess the sustainability of rural water
and sanitation systems. This project involves active collaboration between
Lafayette College and the international staff of Water for People (WFP), located
in San Pedro Sula, Honduras. The student research projects include data
collection of sustainability indicators, comparison of the data sources and
measurement techniques, and development of sustainable solutions to difficult
water and sanitation problems. This project also includes an assessment of
several direct student-learning outcomes.

In Honduras, the Lafayette students will be joined by two civil engineering
students from the National Autonomous University of Honduras (Sula Valley
Region) (UNAH-VS). The four-week immersion will be supervised and mentored by
Diana Betancourt of the WFP Central America Regional office in Honduras, along
with Honduran engineers with extensive rural infrastructure experience. The
Lafayette College students will return to the Lafayette campus for a final four
weeks of reflection, data processing, data analysis, and preparation of
presentations for external groups. The work will be completed jointly with the
UNAH-VS students via weekly videoconference meetings. The project will actively
recruit minority students (from Lafayette?s POSSE Scholars Program for urban
students, and the Minority Scientists and Engineers Student Chapter) for the
cohort groups. Outreach activities will also target a pre-engineering program at
a high school with a sizable, diverse population.