* 0926171
* Acquisition of a Carbon Analyzer System to Support Research in Sedimentary Geology
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Tracy Frank, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Thomas J. Boyd
* 08/31/2010
* USD 31,036.00

0926171 Frank

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)." This award will contribute to purchasing a coulometric
inorganic carbon analyzer. The analyzer will be used to measure total carbon
(TC), total organic carbon (TOC) and total inorganic carbon (TIC). The
instrument will be employed in paloclimatology and paleoenvironmental science
using samples from terrestrial, marine and lacustrine systems. The early career
PI has considerable experience with the requested instrumentation and will
oversee purchase, set-up, maintenance and operation. The Department of
Geosciences will provide 15% matching funds, and will support all infrastructure
costs and long-term repair costs post-warranty. The PI will train new users and
establish a nominal per sample fee to cover expendables and supplies. The PI
will use the new instrumentation in understanding the biogeochemistry of the
late Paleozoic ice age by analyzing the extent and duration of ice sheet events
and the end-Permian biotic crisis. Additionally, carbon measurements will
support the Antarctic Geologic Drilling Program. The PI will investigate the
diagenic processes recorded in ice cores by extracting and analyzing pore-
waters. Sediment samples have also been taken for analysis. Diagenesis will also
be assessed in carbonate mounds by analyzing carbon speciation. Aragonite
removal (or preservation) will be determined as a proxy for environmental
conditions. Similarly, conditions by which aragonite skeletal remains are
preserved will also assessed by analyzing cores from other locations. The
instrumentation will provide a unique regional resource for the PI and other
collaborative researchers. Results will be widely disseminated through the
literature and at meetings. Student researchers will be trained and given access
to the instrumentation. Class projects will also be supported.

***