* 0926197
* Lead and Lead Isotope Sample Collection and Analysis for the U.S. GEOTRACES Zonal North Atlantic Survey Section
* NONE,NONE
* 12/01/2009,11/30/2012
* Edward Boyle, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 11/30/2012
* USD 623,139.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The international GEOTRACES program has been developed to produce a global
framework of key trace elements and isotopes that will describe the contemporary
distributions of these properties in the ocean. This information can then be
used to constrain models of the processes and fluxes of biogeochemically
important elements and key tracers that frame flux processes and
transformations. A scientist from Massachusetts Institute of Technology will
collect samples during the GEOTRACES North Atlantic cruise in 2010 and analyze
them for lead (Pb) and Pb isotopes. Samples will be taken from sites that
exhibit the physical and biogeochemical processes that influence trace metals
and their isotopes (i.e., strong meridional advection, boundary scavenging and
sources, aeolian deposition, input of intermediate waters from the Mediterranean
and Labrador Seas, and evidence of anthropogenic impacts). Amongst the questions
the scientist will address with the dataset to be generated are the following:
(1) have profiles of Pb and Pb isotopes in the ocean evolved in the western and
eastern subtropical Atlantic since 1999; (2) is their distribution consistent
with advective transport or with exchange on sinking particle; (3) are Pb or Pb
isotope signals from hydrothermal vents transported a significant distance
beyond the source?; and (4) how do upper and lower North Atlantic Deep Water
differ in their Pb and Pb isotopic composition, and how are these differences
expressed laterally over the western boundary? In addition, because Pb behaves
similarly to other trace metals as regards atmospheric deposition, biological
uptake, and abiotic scavenging, results from this study will be applicable to
other elements. As regards broader impacts, this work will aid in creating more
accurate biogeochemical models allowing scientists to access the impact of
future climate change and anthropogenic pollution. One graduate student would be
trained and supported as part of this project.