* 0926213
* US GEOTRACES N. Atlantic: Measuring the &amp;#948;13C-DIC distribution and quantifying the impact of organic matter export on &amp;#948;13C, nutrients and biologically active trace
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Paul Quay, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 09/30/2012
* USD 385,118.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, researchers at the
University of Washington will address two of the overriding goals of the
GEOTRACES program: advancing our understanding of the processes that control
trace element distributions in the ocean, and understanding the processes that
control the concentrations of geochemical species used for proxies of the past
ocean environment. The overall goal is to improve our ability to use trace
element and del13C proxies as indicators of past changes in ocean circulation
and carbon cycling. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research has three components: (1)
to measure the 13C/12C of the dissolved inorganic carbon (DIC) during the
GEOTRACES cruise in the North Atlantic Ocean; (2) to estimate the rate of
organic matter (OM) export from the surface layer; and (3) to quantify the
impact that air-sea CO2 gas exchange, OM export, remineralization and
circulation have on the modern distributions of bioactive trace elements, del
13C-DIC and nutrients in the Atlantic Ocean. Del13C-DIC will be measured at all
stations for a total of ca. 600 samples with particular emphasis on improving
the sampling coverage in intermediate waters and deep sea. Additionally, the
team will measure the dissolved O2/Ar gas ratio in the surface layer using
discrete and underway measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The rates of OM export
will be determined using two approaches. The first method relies on the air-sea
disequilibrium of the ä13C-DIC; the second method relies on the air-sea
disequilibrium of the dissolved oxygen gas. Air-sea gas exchange rates will be
estimated from satellite-based wind speeds. The goal of this part of the project
is to improve our understanding of the impact of OM export on bioactive trace
elements. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. This project is part of an
international scientific program (GEOTRACES) and, thus, the data and research
results will be broadly distributed to the international oceanographic
community. Additionally, the results will be incorporated into the principal
investigator's teaching curricula, specifically in an undergraduate course
entitled Climatic Extremes and graduate course entitled Isotope Biogeochemistry.
Third, there will be active undergraduate participation in preparing samples for
del13C-DIC analyses during this project. Lastly, there are clear societal
benefits from the GEOTRACES program goals that will improve predictions of
future climate change under increasing atmospheric CO2 levels.