* 0926379
* Collaborative Research:  Nonparametric Bayesian Modeling of Reliability of Nanoelectronics
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Yue Kuo, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Edwin Romeijn
* 08/31/2013
* USD 206,229.00

This grant provides funding for the investigation of reliability in
nanoelectronics. Nanoelectronics is a driving force for strong economic growth
in the United States. Reliability is recognized as one of the most critical
factors in determining the success of nano fabrication and manufacturing. This
collaborative project will be led by a nano device engineer and a reliability
specialist. The objective of this interdisciplinary research is to investigate
effective and practical nonparametric Bayesian methods to assess the reliability
of nanoelectronic products during the early design and development stages.
Specially, the proposed research tasks consist of two closely-related
components: (i) an analytical study to develop practical nonparametric Bayesian
methods for estimating important reliability measures of nanoelectronic devices,
and (ii) an experimental study to validate the models by fabricating and
characterizing newly developed nonvolatile memories based on nanocrystals
embedded high-k thin films. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Upon the successful completion
of this project, new methods and tools that are critical to design and
manufacture reliable nanoelectronic products will be developed. This will be the
first systematic study in modeling and predicting reliability of nano products
based on experimental data and nonparametric Bayesian methods which offer great
flexibility and capability to address challenges in real products influencing
yield and cost. The result will enable manufacturers to assess reliability of
new nano products and involved costs in the early design and development stages,
which would expedite products to the market. Furthermore, the new nonvolatile
memory devices have practical applications in future generation integrated
circuits (ICs) and data storage. This multidisciplinary research project will
provides students with both theoretical and experimental education in
reliability, semiconductor devices, thin film materials, and high-tech
fabrication processes. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;