* 0926407
* Deep ocean mixing and circulation in subpolar seas
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Peter Rhines, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 07/31/2012
* USD 514,084.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This project is an experimental investigation of oceanic circulation and mixing,
particularly focused on the deep ocean at high latitude. Using several new
technologies recently developed in the Geophysical Fluid Dynamics (GFD)
laboratory at University of Washington the Principal Investigator propose to
study the stratified, rotating circulations of the high latitude oceans,
particularly aiming at mixing effects, topographic effects and the communication
of dense overflow circulations with the surrounding ocean. This work will access
a unique data-set from a related NSF-funded field program in the Labrador-
Greenland-Iceland-Norway sector of the sub-polar Atlantic Ocean. The predicted
decline of the global oceanic overturning circulation, in climate model
scenarios, is sensitive to parameterized physics of high-latitude circulation
and mixing. The sinking of dense plumes occurs with complex topographic ridges,
passages, and basins which are extremely difficult to model numerically. As
dense water spills from the Faroe-Bank Channel into the Atlantic for example,
intense mixing, entrainment and variability have been recently observed. Over a
space of 100 km the water mass is diluted and its place in the global general
circulation is greatly altered. Specific experiments, motivated by these
observations, will be conducted:

(i) pathways and instability of deep, dense boundary currents in topographically
complex basins; (ii) mixing and entrainment in deep currents, together with two
speculative experiments: (iii) circulation and mixing at the polar front (iv)
interaction of internal waves with velocity and density fronts.

Intellectual Merit: Research in climate dominantly involves by observations and
numerical models. Laboratory experiments in this area are rare, yet we believe
there are many reasons for experimenting with real fluids: both in the micro-
physics embedded in climate models (like phase change and its effect on
dynamics, and turbulent mixing), and in simulation of complex three-dimensional
circulations of rotating stratified fluids with complex topography. Beyond
climate research, this work on basic potential vorticity dynamics helps in
understanding circulations of the atmosphere, and the atmospheres of other
planets.

Broader impacts: Understanding the ocean climate system is of importance to the
larger problem of global warming and its predicted effect in slowing the global
ocean circulation. The laboratory has been a source of inspiration for students
in our field, for young undergraduates studying the global environment and,
through open lectures, to the general public. The University of Washington GFD
laboratory is constantly in use as a teaching tool, and is regularly a site of
filming science segments for television productions. The project involves
several international collaborations: (a) with Professor Afanasyev of Memorial
Univ., Newfoundland, Canada on the application of 'optical altimetry' and
optical thickness techniques in mapping barotropic and baroclinic circulations
in the proposed experiments; (b, with GFD l experiments on downslope flows (Dr.
E. Darelius of Univ. Bergen, Norway), dense plumes in valleys like the Faroe
Bank Channel, and (c) with GFD laboratory experiments of Dr. O-A. Nøst of
Tromsø, Norway, on the pathways of deep circulation in high-latitude basins.

This project is contribution to the Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation
theme of the US CLIVAR (CLImate VARiability and predictability) program.