* 0926466
* Workshop to Explore a Partnership for Nanotechnology Education
* ENG,EEC
* 04/15/2009,03/31/2011
* James Murday, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 03/31/2011
* USD 82,555.00

This award provides funding to the University of Southern California (USC) for
the support of a Workshop to Explore a Partnership for Nanotechnology Education,
under the direction of Dr. James Murday of USC and Dr. Aldrin Sweeney,
University of Central Florida (UCF) who are serving as co-chairs of the
organizing committee. The workshop will be held April 26-28, 2009 at the
Davidson Conference Center, on the campus of USC. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intent of this proposed workshop is to involve representatives from the various
stakeholder communities, including K-12 teachers, community colleges,
universities, continuing education, various professional communities, industry,
foundations, state/local education authorities, and pertinent Federal agencies.
The workshop participants will be exposed to the present status of nanoscale
education. They will be charged with identifying opportunities/challenges
associated with: a) the infrastructure needed to develop effective "nano"
education; b) a functional stakeholder partnership(s) that addresses
needs/opportunities, and c) mechanisms for that partnership(s) to provide
information fo the state/local authorities, industrial leaders, and foundations
to use in developing goals, strategies and programs toward effective nano
education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A workshop report will be prepared to transmit
the workshop recommendation and it will also be published in a refereed journal
to ensure the broadest dispersion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop is being
co-funded by the NSF Directorate for Engineering, Directorate for Mathematics
and Physical Sciences and the Directorate for Education and Human Resources.