* 0926911
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Modeling the Influence of Surface Meltwater on the Ice Dynamics of the Greenland Ice Sheet
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Konrad Steffen, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Thomas J. Baerwald
* 07/31/2011
* USD 11,960.00

Observations have shown a relationship between increased summer ice velocity and
increased meltwater production over several years on the western slope of the
Greenland Ice Sheet. This doctoral dissertation research project will map the
spatial distribution of moulins (vertical conduits that transmit surface
meltwater to the bed of the ice sheet) based on high-resolution satellite
imagery within a 1,100 square-km area of the inland ice northeast of
Jakobshavn/Ilulissat, West Greenland (at a latitude of roughly 70-degrees N).
The doctoral student will compare observed moulin locations to historical moulin
locations as identified on a topographical map based on 1985 aerial photography
in order to identify changes in moulin distribution over time. A multivariate
regression model will be derived to explain moulin density across the study
area. Subglacial water pressures, determined from moulin density, will be
translated into basal sliding speed using sliding laws previously validated for
alpine glaciers. The seasonal melt-acceleration phenomenon then will be modeled
using a coupled thermodynamic ice sheet model under both present day and future
climatic conditions, with the latter including a simulated increase in surface
meltwater production. The primary goal of this project is to model the physical
basis of the observed melt-induced acceleration of ice flow and predict how this
mechanism will influence ice sheet dynamics in the future. The secondary goal of
the project is to identify changes in moulin distribution over time. Moulin
distribution will be determined via feature extraction from high resolution
(with roughly one meter pixels) commercial satellite imagery.

Sea-level rise is a highly relevant societal concern. The estimated sea-level
rise contribution from glaciers and ice sheets currently is based primarily on
surface mass balance and ignores the possible influence of changing ice
velocity, with increased ice loss related to increased iceberg calving. This
project therefore will directly address the need to improve basic understanding
of the potential sea-level rise contribution due to accelerated ice flow in the
Greenland Ice Sheet. The products of this project will be maps of moulin density
and of the magnitude and spatial distribution of basal slide within the study
area. This project will provide new insights regarding the influence of
meltwater on the ice dynamics of ice sheets by contributing novel models of
surface hydrology (i.e moulin density) as well as basal slide (the relation
between subglacial water pressure and ice velocity at the ice-bedrock
interface). The parameterizations and conceptual advances made in this project
likely will be useful for the alpine glacier community as well. This project
will apply these theoretical advances to probe the physical basis of the
observed correlation between ice surface velocity and duration of summer melt on
the western flank of the Greenland Ice Sheet. As a Doctoral Dissertation
Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a
promising student to establish a strong independent research career.