* 0926027
* GOALI: Fabrication and Device Physics of Bit-Patterned Magnetic Recording Media
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* T. Randall Lee, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2015
* USD 398,814.00

The research outlined in this proposal explores the downward scalability of
magnetic bit-patterned media with a defined target of reaching the fundamental
magnetic data storage limit (i.e., the superparamagnetic limit) at a bit size of
approximately 3-4 nm using the guided self-assembly of highly anisotropic
magnetic nanoparticles in precision-fabricated templates. The technology to be
developed during the course of this project will give rise to unprecedented
capabilities, such as meeting the data storage needs of the world's largest
corporations on a single desktop computer, or storing the entire contents of the
Library of Congress on an iPod! &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the
proposed research is multi-faceted, offering unique insights to the science of
guided self-assembly, to the mechanisms of the self-limiting ion milling for
high-fidelity template fabrication, and to the synthesis of highly anisotropic
magnetic nanoparticles. Furthermore, this work will dramatically expand current
theoretical models and experimental testing in the recording physics of magnetic
bit-patterned media. Specifically, the availability of genuine nanostructured
arrays, which will be developed during the course of this project, will enable
fundamental studies of the limits of the micromagnetic formalism widely used for
the theoretical modeling of magnetic nanostructures.&lt;br/&gt;The broader
technological impacts of the proposed research include the development of state-
of-the-art nanofabrication technologies that expand our current capabilities far
beyond the projected goals of the international semiconductor technology
roadmap. The availability of ultra-high-density magnetic media will enable a
range of transformative magnetic data-storage applications, including probe-
based data storage devices in which a two-dimensional array of read/write
nanotransducers can be used to address the bits on a patterned disk. Low cost,
low power consumption, and small size are key attributes that make probe storage
an attractive solution for mobile applications (e.g., hand-held computers and
cellular telephones).&lt;br/&gt;With regard to broader impacts on society as a
whole, the University of Houston serves the most ethnically diverse student body
among doctoral-degree-granting institutions. It is from this diverse student
body that the bulk of our graduate students are drawn. Furthermore, the research
program outlined here will be integrated with existing NSF-REU, RET, NUE, and
GK-12 programs as well as various national and state-supported programs in which
the investigators actively enhance the recruitment of women and underrepresented
minorities into the fields of science and engineering. The program will also
provide research projects that will be compliant with the University of
Houston's undergraduate Capstone program. Moreover, the knowledge gained over
the course of this program will be disseminated through the newly adopted
Nanoengineering Minor Option, which launches in the fall of 2009.&lt;br/&gt;