* 0926159
* Collaborative Research: AIS: Incremental Learning from Unbalanced Data in Nonstationary Environments
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Robi Polikar, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 08/31/2013
* USD 164,923.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)"

The ultimate goal of computational intelligence has long been emulating brain-
like-intelligence by discovering and learning patterns from data. However, in
related research, the data have been assumed to be generated by an underlying
fixed physical process. Recently, new algorithms have emerged that can
accommodate new data, or data with unbalanced distributions. However, learning
from a non-stationary environment, where the underlying process that generates
the data changes over time, has received less attention, whereas the problem of
learning in a non-stationary environment that incrementally provides unbalanced
data has received hardly any attention. Since the brain can and routinely does
learn in such settings, the need for a general framework for learning from ? and
adapting to ? a nonstationary environment that introduces unbalanced data can be
hardly overstated. Spam detection, epidemiological studies, or analysis of
climate change, are just a few examples of such scenarios.

Given such a scenario of unbalanced data, the goal of this project is to develop
a general framework that would recognize if and when there has been a change,
learn novel content, reinforce existing knowledge that is still relevant, and
forget what may no longer be relevant. Our hypothesis is that learning from
unbalanced and nonstationary data can be achieved by strategic use of i.) data
regeneration through local extrapolation ? to help balance the unbalanced
dataset ? combined with ii.) an incrementally generated ensemble of experts
model that use dynamically assigned weights to emulate short and long term
memory properties of the brain ? to help track the changing environments.