* 0926395
* Linking Protein Degradation to Peptide and Amino Acid Compositions in Sinking Particles and Marine Sediments
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Richard Keil, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Simone Metz
* 08/31/2012
* USD 592,116.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Organic matter diagenesis, including protein diagenesis, is an important area
for understanding the fate of sinking marine materials as well as the global
oceanic carbon and nitrogen cycles. In marine waters and sediments, hydrolysable
amino acid compositions, derived from proteins and peptides, have historically
been important indicators for organic matter degradation status and
bioavailability. Traditional amino acid analyses result in the break down of
proteins, which wipe out the sequence and source information provided within
those proteins. However, new marine proteomic techniques have allowed scientists
to unlock the sequence and source information that is lost during amino acid
analyses.

A scientist from the University of Washington will integrate proteomic and amino
acid approaches to bridge the knowledge gap between traditional measurements and
modern techniques of analyzing amino acids in the marine environment. Through
the combination of field and laboratory analyses, he will determine how various
environmental factors influence protein degradation and preservation.

Results from this research will provide quantitative information regarding the
rates at which organic carbon and nitrogen cycling occur in the oceans and
sediments, as well as provide insight on the processes controlling them. This
project will be integrated with the SoundCitizen program, a co-mentoring and
student learning community within the University of Washington's School of
Oceanography. Support and training opportunities for both graduate and
undergraduate students will also be available.