* 0926743
* UBM-Group:  Research Mentoring in Mathematical Biology at New Mexico State University
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* William Boecklen, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 08/31/2013
* USD 240,190.00

Researchers from the Departments of Biology and Mathematical Sciences are
creating an interdisciplinary program in mathematical biology to prepare
undergraduate students for graduate study and future careers in the field. Key
elements being introduced include: curriculum development, undergraduate
mentoring by interdisciplinary teams of faculty, peer-to-peer interaction and
mentoring, and extensive support and cultural activities (workshops, field
trips, seminars, and group discussions). The centerpiece of the project is long-
term, interdisciplinary research experiences that combine biological
experimentation with mathematical monitoring. Teams of students are experiencing
a complete research cycle including hypothesis formulation, model development
and analysis, experimental design and execution, data analysis and hypothesis
testing, manuscript development and submission, and formal
presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research uses a single model system,
Drosophila, and spans a variety of disciplines within biology including
developmental biology, physiology, evolutionary biology, and population ecology.
The research projects involve model conceptualization and construction (using
differential equations, difference equations, and matrix algebra), parameter
estimation, numerical analysis and stability analysis. Three major themes are
being followed: 1. extension of transcriptional network models to eye
development in Drosophila melanogaster; 2. consequences of Wolbachia infection
to host incompatibility and life-history evolution in Drosophila simulans; and
3. modeling stable isotopes incorporation dynamics in Drosophila species
following dietary shifts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The project
employs a robust mentoring model that involves faculty-student, graduate
student-undergraduate student, and several layers of peer-to-peer interactions
(between advanced and beginning students, between students in different research
groups, and, naturally, between students within research groups). Since the
research projects involve currently active research areas and are not
demonstration projects, the students, in collaboration with their faculty
mentors, are expected to publish in peer-reviewed journals and to present at
national meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The project supports a
new research and educational thrust within a large Hispanic serving institution.
The lessons learned from the two formal mathematical biology courses being added
to the current curriculum are fostering interactions between mathematicians and
biologists on this campus and are serving as the springboard for an
interdisciplinary mathematical biology degree program being developed by the two
departments. In addition, on-going outreach activities are introducing a
mathematical biology approach to local middle and high school biology
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is partially supported by funds from
the Directorate for Biological Sciences.