* 0926537
* MSP Institute:  Mathematics Specialists in Middle Schools
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2009,09/30/2015
* William Haver, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 09/30/2015
* USD 4,947,929.00

Lead Institution: Virginia Commonwealth University&lt;br/&gt;Core Partners:
Norfolk State University, University of Virginia and School systems from
Arlington County, Buena Vista City, Caroline County, Culpeper County, Fairfax
County, Hanover County, Henrico County, Norfolk City, Portsmouth City, Richmond
City, Scott County, and Westmoreland County.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF
Mathematics Specialist Partnership Institute is supporting 50 outstanding middle
school teachers to become mathematics specialists. Each teacher participates in
a 66 day Institute offered over three consecutive summers; completes a total of
33 graduate credits during the Institute sessions and the subsequent academic
years; and participates in various Institute enrichment activities. The teachers
will earn a master's degree and certification as a Mathematics Specialist. Each
of the 50 participants will serve as a Specialist within their home school
district, annually coaching an average of 15 other teachers and impacting 1200
middle school students. Therefore, a total of 750 teachers (50 x 15) and 60,000
students (50 x 1200) will be impacted by the Institute Partnership.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project is based on the research of a
developed and refined program which has prepared and inducted over 250
Mathematics Specialists into K-5 schools in Virginia. The exciting results from
the prior research, which used control groups in the experimental design,
indicate the positive impact of Specialists on teacher knowledge, teachers'
attitudes and beliefs and ultimately student learning as measured on the high
stakes Virginia Standards of Learning tests. The established preparation program
will be refined and adapted to meet the curricula needs in grades 6-8, including
algebra. The research of these adaptations and refinements of currently
developed programs is necessary to validate statewide implementation of
Mathematics Specialists at the middle school level and to model their work
nationally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research questions for the project are 1)
Can we prepare Mathematics Specialists for service in grades 6-8 by adapting and
refining training and induction programs which have served well in K-5 schools?
2) Will this Institute produce intellectual leaders in Virginia? 3) Can these
Specialists impact student learning in grades 6-8 to enhance student success in
the middle school curriculum, including
algebra?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mathematics Specialists have been recommended by
the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics and prominent national educators
as a possible way to help close the achievement gap for U.S. students. The
project research could be transformative in validating a national model for
training Mathematics Specialists for their role in middle schools. The mixed
design research featuring controlled matched pairs of schools and case studies
could validate the positive effects of student learning of Mathematics
Specialists in middle schools. This study, following successful initial research
based results in grades K-5 is needed to support the introduction of Mathematics
Specialists nationally. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).