* 0926178
* Collaborative Research: Engineering the Morphology and Microstructure of Group III-V Compound Semiconducting Nanowires
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Vivek Shenoy, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Gary Fischman
* 07/31/2012
* USD 120,000.00

Proposal Title: Collaborative Research: Engineering the Morphology and
Microstructure of Group III-V Compound Semiconducting Nanowires Institution:
University of California-Los Angeles Abstract Date: 08/03/09 The goal of this
interdisciplinary collaborative research effort between UCLA and Brown
University is to quantitatively understand the mechanisms governing the growth
of group III-V compound semiconducting nanowire heterostructures and hence
develop strategies to tailor their morphology, crystallinity, and chemistry.
Semiconducting nanowires have recently gained considerable attention owing to
their potential for applications in optoelectronics, nanoelectronics, sensors,
energy harvesting, and energy storage. However, growth of desired multi-
component nanowire heterostructures is difficult due to kinetic instabilities
occurring during growth. To address this issue, the proposed research will
combine in situ (as well as ex situ) studies of nanowire growth as a function of
temperature, time, flux, and catalyst composition with theoretical/computational
modeling. Simulated morphologies and structures will then be compared with
experimental observations to quantitatively describe the morphological,
structural, and compositional evolution during the growth of nanowires. If
successful, the results of this research will provide a holistic understanding
of the nanowire heterostructure formation and help develop technologies for the
fabrication of advanced functional materials with desired properties. The
proposed experimental and computational methods are general and applicable to
investigate (and predict) nanostructure growth in other material systems as well
as other synthesis (eg., solution phase) methods. The results will be
disseminated to enhance the understanding of the nanowire growth mechanisms.
Videos of in situ observations and growth simulations will be posted on the Web
to promote interest in nanoscience and nanotechnology among the public. Graduate
and engineering undergraduate students will benefit through classroom
instruction and involvement in the research. High-school students will be
engaged to provide them firsthand research experience that will encourage them
to pursue higher education in engineering