* 0926402
* Collaborative Research:  Experimental Determination of Trace Element Partition Coefficients Between Anorthitic Plagioclase and MORB
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Roger Nielsen, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 08/31/2013
* USD 90,037.00

This research carries out a set of detailed experiments on high temperature
plagioclase crystals at crustal pressures and water contents to allow
calibration of numerical models of magmatic processes. The importance of this
work is that the zoning patterns of feldspar crystals are similar to tree rings
in that the zones are often concentric and record the chemical changes that have
occurred over time during the growth of the mineral, in this case recording
changes in the composition, temperature, and pressure of magmas in which they
grew. As such, these minerals can reveal information on the amount of melting in
the mantle, the crystallization of a magma, magma residence times, the
interaction of magma bodies with the lower crust, and the amount of mass and
heat transfer from the mantle to the crust. In short, how the Earth's heat
engine works. At present, it is not clear how elements distribute themselves as
a function of temperature, pressure, and composition, including H2O in these
minerals. The funded research is designed to examine the zoning of Li, Ba, Sr,
Pb, Zr and rare earth elements in anorthite plagioclase at pressures to 0.7 GPa
in the presence of 0 to 1.5 weight percent H2O. Experiments have been designed
with the specific goal of understanding magmatic processes that create the ocean
crust, in particular, that associated with slow and intermediate spreading
centers and fracture zones. Data will be incorporated into thermodynamic
databases for modeling melt composition and evolution. Broader impacts of the
work include graduate student training and building essential datasets that make
up the infrastructure for science.