* 0926196
* Using Neuroimaging to Test Models of Speech Motor Control
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Srikantan Nagarajan, University of California-San Francisco
* Continuing Grant
* Akaysha Tang
* 09/30/2013
* USD 699,999.00

To speak so a listener understands, the speaker has to accurately produce the
sounds from his or her language. While this may seem effortless for most people,
the actual speech production involves complex mental and physical processes
involving the activation of speech muscles and the precisely timed movements in
the vocal tract (e.g., the combination of movements in the mouth, jaw, and so
on). The unique properties of the individual's speech organs (e.g., size of
mouth), combined with the developmental changes of these properties over a
lifetime, will directly influence the way speech sounds are produced by each
individual. How does the human brain accomplish this feat of continually tuning
the control of vocal tract so that it always produces the sounds desired? With
support from the National Science Foundation, the investigators will study how
the speaking process involves the brain predicting the sensory feedback and
correcting the control of the vocal tract when the feedback does not match the
prediction. While previous research suggests that this prediction and correction
process does occur during speaking, there is little information about how the
circuitry in the brain would accomplish such a process. In the proposed research
the investigators will examine the timecourse of neural responses to audio
feedback perturbations (brief changes in pitch, amplitude, or formant
frequencies) during speaking. They will use magnetoencephalography (MEG) and
electrocorticography (ECOG) methods to record normal individuals and epilepsy
patients who have electrodes implanted in their brain to localize seizures. Both
methods allow neural activity in the brain to be recorded at a millisecond time
resolution.

The results of these experiments will allow for the testing of different models
that have been proposed to explain the neural substrate of speech motor control.
The outcome of the research will facilitate relating the control of speaking to
what is known in other domains of motor control research, and lead to a more
complete understanding of the control of movements in humans. The use of
advanced functional neuroimaging to study the neural basis of speaking will
provide a special opportunity to train and educate a wide range of graduate
students, post-doctoral trainees, and medical students who will get involved in
the research. The proposed research will also further the development of multi-
user research facilities, especially at the UCSF Biomagnetic Imaging Laboratory
that has one of a limited number of MEG scanner facilities in the US.