* 0926268
* BRIGE: Morphological Effects on Low Temperature, Pressureless Sintering of Ag Nanostructures: A New Pb-free Alternative for High Temperature and High Power Interconnections
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Pedro Quintero, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 08/31/2012
* USD 175,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this BRIGE
award is to investigate the effect of silver (Ag) nanostructures? morphology on
the progression of an environmentally benign lead-free, pressureless sintering
process. Key to the success of the project is the characterization of shape-
controlled synthesis of Ag nanostructures by polyol process that could lead to
the nucleation of non-stable crystallites that will favor the progression of a
low temperature sintering reaction resulting in mesoporous conductive film. The
specific aims of the proposed work are: 1) explore the effect of process
parameters on polyol synthesis and establish a correlation with the resulting
morphology of Ag nanostructures; 2) develop a model to control the geometrical
features of Ag nanostructures as a function of critical synthesis parameters; 3)
establish the effect of morphology on the progression of a low temperature,
pressureless sintering process. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results
of this research will provide a key enabling technology for the development of
next generation high power electronics such as those used in hybrid-electric
vehicles, public power grids, as well as control and conversion for alternative
energy sources. Successful achievement of a continuous, conductive Ag film by
this technique will enable a departure from the traditional reflow process which
restricts the application temperature to a fraction of the melting point of the
attach material. Further, this lead-free alternative for high temperature, high
power interconnections support society?s need for environmentally benign
technologies. The technical objective of the project is integrally related to
its outreach goal to initiate a research program to broaden the participation
and increase the opportunities of Hispanic engineering students at the
University of Puerto Rico-Mayaguez (UPRM). This award will encourage the
engagement of these students independent scholarly research. Lastly, this award
will partially sponsor the UPRM Mechanical Engineering Summer Camp for high
school students by providing financial and mentoring resources.