* 0926284
* BRIGE - Prokaryotic Real Time Gene Expression Profiling For Toxicity Assessment And Water Quality Monitoring
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* April Gu, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Ted A. Conway
* 08/31/2012
* USD 174,053.00

PI: Gu, April&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 0926284&lt;br/&gt;Goals: The health
risk associated with the plethora of emerging contaminants necessitates a
breakthrough in toxicity assessment technology for water quality monitoring. The
goals of this project are: a) to explore the&lt;br/&gt;validity of a novel
application of prokaryotic real time gene expression profiling for assessing
toxic effects and understanding toxicity mechanisms, b) to develop a more
sophisticated and informative, yet feasible and&lt;br/&gt;reliable toxicity
assessment methodology for evaluation and identification of contaminants in
water samples and c) to establish a creative and integrated education program to
attract and educate personnel from various disciplines and identities,
especially women and underrepresented groups, to become contributors in the
environmental engineering field. The long-term goal is to build a unique
interdisciplinary and translational research and educational program that
specializes in applying genomic/molecular biotechnology for
water&lt;br/&gt;quality monitoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Methods: A new
prokaryotic real-time gene expression profiling method, using a comprehensive
library (cellarray) of transcriptional fusions of Green Fluorescence Protein
(GFP) to each of about 1900 different gene promoters in E. coli. k12, will be
employed for toxicity evaluation and identification in water samples. The high-
temporal-resolution and high-throughput measurements of cellular-level
collective state gene&lt;br/&gt;expression activities in the living cell will
yield characteristic gene expression profiling in response to a specific
compound or a mixture of compounds, depending on their toxic mechanisms and
modes of action. A database of signature gene expression profiles (biomarkers)
for various categories of emerging environmental pollutants will be established
and the toxic mechanisms will be revealed. Multidimensional hierarchical
clustering methods will be applied to identify and/or classify pollutants based
on their similarity in gene expression profiles and, by extension, similarity in
their underlying modes of action of toxicity. Gene&lt;br/&gt;expression
profiling results in real environmental samples will be compared with those
obtained by conventional toxicity evaluation methods in order to confirm the
validity of gene expression profiling for&lt;br/&gt;toxicity assessment. The
education plan is developed by integrating a series of teaching and
education&lt;br/&gt;outreach activities with an interdisciplinary, experiential
and multi-channel teaching paradigm that will incorporate the learning of
existing knowledge in classrooms, discovering new information through
research&lt;br/&gt;and discovery, and applying and translating knowledge through
practice and application. Highlights of these&lt;br/&gt;activities include
expanding the pioneering BEST (Biotechnology for the Environment-Showcase and
Training) program, through connections with various NU education identities,
local organizations and&lt;br/&gt;communities, to increase the diversity of
participants in the environmental engineering field, especially
for&lt;br/&gt;women, minorities and people with disabilities; developing a new
interdisciplinary course to attract and&lt;br/&gt;expose students from other
disciplines to environmental engineering and enhancing technology transfer
and&lt;br/&gt;information dissemination through multi-level collaborations, Co-
op program at NU and via ITRI (Industrial&lt;br/&gt;Translational Research
Initiative).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits: This project integrates
diverse disciplines of biotechnology, toxicology and environmental engineering
and opens new ground for research in genomic-based toxicity assessment for water
quality monitoring. We are the first to apply a prokaryotic cell-array
consisting of a large number of bioluminescent GFP-transformed E. coli. strains
to measure the real-time gene expression activities in response to contaminants.
This approach will lead to timely and more informative toxicity evaluation
results than conventional methods. It has higher sensitivity and specificity
than the existing microarray-based genomic profiling approach because it adds a
temporal dimension to the profiling data and therefore allows for more
systematic and higher-resolution toxicity evaluation of pollutants. Moreover,
the proposed method greatly improves the feasibility and cost-effectiveness of
gene expression profiling for toxicity assessment due to its simpler, faster and
reliable assay procedures, higher reusability and desirable flexibility for
customization of the cell-array library.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
This research has significant impact on ensuring water quality for public health
protection&lt;br/&gt;and life quality improvement. Current available toxicity
assessment methods for water quality monitoring are not sufficient, and they
severely hamper our progress in water quality protection and improvement. This
project presents a new interdisciplinary approach to meet the extremely urgent
need for effective and reliable methods to detect and evaluate toxicity effects
of emerging contaminants in water. The integrated interdisciplinary,
experiential and multi-channel teaching and education paradigm will increase the
diversity&lt;br/&gt;of participation in environmental engineering workforce and
it will equip them with adequate knowledge and skills to tackle today's
challenging environmental issues. The support for the PI's career development
will help her develop as a productive scholar who benefits society by
contributing to the technological and educational advancement of water quality
improvement and public health protection.