* 0926278
* International Research Experiences for Students (IRES):   Development of Global Scientists by Research Collaborations on Process Variation Characterization and Design Methodology
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Janet Roveda, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Sung
* 09/30/2013
* USD 150,000.00

OISE-0926278 University of Arizona (Wang, Janet, ?IRES: Development of Global
Scientists by Research Collaborations on Process Variation Characterization and
Design Methodology?)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public
Law 111-5). The award supports participation of U.S. graduate and undergraduate
students from the PI?s Mixed-Signal Nanometer VLSI Design Lab in a collaboration
on the characterizations and design methodologies for integrated circuit (IC)
under process variation impact. Device variability tends to spiral out of
control as circuit design technology enters the nanometer design regime. Most
current research on adaptive design and statistical analysis tools emphasizes
that the manufactured chips match the original design specifications. Several
tough issues prevent the diminution of variability. For example, how do we model
the variability? How do we quantify it? How do we manage the variability that
stems from irreducible complexity? Is it possible for us to make use of the
variability instead of just controlling it? The proposed joint research intends
to provide novel approaches to overcome these challenging obstacles.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI and her students will collaborate with Prof.
Charlie C.P. Chen from Department of Electrical Engineering, National Taiwan
University, and Prof. Guanrong Chen and Prof. Wallace K.S. Tang, both at the
Centre for Chaos and Complex Networks (CCCN), Department of Electronic
Engineering, City University of Hong Kong. The award support four U.S.
students?two undergraduates and two graduate students?each summer over the next
three years to conduct the proposed joint research. The unique, open sources on
process data at National Taiwan University offers first hand data to support
research on the modeling and characterization of design for manufacture. The
facilities of City University of Hong Kong provide an exceptional opportunity to
combine the expertise of U.S, Taiwan and Hong Kong scientists in a synergistic
program to elucidate the property of process variation mechanism and develop
design methodologies to utilize the variability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the
first year students will exploit the idea of statistical performance to model
device and gates. The newly proposed models are to be tested on 45 nm process
data in cooperation with the National Taiwan University. Expected laboratory
tasks include the measurements of the performance distribution and of
environmental influences on IC design. Several different statistical models
including the finite point model formulated at The City University of Hong Kong
may be applied to the experimental measurement data. During the second year,
students will investigate new strategies that employ performance oriented
parameter variation reduction and provide performance bound estimation. They
will test the ability of the proposed models to characterize and verify
different types of mixed-signal circuits. In the third year, students are
expected to integrate the above research components into a new design flow. A
highly nonlinear circuit proposed by The City University of Hong Kong will
provide a prototype circuit. Students will redesign the circuit using the new
flow, measure and test the circuit performance, and verify the quality of
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will increase understanding of the
statistical nature of process&lt;br/&gt;variations, the impact on circuit
performance, and their potential for recovery following an intelligent design
algorithm. In this program, students will develop scientific hypotheses, design
individual research projects, and analyze and present their results orally and
in written form. They will be exposed to laboratory and field research
techniques in a unique environment. The discoveries from the joint research to
be undertaken will also inform the development of curriculum and fill a gap in
current textbook coverage of process variation and chaotic modeling as a
scholarly discipline.&lt;br/&gt;