* 0926372
* Collaborative Research:  Were Protists the Beginning of the End for Stromatolites?
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Roger Summons, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2013
* USD 270,972.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microbial mats are conspicuous
components of many benthic marine and aquatic settings. A subset of these
microbial mats binds sediments to form potentially fossilizable structures,
often called stromatolites or microbialites. While much is known about
microbialite autotrophs, little is known about their heterotrophic eukaryotes.
The lack of understanding is surprising given that stromatolites have an
extensive geologic record spanning most of Earth's history. Stromatolites are
layered sedimentary structures formed by a combination of microbial activities,
abiotic carbonate precipitation, and sedimentary processes. Details of
stromatolite formation and preservation are poorly understood, and a drastic
decline in stromatolite occurrence and diversity in the late Precambrian has
long been a conundrum. A popular hypothesis to explain this decline at ~1
billion years ago is that eukaryotic organisms evolved to become predators on
stromatolites. To date, the most commonly proposed predatory culprit is an
unidentified metazoan, although evidence of such an organism is lacking from the
fossil record. Protists, most of which are not expected to leave an obvious
fossil record, are additional possible stromatolitic predators, but they have
been largely ignored in this context. The hypotheses of this project are: (1)
Heterotrophic protist activity caused the textural change from stromatolites
(layered sediment fabric) to thrombolites (clotted sediment fabric) and (2)
Heterotrophic protists caused the decimation of Neoproterozoic stromatolites.
Since it is impossible to recreate the Neoproterozoic, studies of modern analogs
serve to indirectly test these hypotheses. The overall goal of this project is
to describe the eukaryotic communities associated with modern stromatolites and
thrombolites from the Bahamas and Australia, compare the communities from the
two sites, and to relate the communities to stromatolitic / thrombolitic
sediment fabric and biomarker signatures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal
will be achieved by addressing the following specific aims: (1) Identify, via
morphologic and molecular approaches, the eukaryotic community of modern
stromatolites and thrombolites; (2) Analyze modern and fossil stromatolites and
thrombolites for their eukaryotic lipid biomarkers using solvent extraction,
chromatographic and mass spectrometric methods; (3) Using the Fluorescently
Labeled Embedded Core (FLEC) method, document the sub-millimeter distributions
of the heterotrophic eukaryotic community inhabiting modern stromatolites and
thrombolites in conjunction with fine-scale sediment fabric; (4) Using solvent
extraction, chromatographic and mass spectrometric methods, analyze cultures of
allogromiid foraminifers to survey for lipid biomarkers unique to them; (5)
After incubation of modern stromatolites with heterotrophic protists, use FLEC
methodology to determine how their activity affects sediment fabric and conduct
preliminary comparisons of these modern fabrics to those of stromatolite
fossils. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The oldest fossil
stromatolites are &gt;3.4 billion years old and are the most visible
manifestations of pervasive microbial life on the early Earth. The changes in
stromatolite abundance and morphology document complex interplays between
biological and geological processes. This project addresses multiple aspects of
stromatolite genesis and pre-fossilization alteration but at its core, focuses
on one of the greatest geological enigmas: the possible connection between
stromatolite decline and the rise of complex life. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: Because any undergraduate introductory historical geology class (and
some middle and high school Earth Science classes) introduces stromatolites as
the first highly visible evidence of life on Earth, the results of this project
would be interesting to a wide audience. This multidisciplinary project
involving benthic ecology, molecular biology, sedimentology, and organic
geochemistry includes education opportunities from high school to graduate
students and teachers. The project would support a WHOI-MIT Joint Program
student for half of his/her PhD studies and an MIT student for half of his/her
PhD studies. Additionally, undergraduate students from MIT, the University of
Connecticut, and University of Miami will actively participate in some of our
field collections and laboratory analyses.