* 0926558
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Gendered Development and the Social Reproduction of Security in Southeast Turkey
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,02/28/2011
* Sallie Marston, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2011
* USD 12,000.00

Government-sponsored gendered development projects are taking on an important
role in Turkey's efforts to pacify regional conflict in the predominantly
Kurdish Southeast region. A growing number of women's state education centers
housed in laundries and mosques in crowded urban centers throughout the
Southeast constitute important mechanisms for the socioeconomic integration of
the region. These projects recently have been linked in public governmental
dialogue to larger militarized security concerns dealing with Kurdish
separatism, however. National security therefore is broadening its conceptual
and methodological scope to incorporate unconventional populations (women and
children) and spaces (home and school) as important elements of a political and
territorial stabilization project. These are the sites where the translation of
behavior, values, and the engagements with law and rights underpinning a state
consolidation project unfold. This doctoral dissertation research project will
seek answers to the following questions: (1) How does the Turkish state formally
define "national security" and the relationship of "national security" to
socioeconomic development goals in the context of Southeast Turkey? (2) How is
the household politicized as an arena of state concern by development affiliates
(doctors, lawyers, and teachers) and education practices? (3) Do development
participants and their family members frame their everyday choices about family
within the larger security concerns of the state, and how might their
experiences vary across generations and genders? The doctoral candidate will
conduct an extended ethnography of development activities and home life. A
series of interviews with development participants, their family members, and
workers also will be conducted to measure if and how individuals frame their
choices about home, work, and recreation within a larger geopolitical project of
state-building.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Considering the heightened preoccupation of
the state with security in the 21st century in a number of global contexts, the
results of this project will reveal more broadly how an abstract concept like
"national security" become manifest in policy and negotiated by regular
citizens. From a regional perspective, the Kurdish situation in the Middle East
often is oversimplified in popular media and political commentary as a broad
issue of cross-border competing nationalisms. Kurdish women, in particular,
represent a minority group that has received very little attention in scholarly
research. Taken together, the disparate stories of Kurdish migrant women and
their children as well as community doctors, lawyers, and teachers will reveal
how a policy of national security works within a larger politics of state and
national belonging. At this scale, single-plot geopolitical narratives about
ethno-nationalism, political affiliation, and physical boundaries are
complicated by real and important decisions about family and neighborhood
welfare and life choices and values. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research
Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising
student to establish a strong independent research career. This project is
jointly supported by the NSF Geography and Spatial Sciences Program and the NSF
Office of International Science and Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;