* 0926737
* UBM, RUI: Integrative Research-focused Experiences and Curriculum in Mathematical Biology
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2015
* Jason Miller, Truman State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 08/31/2015
* USD 500,000.00

This interdisciplinary undergraduate research project builds on and strengthens
a successful program. It continues the program of extended interdisciplinary
undergraduate research experiences. Each year the program engages a minimum of
eight talented sophomores, juniors, and seniors in the entire research
enterprise. Projects represent a wide array of biological and mathematical sub-
disciplines and expose all participants to a broad spectrum of research modes
and techniques (i.e., molecular-, cellular-, organismal-, and
population/community-level questions within biology; and analytic, modeling,
visualization, and statistical questions within mathematics). Undergraduate
researchers participate in cross-disciplinary teams of two undergraduates (one
biology major and one mathematics major), and each team is mentored by a pair of
faculty members consisting of a biologist and mathematical scientist. For an
entire year, each student-faculty team pursues an interdisciplinary research
question and engage in a series of programmatic activities designed to meet the
needs of holistic, multi-disciplinary research problems of the 21st century. The
proposed program enhances Truman State's efforts to redesign introductory
coursework in biology and mathematics to be more interdisciplinary. Data
generated by current and past projects will be used to develop interdisciplinary
course modules for these courses. This will lead to significant and deep course
redesign that will increase the number of students who graduate ready to work at
the intersection of the life and mathematical sciences. The program includes
summer workshops for module generation, interim faculty development mini-
workshops where faculty are taught how to employ the material in their courses,
and plans for sharing modules with the broader mathematical biology education
community.

The program advances discovery and understanding in the biological and
mathematical sciences. By creating resources for and promoting the integration
of research and teaching in mathematics and biology, it provides an invaluable
opportunity for faculty to practice the pedagogy of research and develop their
skills mentoring interdisciplinary student inquiry. The faculty will be the core
supporters for students pursuing a new and innovative interdisciplinary minor in
mathematical biology. Students who participate in the program or learn biology
and mathematics through the interdisciplinary modules will be more able to
pursue careers at the interface of the life and mathematical sciences. By making
an exciting area of study available to more students, the program has great
potential to increase enrollment in mathematics and biology (and perhaps all
STEM disciplines). The program diversity has been greater than that of the
Truman population, and continued partnering with existing Truman programs will
insure that underrepresented groups will participate in the program in the
future.