* 0926970
* BRIGE:  The Fabrication of a Novel, Full Thickness, Artificial Bone Graft for Bone Tissue Engineering
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Joseph Freeman, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Ted A. Conway
* 08/31/2011
* USD 201,959.00

0926970&lt;br/&gt;Freeman&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bone loss due to trauma or
disease is prevalent in the U.S. Over 3 million orthopaedic procedures are
performed every year; approximately 500,000 of these are bone grafting
procedures making bone second only to blood as the most transplanted material.
Bone loss is usually treated using autografts or allografts. Although they do
have their benefits, each of these materials has a set of drawbacks which limit
the extent of their use. With this in mind, the objective of this project is to
use tissue engineering to create new scaffolds as practical and functional
alternatives for bone replacement and regeneration. The new scaffolds will have
a nanofibrous structure and be structurally similar to natural bone, containing
both cortical and trabecular areas and microvascularization. To accomplish this
task we will complete the following objectives: 1) Perform a finite element
analysis to discover the nanofiber orientation necessary for the scaffold to
bear the appropriate load. 2) Construct fully mineralized, porous, nanofibrous
scaffolds for trabecular bone by combining techniques for nanofiber
mineralization, pore creation, and sintering. 3) Creating cortical bone like
structures with vascular channels using electrospinning techniques with
microfibers and nanofiber mineralization. 4) Creating a full thickness, porous
load bearing scaffold by combining the trabecular and cortical scaffolds with
sintering techniques. The resulting structure will be engineered from
mineralized poly (L-lactic acid) nanofibers and will be designed to withstand
the forces experienced in load bearing bones while having enough porosity to
allow for full thickness cellular and tissue infiltration.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;Although many studies have
created scaffolds to replace bone, most of these seek to only replace trabecular
bone. No currently available scaffold or technique seeks to mimic the structure
and properties of both trabecular and cortical bone, including correctly placed
vasculature. The creation of this scaffold would also lead to a solution to the
problem of cell movement in nanofiber scaffolds. Typically the pores in
nanofibrous scaffolds are too small to allow significant cellular infiltration.
The method of micro-porous nanofibrous scaffold fabrication described in this
project would solve this problem and could be used for the other tissue
engineering applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research will advance the field of tissue engineering through the
creation of nanofibrous scaffolds that do not hinder cell motility and the
production of a full thickness bone graft. This research will provide an
opportunity for many students to gain experience in experimental design, data
analysis, engineering, and the ability to work in a group environment. Dr.
Freeman is devoted to establishing outreach programs to recruit students from
underrepresented groups into engineering and science. Currently, he mentors
graduate students from all segments of underrepresentation. Since arriving at
Virginia Tech over 2 years ago he has also mentioned 3 undergraduates of
underrepresented groups. Dr. Freeman is involved in the Multicultural Academic
Opportunities Program (MAOP) and the Center for the Enhancement of Engineering
Diversity (CEED) at Virginia Tech. Students will be chosen from these programs
to conduct research based on this project. He will use aspects from this project
in his presentations to encourage student interest in math, science, and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;