* 0926490
* Catalyzing Innovation in Phase I Centers for Chemical Innovation (CCIs): Building Successful Pathways for Research to Innovation (R2I) Translation
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2009,12/31/2013
* Philip Weilerstein, National Collegiate Inventors and Innovators Alliance
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 12/31/2013
* USD 450,000.00

The National Collegiate Inventors and Innovators Alliance (NCIIA) is supported
with this grant to explore attitudes, perceptions, and beliefs regarding
research translation from the perspective of CCI Phase 1 key participants,
faculty, post-docs and students and to utilize this information in providing
support for CCI Phase 1 Centers to develop and implement effective research to
innovation translation plans. This project will focus on the Phase I Centers for
Chemical Innovation (CCI) research teams and will include studies both pre and
post workshop involvement of the CCI Phase 1 Centers. Research about CCI
participants' perspectives on R2I will provide insight that can be used to
develop more effective instructional approaches and institutional policies to
enhance innovation. Knowledge about the R2I process in collaborative research
settings will be summarized and disseminated broadly to other academic
audiences. Current practices for inter-institutional intellectual property
development and ownership will also be identified, codified and disseminated. At
the same time, Phase I CCI research teams will be supported in the use and
deployment of effective tools and processes for defining and validating
potential innovations arising from their research and developing translation
plans for that research.