* 0926794
* BRIGE:  An Exploration Into Concrete Surface Preparation Using Dry Ice Bombardment
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* James Giancaspro, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 07/31/2012
* USD 188,865.00

The research objective of this BRIGE award is to investigate the viability of
bombarding concrete with dry ice as a means of preparing the substrate to
receive coatings and composite overlay. The specific goals are to (a) examine
the effectiveness of removing corrosion byproduct from substrate, (b) identify
whether dry ice bombardment induces damage within the substrate, and (c) explain
how the fresh and hardened properties of concrete contribute to these behaviors.
Diversity, education, family, and science will be united by creating parent-
student teams to carry out a portion of the research activities. Close
involvement of faculty, parents, and students in research will allow families
from underrepresented groups to embrace the technology being investigated.

If successful, the results of this research will explain the fundamental
relationships between basic substrate properties and their influence on cleaning
efficacy and potential to cause substrate damage from dry ice bombardment.
Significant achievement also prevails by adapting well-established, scientific
protocol to investigate this unusual, yet unexplored blasting technique. Among
such protocol include non-destructive inspection (NDI) using ultrasonic
resonance, and Laser Scanning Confocal Microscopy (LSCM). From an environmental
perspective, dry ice blasting could reduce the time and cost of surface
preparation as well as lessen the negative impact on the surrounding environment
and personnel carrying out the construction. Moreover, the dry ice supply is
derived from reclamation of CO2 gas byproduct from existing manufacturing
processes, thus, contributing to its sustainability. Potential energy-related
implications could lead to an important research thrust in academia and industry
in the future. Furthermore, the results generated from this research could be
applied to other topical areas and material systems such as corrosion and lead-
based paint removal from steel bridges, mold remediation in urban housing, and
biofilm removal from timber piles or bridge piers located in thriving, yet
delicate, marine ecosystems.