* 0926581
* Environmental signal analysis: Monitoring the impacts of climate change on rocky intertidal ecosystem across a cascade of scales
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Brian Helmuth, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2014
* USD 761,670.00

The rocky intertidal zone is a model ecosystem for evaluating the impacts of
weather, climate, and climate change on natural ecosystems, as animals and
plants living in this habitat frequently live very close to their thermal
tolerance limits. Moreover, two organisms exposed to identical physical
environments can experience radically different conditions at the level of the
niche. Environmental signals measured at large spatial and temporal scales must
be translated to the level of an organism's niche to hindcast, nowcast, and
forecast the effects of climate and weather on the survival, reproduction and
ecological interactions of organisms. The investigator has developed models and
sensors for several species of intertidal organisms, specifically the mussel
Mytilus californianus and the predatory seastar Pisaster ochraceus. Data
relevant to mussels has been collected nearly continuously at a series of 9
sites along the west coast of North America since 1999, and these data show that
patterns of physiological stress are likely to be far more complex than those
predicted based on measurements at the habitat level (i.e. by buoy or
satellite). Increases in body temperature have been observed over the last 5
years that are not reflected by onshore or offshore water or air temperature
measurements, but instead are the result of complex interactions between
multiple environmental parameters. Moreover, preliminary results suggest that
predator and prey may experience markedly different patterns of temperature in
space and in time. This result has significant implications for where and when
we look for evidence of the impacts of climate change. The investigator will
continue monitoring intertidal temperatures, currently the only long-terms
series of its kind, and will expand the study to include the predatory seastar
Pisaster through the use of thermally-matched sensors. He will use these data to
test a series of hypotheses relating to patterns of risk of high and low
temperature extremes. Data will also serve as an important source of information
for physiological, ecological and biogeographic studies conducted by labs
throughout the US. The investigator will produce a searchable, publicly-
accessible database where individual temperature records can be downloaded by
researchers and applied to physiological and ecological studies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a collaboration between departments
of Biological Science and Computer Science and Engineering to develop a database
and user-friendly web-based interface that will provide access to data by
multiple end-users. It will also feed into existing outreach efforts that make
lesson plans for K-12 students, using data as part of lesson plans and other
activities to teach students about the effects of climate change on coastal
organisms.