* 0926076
* Robust Physiological Signal Extraction using High Precision Hardware and Personalized Signal Processing
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Todd Seto, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* GEORGE HADDAD
* 07/31/2013
* USD 350,000.00

The objective of this research is to enable accurate heart signal extraction
using Doppler radar. The approach is to develop high-precision hardware and
data-driven solutions for extracting and interpreting physiological data
obtained using Doppler radar. The primary motivation for this work is a growing
need for non-invasive monitoring of health parameters, as well as military and
national security applications.

With respect to intellectual merit, this collaborative research involving
engineering and medical faculty at the University of Hawaii at Manoa seeks to
achieve a high level of robustness and reliability in non-contact Doppler radar
physiological sensing. The project builds on the investigators' past work on
Doppler heart sensing and non-invasive cardiology.

With respect to broader impact, this project has the potential to result in
valuable tools that can benefit society in the areas of health care, emergency
response, military, and security operations. This project presents a motivating
educational opportunity for a diverse population of minority students that have
been historically underserved by local educational and industrial opportunities.
An important aspect of this project is the interaction of engineering students
with the medical co-advisor. The partnership established in this project allows
engineering students and faculty to complement College of Engineering resources
by leveraging medical school expertise and facilities. Students involved in this
project also have an opportunity to participate in K-12 outreach activities.