* 0926422
* Collaborative Research: Using Melt Inclusions to Test Models for Wet Melting and Melt Extraction Beneath Mid-Ocean Ridges
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Mark Behn, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 08/31/2013
* USD 309,001.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mid-ocean ridges are the primary
location of new crust generation. Because crustal creation impacts the structure
of the crust and mantle in the region of generation, being able to read the
geochemical clues of deep seated magmatic processes in surface-erupted lavas is
critical to our knowledge of how the Earth works. This research uses state-of-
the-art ion probe analyses of olivine hosted melt inclusions to examine magmatic
processes that result in the chemistry of lavas erupted at mid-ocean ridges. It
focuses on determining the concentrations of volatile phases, such as H2O and
CO2, that are known to control mantle melting and impact eruption processes.
Samples from the Southwest Indian Ridge and other slow and ultraslow spreading
centers will be analyzed. The data which come from environments characterized by
cooler thermal regimes; lower average degrees of melting; and extremely focused
volcanism, will be compared with data from faster spreading ridges. Project
outcomes include: (1) characterizing the relationship between H2O and degree of
melting over a range of depths beneath mid-ocean ridge axes, (2) determining
changes in melt chemistry along the ridges, and (3) quantifying volatile fluxes
from ultra-slow mid-ocean ridge spreading environments. In addition the work
helps us to better evaluate the extent to which olivine hosted melt inclusions
record melting processes in other geologic settings. Broader impacts of the work
include support for an early career scientist whose gender is under-represented
in the sciences and undergraduate training. Results will also be made publicly
available on the NSF-funded PetDB database. &lt;br/&gt;