* 0926858
* BRIGE: Innovative Connection Design for Enhanced Seismic Performance of Low to Mid-Rise Steel Frames
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Jason McCormick, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 07/31/2012
* USD 174,973.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this BRIGE
award is to develop new connection details utilizing the superior compression,
bending, and torsion properties of hollow structural section (HSS) beam and
column members for low to mid-rise steel frames in areas of high seismicity. The
behavior of HSS beam members under bending will be explored through full-scale
experimental studies to determine limiting parameters for plastic hinge
formation. The data from these tests will provide the basis for detailed models
that can accurately capture global and local behavior under bending and provide
a means to identify suitable connection configurations and design details.
Further refinement of these models will be achieved through small-scale tests
focused on local buckling and weld behavior. The seismic response of frame
systems with the identified HSS connections will be compared to those with
conventional connection detailing through numerical analyses. Additional
numerical studies of the HSS moment connections will consider the use of
innovative supplemental energy dissipation materials to further enhance their
seismic performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this
research will provide a knowledge base for the design of resilient and robust
low to mid-rise moment frame structures utilizing HSS members. The increased
understanding of the global bending, local, and weld behavior of HSS members
will directly benefit the steel design community and help to enhance the welfare
and safety of communities in areas of high seismicity. The interaction between
materials, structures, and natural hazards provides a unique context in which to
broaden participation of underrepresented students. K-12 outreach programs and
involvement of underrepresented groups at the university level in everything
from analytical modeling to large-scale structural testing will act as a
catalyst to foster continued participation and interest of underrepresented
groups in the math, science, and engineering fields.