* 0926985
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Institutional Analysis and Effective Conservation of Biodiversity in Central America
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2011
* Catherine Tucker, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2011
* USD 11,936.00

Because of human-related disturbances, tropical forests are suffering from rapid
deforestation and fragmentation, which is leading to a significant decrease in
biodiversity. This impacts the survival, livelihoods, and prosperity of local
human populations. Conservation of biologically rich forests is one of the most
crucial issues in current natural resource management. Institutional approaches
to conservation range from limited-use laws to complete exclusion of people from
protected areas. Institutions are formal and informal rules that people use to
manage resources. Previous research has shown a correlation between monitoring
and enforcement institutions and biodiversity, but there is no clear
understanding about why some institutions successfully maintain biodiversity
while others do not. This doctoral dissertation research project will quantify
the differences in forest tree biodiversity and spatial distribution of
deforestation and reforestation events in a contiguous high montaine cloud
forest, La Fraternidad Biosphere Reserve, which is located at the intersection
of Guatemala, Honduras, and El Salvador. Each country has different
institutional arrangements dealing with the protection of this area, and
monitoring and enforcement vary across the countries. The doctoral candidate
will address the following question: How do institutional arrangements for
monitoring and enforcement affect biodiversity in protected areas? Remote-
sensing land-cover change analysis along with intensive forest mensuration,
local household surveys, and interviews will provide data needed to complete a
comparative analysis of the impacts of three distinct institutional protection
regimes on forest biodiversity. Findings are expected to show where
deforestation and reforestation are occurring, compare tree biodiversity among
the three countries, and correlate the results to institutional variables,
especially monitoring and enforcement. The student expects to demonstrate that
institutional arrangements limiting forest product use through monitoring and
enforcement will be positively correlated with higher forest
biodiversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will conduct a multinational
comparative analysis within a single forest ecosystem in a transnational
protected area. In case studies across different forests, variability in abiotic
and biotic variables can make meaningful comparisons difficult. Because this
forest ecosystem is subject to three distinct institutional arrangements, it
will be easier to attribute differences in forest biodiversity to institutional
differences. Research results will enhance current knowledge of effective
institutions for forest governance by comparing institutions and their effects
on the ground. The project also will explore what institutional arrangements are
associated with conservation in protected areas occupied by humans and which
institutional variables correlate with greater biodiversity. This research has
potential implications for approaches to current conservation initiatives in
areas where people live within in protected areas. As a Doctoral Dissertation
Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a
promising student to establish a strong independent research career. This award
is jointly supported by the NSF Geography and Spatial Sciences Program and the
NSF Office of International Science and Engineering.