* 0927792
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Turkish-Dutch Mosques and the Construction of Transnational Spaces in Europe
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2009,01/31/2011
* Murat Es, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Ezekiel Kalipeni
* 01/31/2011
* USD 12,000.00

The location and establishment of mosques is often at the forefront of debates
on Muslim integration and national belonging in Europe. These debates typically
treat mosque construction within a framework of the Islamicization of cityspaces
and of Muslim public visibility. The changing meaning and use of mosques as
religious spaces by Muslims, however, remain understudied. This research aims to
fill this gap by examining the symbolic, material, and cognitive production of
mosque spaces by Turkish immigrants in the Netherlands. Even though often
approached as uniform places, Turkish-Dutch mosques in fact are differentiated
along political, ethnic, regional, gender, and denominational lines. Since the
transnational connections between the Turkey and the Netherlands inform the ways
in which mosques are imagined, built and institutionalized, this project also
will investigate the historical trajectories of, and influences between, mosque
projects and national belonging in Turkey and the Netherlands. The research will
be conducted through a multi-sited ethnography that will take place in the Dutch
cities of Amsterdam, Haarlem and The Hague and in the Turkish cities of Istanbul
and Ankara. The research data will be collected by means of participant
observation, semi-structured interviews, discourse analysis of policy and media
documents, and focus groups. The findings of this research likely will
demonstrate the importance of the contextual differences and competing actors in
the imagination, construction and contestation of Turkish-Dutch mosques. Based
on the conviction that space is not just the container of identities but is
socially constructed and constitutive of social relations, this research will
also explicate the role mosques play in the cultivation of ethnic, national and
religious modes of belonging and subject positions within the transnational
space between Turkey and the Netherlands. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intense debates
about the compatibility of Islamic principles, beliefs and practices with
European norms and values have recently become commonplace. Muslim immigrants
are often criticized for reproducing their religious traditions while rejecting
the legal, cultural, and political circumstances of their host countries. This
project will problematize approaching mosques as primordial and static locations
of Muslim identity in the Netherlands. Instead it will show multiple and
contested views, actors and processes that go into the production of distinct
and diverse mosque spaces and Muslim communities. In so doing, this research
will offer a corrective to the representation of mosques mainly as sites of
resistance to integration and as breeding grounds of fundamentalism in the
Netherlands. In contrast to views that externalize both Muslims and their
communal sites in Europe, this project will demonstrate how Islamic beliefs,
practices, and spaces are defined by their specific context. As a Doctoral
Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to
enable a promising student to establish an independent research
career.&lt;br/&gt;