* 0927254
* IRES US-Kenya: Effects of habitat changes on distribution, abundance and resource exploitation by globally-threatened and forest specialist birds in Arabuko-Sokoke Forest, Kenya
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Joseph Oyugi, City Colleges of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 08/31/2013
* USD 139,560.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Joseph Oyugi of Warren Wright
College of the City Colleges of Chicago will train undergraduate students from
the United States in applied ecological research by investigating how habitat
alterations affect bird communities in a tropical forest. Each year for three
summers, four undergraduates and one faculty will travel to Kenya to conduct
field research in Arabuko-Sokoke Forest. Arabuko-Sokoke Forest in coastal Kenya
ranks second as the most important forest for bird conservation in mainland
Africa. The 270 bird species known from it include six globally threatened,
three near-threatened species, eight species categorized as regionally
threatened in eastern Africa and several other forest-specialist birds. Both
threatened and forest specialist birds show preference for certain habitat
types. However, Arabuko-Sokoke Forest is under severe pressure due to selective
logging, pole harvesting for building, fuel wood collection and unplanned
tourism activities. These activities have different impacts on the forest and
have the potentials of altering the forest structure and negatively affect
forest birds including other biodiversity within the forest. Our objective is to
examine how these habitat modifications relate to the distribution, abundance
and resource exploitation by three rare bird species and three forest specialist
birds that occur in Arabuko-Sokoke forest. Specifically, students will use
census data, mist netting and the foraging behavior observations to determine
the environmental and ecological factors that either promote the success or
threaten the survival of these species. The PI collaborates with Alfred Owino,
Research Scientist with Biodiversity Research and Monitoring Division at the
Kenya Wildlife Service (KWS) who will be involved in co-
mentorship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The project directly
addresses concerns that Seymour and Hewitt offered to explain the exodus from
science fields: lack of confidence, competitive atmosphere and dullness of
subject matter. Students will investigate how birds respond to habitat
heterogeneity, and in the end identify the axes of environmental heterogeneity
that promote species survival and coexistence. This project will provide US
students with opportunity for self discovery through ?hands-on? training in
field ecology that includes, field preparations, experimental designs, data
collection and analysis, writing and research presentation in workshops,
conferences and relevant scientific publications. The proposed research
investigations will advance science by elucidating mechanisms structuring the
bird community of Arabuko-Sokoke Forest, which includes resource use, resource
partitioning and mechanisms of coexistence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: Wilbur Wright College is a Minority Serving and Hispanic Serving
Institution of about 6000 students that is part of the City Colleges of Chicago.
This student population increase the diversity of the STEM talent pool from
which the nation?s future scientific talent and technical force will be drawn.
The proposed study is also ranked among the priority studies by the wildlife
management authority in Kenya. The data from this research would provide the
required information for the long-term conservation of the Arabuko-Sokoke
Forest. In addition, the research will further the knowledge and expertise of
local naturalists and tour guides, and indirectly further their careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by NSF's Division of Environmental
Biology, Directorate for Biological Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;