* 0927874
* Methyl Bromide and Selected Halocarbons:  Response of the Ocean to the Montreal Protocol and Subsequent Amendments
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Shari Yvon-Lewis, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 07/31/2013
* USD 312,147.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Since the implementation of the Montreal Protocol and its amendments, banning
the use of methyl bromide (CH3Br), other halocarbons, and chlorofluorocarbons,
the concentration of these substances in the atmosphere have declined. This
suggests the ocean should also have lower values than prior to the phaseout
assuming the rates of biological production remain unchanged. A scientist from
Texas A&M University will be conducting measurements of these parameters during
cruises in the Atlantic and Pacific Ocean basin to assess the spatial and
temporal variability of surface ocean concentrations and saturation states of
CH3Br and other halocarbons. In addition, the scientist will investigate the
relationship between the distribution of CH3Br and the other halocarbons and
remotely sensed oceanic parameters such as sea surface temperature. Lastly, any
potential changes in the biological production or degradation rates of CH3Br
would be ascertained. Results from this research will advance the understanding
of the role of the ocean in the cycling of atmospheric halocarbons, as well as
further our knowledge on the origin and cycling of these components in seawater.
This scientific progression will allow scientist and modelers to develop the
predictive capability on how air/sea fluxes of oceanic trace gases will respond
to global changes in atmosphere/ocean chemistry and climate.

As regards broader impacts, understanding the results and impacts of
environmental policies and protocols that have already been enacted, such as the
Montreal Protocol, is important in assessing the potential ramifications of
enacting new environmental policies. Results from this study would be
incorporated into the teaching materials for the proponent's graduate and
undergraduate classes. One graduate student would be supported and trained as
part of this project.