* 0927149
* Experiments and Models on Room Temperature Creep of Nanocrystalline Metallic Films
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Philippe Geubelle, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Siegmund
* 06/30/2013
* USD 398,521.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project integrates
experiments and modeling to develop physics-based predictive models for the
problem of room temperature creep in nanocrystalline metallic films. The novel
experiments aim at extracting directly the grain-boundary (GB) sliding viscosity
and the GB diffusivity. Model experiments augmented with atomic force microscopy
measurements will obtain the displacement jumps as a function of time. The
measured local GB parameters will be incorporated in cohesive models for the GBs
in a multiscale model for polycrystalline Au to quantify the effect of inelastic
GB mechanisms on the creep response of nanocrystalline Au films. While other
homogenization schemes use the macroscale material behavior to fit microscale
parameters, the proposed multiscale experimental/modeling protocol employs
macroscale experiments to validate the multiscale modeling
predictions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project can have significant
technological and educational impacts. Several thin film applications, such as
radio frequency microelectromechanical systems, variable capacitors and tunable
filters involve fixed-fixed metal structures that suffer from loss of mechanical
stiffness due to creep at room temperature. Quantification of the GB mechanisms
in nanocrystalline metals will allow for mitigating strategies to prevent room
temperature creep but maintain the high yield strength that is controlled by
dislocation crystal plasticity. Once perfected, the experiments will be
integrated in the PI's experimental course "Nanoscale Contact Mechanics" that
provides theoretical and experimental education and training to graduate
students by following a "bottom-up" methodology in mechanics.