* 0927744
* Experimental Study of Iron Partitioning and Hydrogen Generation During Serpentinization of Ultramafic Rocks
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Alexis Templeton, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 08/31/2014
* USD 445,062.00

Scientists have become increasingly aware of microbial communities living at and
below the seafloor where they thrive on chemical energy (chemosynthesis) rather
than sunlight. While it is not yet known how abundant and widespread such
chemosynthetic communities are, it has been suggested that they may make
significant contributions to global biomass and the biogeochemical cycles of
carbon and other elements. A primary source of chemical energy that sustains
these deep sea microbes is molecular hydrogen (H2), which is generated from the
reaction of water with ultramafic rocks, a process known as serpentinization.
However, the factors that control the amount of hydrogen generated during
serpentinization remain poorly known. This research conducts laboratory
experiments at high temperatures and along the vapor pressure curve of H2O that
monitor H2 production as water-rock reactions proceed as a way to simulate the
serpentinization process. Detailed analysis of the solid reaction products with
state-of-the-art high resolution methods make it possible to define the chemical
reactions that generate hydrogen. Numerical geochemical models will provide a
framework for extrapolating the laboratory results to natural systems. Broader
impacts of the work include training for a postdoctoral associate and two
undergraduate students. The research will also serve as a focal point for a new
university course aimed at training students in a multidisciplinary scientific
approach.