* 0927739
* Agent-Based Modeling for Planning Emergency Response to Contamination Emergencies in Water Utilities
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Michael Lindell, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 08/31/2012
* USD 384,954.00

This research project bridges the disciplines of hydraulic engineering and
social science to provide answers to the questions a water utility manager faces
in a contamination event, "What do I need to know and what tools can I use to
effectively minimize sickness and deaths from this event?" Approximately 90
percent of the U.S. population receives water from one of 170,000 public water
utilities. Despite the ubiquity of this infrastructure and its importance for
public health, many aspects of emergency management for water systems remain at
an undeveloped stage. Accidental contaminants in the water distribution system
erode public trust and result in sickness and death, and malicious contamination
may cause even more destructive results. As a contamination event unfolds, water
utility managers need to make decisions in an extraordinarily difficult
environment: information that they receive is incomplete and subject to great
error; the water distribution system is dynamic and extremely complex; and
consumer reactions are uncertain and affect the operation of the water system,
making the dynamics of the system even more complex and uncertain. Throughout an
event, consumers may reduce their water consumption based on official notices,
such as boil water notices, or informal (peer-initiated) warnings, and the
actions of consumers in response to these alerts will change hydraulic
conditions in the network. Thus, any further decisions by water utility managers
should take into account the fluctuations of the contaminant plume. The project
addresses several unknown facets of the water distribution threat management
problem. This research will collect data needed to empirically model consumers'
decision-making process and compliance rates to protective action
recommendations. Empirical models of consumer behavior and hydraulic simulation
of water distribution networks will be coupled through an agent-based modeling
(ABM) framework. The simulation framework will be coupled with optimization
algorithms to evaluate large sets of response options and develop effective
emergency response plans that account for uncertainty and the dynamic nature of
population-infrastructure interactions. Project results will be used to develop
a protocol for responding to contamination events for municipalities and water
utilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While intentional contamination is a realistic
threat to U.S. water utility infrastructure, little research literature exists
on the complex interactions of emergency warnings, public response, and
management effectiveness for water utilities. The Environmental Protection
Agency has published documents to provide some guidance for responding to a
water distribution event, but can recommend only very generic actions, as the
best response for a utility depends on the hydraulic characteristics of the
system, the characteristics of the contaminant release, and the interactions of
the public, media, and decision makers. This framework will allow a specific
water utility to identify response options for a range of events based on its
particular characteristics, thus preparing and equipping public officials and
water utility operators to better protect public health. When a utility uses the
framework, a set of documents and flowcharts will be produced that can later be
used to guide management actions in real-time as a contaminant event unfolds and
the characteristics of the event are understood as information is gathered.