* 0927358
* Collaborative Research:  New Methods for Measuring, Evaluating and Predicting the Safety Impact of Road Infrastructure Systems on Driver Behavior
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Anurag Pande, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* elise miller-hooks
* 08/31/2014
* USD 78,000.00

In this collaborative research project, the investigators study the impact of
roadway infrastructure on driver behavior and its implications on vehicle to
vehicle interactions as well as on assessing macroscopic transportation network
performance. Focusing on the geometric characteristics of highways and freeways
and trying to understand how the road surrounding environment affect the
aggressive driving behavior from a traffic flow theory perspective, better
insight is given on the geometric effects on traffic operations, geometric
effects on safety and effects of operations on safety. For that, the
investigators adopt a unified traffic flow framework where the developed
microscopic acceleration model and the macroscopic two-fluid model are based on
utility maximization (choice) under risk. Explicit incorporation of risk
attitudes and perception parameters in the corresponding models while
understanding the influence of non-traffic related stimulus allows quantifying
the safety implications of different roadway sections on driver behavior. In
order to calibrate the traffic flow models that explain risk attitudes and
perception based on road features, extensive data collection is undertaken. The
investigators focus on three geographically diverse locations: Washington D.C.
metropolitan area and the states of LA and CA. Crash data as well as highway
infrastructure characteristics of the data collection sites are used for
verifying the new approaches with the SEM (Structural Equation Method) modeling
approach. The different research findings are used to develop surrogate safety
measures on freeways and highways and to create a prototype microscopic
simulation model capturing the impact of external non-traffic related
characteristics on the different model parameters. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From a
broader perspective, transportation problems are characterized by finding the
most efficient methods to move people/goods from an origin to a destination in a
fast and safe manner. In vehicular traffic, these problems translate into
avoiding road congestion and reducing human and physical losses due to traffic
incidents. The major "players" in these problems are the driver/vehicle units
(driver socio-demographic characteristics, vehicle properties, etc) and the
driving environment (environmental conditions, traffic conditions,
transportation infrastructure system characteristics, etc) surrounding such
units. In the past years, understanding the impact of civil infrastructure
systems on driver behavior, in particular the corresponding safety implications,
have been limited to identifying "black-spots" and assessing qualitatively or
statistically the safety measures that can be taken to avoid or respond to such
incident scenarios. Nowadays, with the rising number of vehicles-miles travelled
and the associated incidents, the need for substantial research in this area is
no less important but with more generalized models helping answering important
questions: what are the driver cognitive properties that are influenced by the
road geometric features? Which socio-demographic driver characteristics and
environmental/weather features play the major roles in such influence? What are
the relationships between drivers? behavior and collective traffic patterns
including congestion dynamics? How can weather-related and infrastructure-
related parameters be incorporated in traffic flow models? These fundamental
questions need to be answered in order to develop good infrastructure design
strategies and engineering solutions for safer and efficient transportation
systems. By improving traffic management control systems and considering risk-
taking behavior, the resulting traffic flow models have tremendous value in
evacuation management where risk associated to extreme and hazardous conditions
affect driving behavior.