* 0927951
* Manganese, vanadium, gallium and rare earth elements in the GEOTRACES North Atlantic zonal section
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Alan Shiller, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 09/30/2013
* USD 174,857.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;GEOTRACES is a newly initiated
international oceanographic program to identify processes and quantify fluxes
that control the distributions of key trace elements and isotopes in the oceans
and to establish an understanding of the sensitivity of these distributions to
changing environmental conditions. During the GEOTRACES cruise to the North
Atlantic basin in 2010, a scientist from the University of Southern Mississippi
will determine gallium, vanadium, manganese, and rare earth elements in surface
samples and throughout the water column. Samples will be taken from sites that
exhibit the physical and biogeochemical processes that influence trace metals
and their isotopes, namely strong meridional advection, boundary scavenging and
sources, aeolian deposition, and input of intermediate waters from the
Mediterranean and Labrador Seas. The resultant dataset should provide insight
into cross margin exchange of these elements, as well as investigate redox
processes and atmospheric inputs. As regards broader impacts, this project would
contribute funds for the 'Our Ocean World', a podcast broadcast daily on
hundreds of radio stations including the Voice of America. The goal of this
outreach effort is to inform listeners around the world about news items and
information related to ocean matters. One graduate student would be supported
and trained as part of this project.