* 0927262
* Efficient Photocatalytic Conversion of CO2 and Water Vapor to Hydrocarbon Fuels Using Sunlight
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Craig Grimes, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2012
* USD 38,491.00

0927262 Grimes

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

In initial work the PIs have achieved efficient solar conversion of carbon
dioxide and water vapor to methane and other hydrocarbons using nitrogen doped
titania nanotube arrays, with a wall thickness low enough to facilitate
effective carrier transfer to the adsorbing species, sensitized with nano
dimensional islands of co-catalysts platinum and/or copper. All experiments have
been conducted in outdoor sunlight at University Park, PA. Intermediate reaction
products, hydrogen and carbon monoxide, are also detected, with their relative
concentrations underlying hydrocarbon production rates as dependent upon the
nature of the co-catalysts on the nanotube array surface. Using outdoor sunlight
with a power density between 75 to 102 mW/cm2, normalized to global AM 1.5
sunlight at 100 mW/cm2, a hydrocarbon production rate of 111 ppm cm-2 hr-1
(about 160 microliters/g hr) is obtained when the nanotube array samples are
sensitized with both Cu and Pt nanoparticles.1 This rate of CO2 to hydrocarbon
production obtained under outdoor sunlight is at least 20 times higher than
previous published reports, which were conducted under laboratory conditions
using UV illumination. The PIs seek to understand the reactions inherent in
their high rates of photocatalytic CO2 conversion, with a further aim of
significantly improving them. Initial objectives include: {1} Uniform
sensitization. In preliminary efforts the top surface of the nanotube array
samples were sensitized with Cu and Pt co-catalyst particles. The PIs believe
uniform sensitization of the nanotube array samples over their entire surface
area would significantly enhance photocatalytic conversion rates. They seek to
uniformly sensitize the nanotube array samples using atomic layer deposition, or
solution chemistry techniques, with immediate variables including nanoparticle
type (Cu, CuO, Cu2O, Pt), loading, spacing, size, and size distribution in
relationship to the nanotube wall thickness. They will elucidate the role(s) the
co-catalysts play, and the associated underlying physical mechanisms including
half-reactions, thereby enabling design of photocatalytic materials for enhanced
performance. {2} Enhanced Visible Light Absorption. Useful, scale solar
conversion of CO2 to hydrocarbon fuels will require photocatalysts responsive to
visible light. The PIs propose two routes to achieve this. First, by extending
their preliminary efforts on nitrogen doping of titania, which can most readily
be accomplished by modifying the conditions of the crystallization anneal to
maintain nitrogen within the lattice and minimize the density of carrier trap
states associated with doping. Another approach is the synthesis of
compositionally graded Ti-Cu-O nanotube arrays designed for broad spectrum solar
energy absorption, by anodization of compositionally-graded metal films to
achieve nanotube arrays of the corresponding metal oxides. {3} Photocatalytic
Membranes. By enhancing the photocatalytic properties of the sensitized nanotube
arrays, and increasing the surface area through decreased pore size the PIs seek
to achieve a mechanically robust high-surface area photocatalytic membrane into
which CO2 and water vapor flow, and hydrocarbons exit reducing the chances of
back reactions, thereby enhancing the conversion rate, as the products will not
accumulate near the nanotube surface. The nanotube pore size will be optimized
to limit the inflow of CO2 and H2O vapor species to achieve a complete (or
nearly complete) conversion to hydrocarbons and intermediates, thus obtaining a
complete reactant-product separation.

Broader Impacts: A viable means to generate hydrocarbon fuels using solar energy
and CO2, thereby providing a means to store solar energy in the form of chemical
fuel. Interdisciplinary training of a Ph.D. student in this vitally important
field, and significant REU participation. Intellectual Merit: Improved
understanding of photocatalytic materials and reactions enabling design of
advanced photocatalysts, enhanced understanding of oxide materials and their
bandgap engineering, enhanced understanding of the synthesis, material
properties and performance of ternary oxide semiconductors.