* 0927664
* A Collaborative Research on Multivariable Fixed Order Controller Synthesis and Design from Data
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Leehyun Keel, Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* George Chiu
* 09/30/2013
* USD 149,238.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to develop new
fundamental theory and effective design methodologies to address practically
important issues that existing control theories cannot effectively handle:
specifically the proposal will develop methods for the design of fixed and low
order controllers for multivariable systems which satisfy multiple design
specifications and which are based on the measured data and not on models. This
is a very realistic engineering problem that remains open despite significant
progress in computer-aided design. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of
feedback control system design is to precisely regulate physical quantities such
as position, velocity, temperature, pressure, flow-rate and level in dynamic
systems despite significant uncertainty and knowledge of the behavior of the
underlying processes. The present proposal approaches the control design problem
with a view to overcoming several outstanding challenges. These are a) the need
to develop design methods which use measured data directly since mathematical
models are unavailable for most systems b) the design of low order or low
complexity controllers since the existing methods yield high order controllers
which are often fragile or acutely sensitive and therefore unimplementable and
c) designs which satisfy multiple user defined specifications. Preliminary
results on integral and first order controllers look promising. The research
should have a significant impact on control applications ranging from chemical
processes, manufacturing systems, disk drives, missile and aircraft control,
internet congestion control and biological control systems including genetic
networks. In each of these applications models are scarcely available and few
effective design techniques exist for the effective design of simple
controllers.