* 0927428
* The Influence of Surface Waves on the Upper Mixed Layer
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* W Melville, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2013
* USD 885,836.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Intellectual Merit: The momentum and energy fluxes from the atmosphere to the
ocean pass through the surface wave field before giving rise to surface currents
and mixing locally, while some of the fluxes extend across the ocean basins
through propagation by swell. However, the detailed balances of energy and
momentum in the upper ocean are poorly understood and are still the subject of
speculative estimates. Recent Large Eddy Simulations (LES) of the upper ocean
mixed layer, or Oceanic Boundary Layer (OBL), which include wave effects through
Langmuir circulations and wave breaking, have shown that wave effects may be
felt throughout the developing boundary layer through aspects of vortex dynamics
common to both breaking and Langmuir circulations, and synergies between the two
phenomena. For example, the numerical model shows that the same Craik-Leibovich
vortex force and feedback that gives rise to Langmuir circulations may be seeded
by breaking. Furthermore, turbulence generated at the surface by breaking may be
transported into the entraining boundary layer by Langmuir circulations.

The project will carry out a series of field experiments to test the assumptions
and predictions of the LES models. The field measurements will be conducted from
R/P FLIP in collaboration with planned ONR FLIP experiments on surface wave
phenomena and air-sea interaction. These wave measurements are necessary to
constrain the LES models and boundary conditions. The project will concentrate
on the OBL measurements including currents and turbulence, temperature, salinity
and entrained air (bubbles), from profiled instruments and a tethered surface
float. The predictions of the models may be tested by measurements of the
statistical moments of the velocity and temperature fields as a function of
depth, including fluxes of momentum, heat and Turbulent Kinetic Energy (TKE)
through the OBL. One of the important assumptions of the models is that the
dynamical effects of the entrained air due to breaking can be neglected; a good
approximation under certain environmental conditions. However, there is evidence
that this approximation will break down near the surface at higher wind speeds.
If air entrainment is dynamically significant it will act to suppress vertical
mixing and may have a qualitative impact on the structure of the OBL. Direct
measurements of the air entrained by breaking and its dynamical consequences
will be made.

Broader Impacts: This research will include an improved understanding of the
coupling of the oceans and the atmosphere, leading to better coupled models of
weather and climate. Our ability to predict seasonal fluctuations and secular
climate change has an important impact on fisheries, agriculture, the energy
industry, the commodity markets, the construction and insurance industries, and
disaster/threat preparedness. Ultimately, good national and international
environmental policy relies on a solid scientific basis for decision making, and
the project will contribute to those policies. The project will support the
integration of research and education at every academic level. This includes
training and support of post-doctoral scholars and graduate students, as well as
contributions to K-12 and public education. Results from this research will be
disseminated in professional journal publications and more popular avenues of
publication. Knowledge gained through this research will be incorporated into
the education and training of students at Scripps Institution of Oceanography,
UCSD. The resources from the project will support a doctoral student and provide
material and facilities for undergraduate projects and minority undergraduate
summer fellows. The results of this project will be used to promote science and
research to a broader audience by working with the Center for Ocean Science
Excellence/California (COSEE CA) to develop a website and present earth science
workshops for science teachers from the San Diego Unified School District.