* 0927472
* Stability analysis of the western boundary currents in the tropical Indian Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2010,09/30/2015
* Jurgen Theiss, Theiss Research
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 09/30/2015
* USD 299,618.00

The overall objective of the project is to understand better the instabilities
of the western boundary currents in the tropical Indian Ocean, which are the
Somali Current in the Northern and the East African Coastal Current in the
Southern hemisphere. This will in particular allow for determining whether the
instabilities of these currents contribute to the generation of Yanai waves,
also known as mixed Rossby gravity waves, in the western Indian Ocean. Yanai
waves, which have the characteristics of Tropical Instability Waves, have been
observed in the Pacific, Atlantic, and Indian Ocean. While the generation
mechanism is well understood in the Atlantic and Pacific Ocean, it is still
practically unknown in the Indian Ocean. This knowledge gap is the main
motivation for the work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will employ the
classical normal mode stability theory, which considers exponential growth
processes as for instance in the theory of baroclinic instability, and the
comparatively new Generalized Stability Theory, which encompasses also transient
growth processes. To investigate the instabilities of the western boundary
currents in the tropical Indian Ocean three models will be used: A modified form
of the quasigeostrophic model, the equatorial counterpart of the
quasigeostrophic model recently developed by Theiss and Mohebalhojeh, and the
Regional Ocean Modeling System (ROMS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall
objective inspires two additional objectives. The first additional objective is
to investigate whether the equatorial counterpart of the quasigeostrophic model
is for instability studies in the equatorial region a tool that is as
instructive as the quasigeostrophic model in the mid-latitudes. The second
additional objective is to integrate the project with the PIs' Zanzibar Project,
which is an educational project for students on coastal oceanography in East
Africa. The natural overlap of the study of the western boundary currents of the
tropical Indian Ocean and coastal oceanography in East Africa will be used by
the PIs for the mutual benefit of both projects and especially the involved
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Better understanding the instabilities of the
western boundary currents in the tropical Indian Ocean and in particular their
contribution to the generation of Yanai waves would help towards developing a
level of understanding that already exists about the generation of Yanai waves
in the Atlantic and Pacific Ocean. Dominant features such as the alternating
Monsoon winds must affect the instabilities of the western boundary currents in
the tropical Indian Ocean. These instabilities in turn must affect the marine
ecosystems along the East Coast of Africa and might contribute to the generation
of Yanai waves, thus effect the momentum and heat balance in the equatorial
Indian Ocean and climate variability. The instabilities are therefore an
integral part affected by and in turn affecting processes with scales ranging
from local to ocean-basin-wide. In addition, the integration of the study with
the PIs educational Zanzibar Project will help expand the students' study of the
coastal ocean of East Africa to the larger western tropical Indian Ocean.