* 0927453
* U.S. GEOTRACES North Atlantic Section: The chemical speciation of dissolved iron and copper
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2014
* Kristen Buck, Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences (BIOS), Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 02/28/2014
* USD 317,042.00

GEOTRACES is a newly initiated international oceanographic program to identify
processes and quantify fluxes that control the distributions of key trace
elements and isotopes in the oceans and to establish an understanding of the
sensitivity of these distributions to changing environmental conditions. During
the GEOTRACES cruise to the North Atlantic basin in 2010, a scientist from the
Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences will focus on characterizing the organic
complexation of dissolved iron (Fe) in the water column. Iron is typically
&gt;99% complexed by strong organic ligands in the marine environment making
these ligands a crucial component of the biogeochemical cycling of this element.
The specific goals of the proposed work are the following: (1) determine the
distributions of strong Fe-binding organic ligands and the sources of
variability in the relationship between strong ligand and dissolved Fe
concentrations in the proposed hydrographic regions; (2) inter-compare shipboard
and laboratory-based speciation analyses with those of other analysts as well as
with published field data; and (3) assess any apparent contributions of aeolian
deposition to changes in dissolved Fe-binding organic ligand concentrations in
surface waters. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As regards broader impacts, results from
this study would provide much-needed field data for future modeling endeavors.
The outreach component of the study was truly impressive and includes the
production of an radio segment from 'Our Ocean World' that highlight research
finding from this study and the collaboration with high school teachers to
develop lesson plans containing both hands-on experiments related to the
project.