* 0927274
* Collaborative Research: GEOTRACES Atlantic Section: Mercury Speciation Along a Zonal Section in the North Atlantic
* GEO,OCE
* 12/15/2009,11/30/2012
* Chad Hammerschmidt, Wright State University
* Standard Grant
* Simone Metz
* 11/30/2012
* USD 57,930.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

GEOTRACES is an international oceanographic program whose goal is to identify
processes and quantify fluxes that control the distributions of key trace
elements and their isotopes in the ocean and to establish an understanding of
the sensitivity of these distributions to changing environmental conditions.
Mercury (Hg) is an element for which almost no data currently exists for the
North Atlantic. As such, scientist from Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution and
Wright State University plan to participate in the GEOTRACES North Atlantic
cruise to carry out a full depth investigation of mercury species (i.e.,
mercuric ion, elemental Hg, monomethylmercury, dimethylmercury) in this ocean
basin. Sampling from a wide range of oceanic conditions, including sites of
hydrothermal input, upwelling, shelf waters, marginal sea inputs, and regions
subject to oceanic mining influences will provide insight to the transport and
segregation of Hg species, the potential impacts of past, present, and future
anthropogenic Hg emissions on the ocean, as well as the role of the ocean in the
global biogeochemical cycle of this element.

Because the ocean plays a critical role in human exposure to mercury, this
research will also provide insight to the human and ecosystem health threat from
methylated-Hg accumulation in fish. One graduate student from Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution, as well as one graduate and one undergraduate student
from Wright State University would be supported and trained as part of this
project. It is anticipated the graduate students would participate in the
GEOTRACES Atlantic cruise.