* 0927491
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Land-Cover Change and Carbon Sequestration under Diverse Land Management Regimes: Implications for Forest Protection and Restoration in Guatemala
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2009,01/31/2012
* Tom Evans, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 01/31/2012
* USD 11,880.00

Landscapes are complex mosaics of shifting land uses and land cover. Those
dynamics have important local, regional, and global environmental implications.
The objective of this research is to understand land-use/land-cover change
dynamics in Guatemala with direct reference to land management regimes in
diverse forest ecosystems. This research will develop a more thorough
understanding of carbon sequestration implications of tropical forests and the
prospect for different land management types to preserve and restore forests.
Satellite imagery will be acquired for three periods (1991/93, 2001, 2006) to
produce land cover classifications and estimates of aboveground biomass. Forest
mensuration data will be used to relate satellite imagery to documented forest
structure in tropical dry and tropical moist ecosystems. Semi-structured
interviews will be conducted with local stakeholders to compare management
regimes in public, private, and communally managed forests to assess the
relative influence of each land management type on forest condition and
aboveground biomass. Because land-use change poses a significant threat to the
carbon balance and the global carbon cycle, proposals are being advanced to
compensate tropical forest countries for Reducing Emissions from Deforestation
and Degradation (known as REDD). This effort holds tremendous opportunities for
both scientific research and development of national and project-based REDD
initiatives. This research project will be able assess the utility of allometric
equations and remote sensing to estimate aboveground biomass, which has direct
relevance to the REDD programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of
this research lie in its relevance to the contemporary international policy and
development agenda. At the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
Conference of the Parties that took place in Bali in December 2007, the parties
agreed that reduced emissions from deforestation and degradation would be
included in the post-2012 agreements. Programs have already been initiated in
Guatemala to assist local farmers and communities in developing sustainable land
management practices through the provision of carbon services. Findings from
this research will provide valuable data on forest carbon under diverse land
management regimes and will contribute to the development of carbon offset
programs for local stakeholders. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement
award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising student to
establish a strong independent research career.&lt;br/&gt;