* 0927147
* BRIGE: Measurements of Image Formation in Chemically-Amplified Resists
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Gila Stein, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 07/31/2012
* USD 175,000.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chemically-amplified resists are
required for high-throughput patterning of integrated circuits, but recent
experimental and theoretical reports suggest that these systems cannot
simultaneously achieve the required resolution, sensitivity, and line edge
roughness for next generation lithography. Resist design must reflect an optimal
balance between these three factors, but lithography is one of a few processes
in semiconductor manufacturing that does not have closed-loop feedback, so
optimization is enormously complex. Process development relies heavily on
simulating the exposure, image formation, and development steps. Simulation
results are then compared with scanning electron microscopy measurements of the
developed resist structures for validation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: This research program will develop x-ray diffraction methods to
characterize the latent image in chemically-amplified resists. The image
resolution, three-dimensional shape, and pattern line-edge roughness will be
calculated with nanometer accuracy by modeling the diffraction data. There are
currently no experimental methods available to access this information, so this
project offers a unique strategy to identify the fundamental limitations of
chemical amplification for next generation lithography. A protocol will be
developed for in-situ measurements of the image formation process, and the real-
time feedback acquired with this approach may be used for process development,
optimization, and rapid screening of new imaging materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key components to this program are as
follows:&lt;br/&gt;- Electron beam lithography (EBL) will be used to generate
the photoacid distribution in the chemically-amplified resists.&lt;br/&gt;- The
EBL patterns will be line gratings that have a low-amplitude sinusoidal
variation in the pitch. The periodic pitch displacements introduce additional
diffraction peaks that will facilitate the analysis.&lt;br/&gt;- The structure
of the latent image will be characterized with three complementary x-ray
diffraction techniques: Transmission resonant soft x-ray diffraction,
transmission small-angle x-ray diffraction, and grazing-incidence small-angle
x-ray diffraction. Each technique offers unique information.&lt;br/&gt;- Data
will be quantitatively analyzed with models that incorporate the image
resolution, the shape of the image cross-section, and pattern line-edge
roughness. User friendly software packages will be developed and shared with the
lithography community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The BRIGE program
will fund two undergraduate researchers from under-represented groups that are
enrolled at the freshman or sophomore level. Each student will be assigned an
individual project that is appropriate for their level of skill and knowledge,
and they will learn a variety of experimental methods that are relevant to
microelectronics fabrication and nanomaterials characterization. These
undergraduate students will present their work to science classes at local high
schools in Houston. The objective is to demonstrate to high school students the
types of research opportunities that are available at the start of their
scientific careers.