* 0927104
* BRIGE: POWER DELIVERY TECHNOLOGIES RESEARCH AND EDUCATION DEVELOPMENT FOR FUTURE MANY-CORE COMPUTING PLATFORMS
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Jaber Abu Qahouq, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2014
* USD 186,989.00

BRIGE: POWER DELIVERY TECHNOLOGIES RESEARCH AND EDUCATION DEVELOPMENT FOR FUTURE
MANY-CORE COMPUTING
PLATFORMS&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of
this effort is to establish innovative research and educational activities for
multi-core and many-core power delivery technologies for future high performance
computing platforms that are suitable for sustaining multidimensional and
interdisciplinary state-of-the-art research. Multi-core and many-core chip and
processor designs promise significant breakthroughs in computing platform
performance that are used in critical applications in our daily lives. Such
computing technologies and designs require the rethinking of power delivery
technologies by defining new research directions and activities to improve
energy efficiency, improve performance, and reduce size and cost. These
applications, for example, include medical applications, complex weather
simulations, virtual reality and advanced graphics, video conferencing,
manufacturing processes controls, engineering complex analysis, education and
entertainment. Such applications impact peoples' daily life, scientific
advancement, economical growth, health, safety and
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits: Recent chip and processor
designs have started to utilize few cores and currently are powered using
conventional power delivery technologies, which may be sufficient for now even
though not optimum, until the research in this area advances. Future chip and
processor designs are expected to include tens and hundreds of cores that can be
homogeneous and/or heterogeneous with multiple non-uniform workloads. This will
result in the power delivery system being subjected to highly varying and
unpredictable power demands thus impacting energy efficiency and dynamic
performance. This research addresses these challenges by developing an
integrated simulation platform including efficiency model(s), dynamic response
model(s) and homogeneous and heterogeneous many-core loading profiles model(s)
that will be used to investigate and rethink power delivery design for many-core
platforms. Based on the preliminary results obtained from the developed
simulation platform, a reconfigurable research platform will also be developed
that includes different power converter topologies, and programmable control and
power management implementations supporting multiple heterogeneous and
homogeneous many-core workloads.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
research activities and related educational activities are designed to attract
the participation of engineers from all segments of the engineering community,
including those from underrepresented and minority groups such as women and
African Americans, to the area of power delivery and energy systems management
especially as applied to the state-of-the-art and future computing platforms
that has an impact on wide range of applications and markets. Research and
educational activities include research presentations and seminars at selected
Historically Black Colleges and Universities institutions, the University of
Alabama Student Introduction to Engineering program, and the organization of a
Many-Core Power Delivery Open House Day involving industry, students, and
persons from underrepresented groups. The results will also be disseminated
through refereed publications and through a new course for many-core power
delivery designs that will be developed and disseminated.