* 0927057
* BRIGE:  The Design and Characterization of a Multifunctional Chemiresistor Sensor Array
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Kim Lewis, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 07/31/2012
* USD 175,000.00

BRIGE ECCS - 0927057 The Design and Characterization of a Multifunctional
Chemiresistor Sensor Array

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

Intellectual Merit: The objective of this proposal is to design a
multifunctional chemiresistor sensor array which integrates a variety of
preselected functionalized gold nanoparticles and supersensitive electrometers.
The availability of such a device will be beneficial in healthcare or drug
diagnostics where large amounts of data must be quickly collected and analyzed.
The idea of the proposed sensor array is to electrostatically trap a different
functionalized nanoparticle in each row of the array. The gold nanoparticles
will be trapped in a nanogap, which is formed by an aluminum nitride quantum
well sandwiched between gallium nitride layers. The proposed research exploits
the use of single electron devices with Au nanoparticles, to demonstrate a
multifunctional chemiresistor sensor array. Characterization of the devices will
include measurement of the magnitude by which the current-voltage curves are
altered upon exposure to volatile organic compounds. The long term goal is to
explore the mechanisms (i.e., change in particle capacitance or charge)
responsible for single molecule detection. Success of the research will enable
fundamental studies of single molecule transfer events in nanoparticle based
sensors.

Broader Impact: The proposed research promotes the use of chemiresistor sensors,
which are attractive due to its simple and cheap fabrication methods and small
size (~nm scale). Introducing the proposed multifunctional sensor array to
society contributes to the advancement of medical, food and drug businesses. For
example, these devices can easily be implemented in the automobile industry
where sensors are needed to detect hydrocarbons or CO2 in exhaust gases. Also,
the proposed chemiresistor sensors can enable the detection of trace explosives,
which will be of interest to the nation's security industries. To cultivate a
broadly inclusive science and engineering workforce, the proposed research is
designed to promote scientific training of students while broadening the
participation of underrepresented groups. This will be accomplished through a
new educational program, called NOLA MOVERS (New Orleans Louisiana Minority
Opportunities via Educational Research in Science). This summer program will be
established to support students from a Historically Black College and University
to participate in first class research at Rensselaer. Also, a unique research
program will be established in Rensselaer's School of Science to mobilize
"undeclared" science students.