* 0927411
* Collaborative Research: ETBC: The coupling between DOM, algae, and microbes on coral reef platforms
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/2009,10/31/2013
* Craig Carlson, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 10/31/2013
* USD 339,737.00

This project will investigate the coupling between primary producers and the
utilization of dissolved organic matter (DOM) by marine heterotrophic microbes
on coral reefs. Previous metagenomic studies of the microbial communities
associated with near-pristine and degraded coral reefs demonstrated a shift from
a microbial food web similar to the open ocean (Prochlorococcus spp. and
SAR11-like bacteria) to a community dominated by "super-heterotrophs", most
closely related to known pathogens like E. coli, Staphylococcus spp.,
Streptococcus spp., Enterobacter spp. and Vibrio spp. This shift is associated
with a decline in coral cover and an increase in coral disease prevalence.
Previous research by the investigators has also shown that dissolved organic
carbon (DOC) concentrations are lower on coral reef platforms compared to
measurements of offshore waters (60-80 micro M). On degraded reefs, they have
observed DOC measurements as low as 30 - 40 micro M, a value similar to
concentrations observed in the deep Pacific Ocean. The observation of low DOC
measurements on degraded reefs is decoupled from the high abundance of
macroalgae, which one might expect would raise levels of DOC through the release
of photosynthate into the water column. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To explain this
apparent paradox, the investigators suggest the following hypothesis: Reef
degradation, and the associated phase-shifts from coral to algal dominance,
leads to elevated levels of algal exudates in the water column, which allows the
microbial community to utilize the standing stock of semi-labile DOC. This
results in: 1) higher microbial numbers and biomass; 2) a community shift to
'super-heterotrophs', which are potential coral pathogens; and 3) lower standing
stocks of DOC. This project will represent the first global, metagenomic study
of coral reef microbial food webs. The sequence data will be supported by
microbiological (e.g., direct counts and limited culturing), water chemistry
(DOM characterization), benthic cover (diversity, cover, and coral disease
prevalence), fish abundance, and physical oceanographic metadata. At the
completion of this research, the PIs will have: 1) characterized the microbial
communities (using metagenomics) from &gt;100 coral reefs around the world; 2)
determined how different sources of DOM (surface offshore DOM, surface inshore
DOM, interstitial coral DOM and, turf algal derived DOM) vary in chemical
characterization, help to structure microbial communities, and influence DOC
remineralization on coral reefs; 3) determined whether reef-associated algae
produce photosynthetic exudates that allow the microbial communities to degrade
the semi-labile DOC; 4) correlated coral condition (i.e., cover and disease
prevalence) to the quantity and quality of DOM, as well as microbial biomass,
taxonomy and metabolisms, and; 5) characterized the residence time of water on
the reef platform around Moorea and Kiritimati. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts: At the broadest level, this cross-disciplinary project will identify
the linkages between chemical, microbial and ecological processes in coral reef
degradation and will inform management and conservation by identifying a likely
mechanism of coral mortality. At the level of public outreach, the Coral Reef
Multimedia Project, which displays mini-documentaries and short video clips
about different aspects of coral reefs, will be expanded. Undergraduate and
graduate students from SDSU and SIO will create original movies using the
unedited reef video. This program will include 24 students over the three years
of the grant and will upload 50+ new videos to the website. The Rohwer and Smith
labs also sponsor a monthly coral discussion group, which is a forum for PhD and
post-doctoral scientists to present their research. This Coral Club provides
encouragement and suggestions for the researchers to move forward with their
projects and has established a close link between the two major institutions
conducting reef research in San Diego.