* 0927376
* BRIGE: Fundamental Study on Fluid Flow and Heat Transfer of Film Cooling with Backward Injection
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Xianchang Li, Lamar University
* Standard Grant
* Ted A. Conway
* 08/31/2013
* USD 167,451.00

This award is partially funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act
of 2009 (Public Law 111-5)." PI: Li, Xianchang Proposal Number: 0927376 Overall
Research Proposed: Gas turbine engines have been widely used in power generation
and aircraft propulsion. Any increase of the gas turbine efficiency can lead to
a significant saving of energy. To improve the efficiency, the turbine inlet
temperature is usually elevated to be higher than the metal melting point.
Therefore, effective cooling of gas turbine is a critical task for engines?
efficiency as well as safety and lifetime. Film cooling has been used in gas
turbine engines for many years. In film cooling, air drawn from the compressor
is discharged through small holes in the blade walls, after passing the turbine
blade internal channel. The relatively cold air blankets the blade surface so
that heat transfer between the hot working gas flow and blades is reduced. The
main issues related to film cooling are its poor coverage, aerodynamic loss, and
increase of heat transfer coefficient due to strong mixing. To overcome these
problems, film cooling with backward injection is proposed in this research.
Preliminary data evidence the advantage of the proposed concept. The main
objective of this study is to explore the fundamental mechanism of film cooling
with backward coolant injection, including the optimum design conditions. Both
experimental test and numerical simulation are proposed. Experiments will be
conducted to evaluate the cooling performance by measuring flow velocity and
temperature with a Particle Imaging Velocimetry (PIV) and an infrared (IR)
camera together with other instruments. The test data will also be applied to
validate numerical results. Intellectual Merit: The proposed research is to
investigate the fundamental phenomena of fluid flow and heat transfer of film
cooling with backward injection. The intellectual merit lies in: (1) This
research envisions a new concept in film cooling design. The research will lead
to a comprehensive understanding of the impact of backward injecting flow on the
boundary layer or the near-wall region of the main flow. The backward injection
does potentially have a larger pressure loss when compared to its counterpart,
forward injection. The proposed research will explore the impact on both
pressure drop and heat transfer, especially the lateral distribution. A
compromise between pressure drop and heat transfer will lead to an improved
cooling effectiveness without scarifying the overall engine efficiency. (2) The
proposed study can result in data/correlation highly realistic to industrial
applications by both numerical simulation and experimental test. While the
experimental test can validate the numerical simulation under laboratory
conditions, cases at gas turbine operating conditions can be investigated with
numerical simulation. (3) The mechanism of backward injection explored in this
study can also provide an opportunity for related applications such as
aerodynamic flow control. Broader Impact: (1) This fundamental research has a
strong background in industrial applications. Its success will directly benefit
many related industrial companies, and eventually benefit even more gas turbine
end-users such as power generation and aircraft companies. (2) This research
will benefit the academic community and general public through data/result
dissemination. It can also benefit college-level education through integrating
the research into thesis work, course work, and student recruiting. Plans are
made to broaden the impact to K-12 education and inspire the interest in
engineering among young students. Collaboration with researchers from other
institutes will also broaden the impact. (3) Special effort will be made to
achieve the goals of this NSF BRIGE program. More than 50% of population is
African American in the area where the PI?s university is located, but less than
10% of the students are from this group in the College of Engineering. For
broader participation of individuals from underrepresented groups in the
engineering disciplines, the PI plans to offer presentations to high-school
students from general engineering concepts to advanced technologies as addressed
in this proposal. Furthermore, it is also planned to host an engineering seminar
per semester to high-school science teachers so that the teachers can take
engineering concepts to their classes. In this way, more students will be
introduced to engineering fields.