* 0927370
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Biobehavioral Factors and Health Disparities
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Richard Rogers, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2010
* USD 9,825.00

SES-0927370 Richard Rogers Bethany Everett University of Colorado Boulder

This dissertation research will investigate health disparities during the
transition from adolescence to young adulthood. Sexual minorities face higher
levels of structural and interpersonal discrimination, and a growing body of
research is beginning to document their effect on the health of sexual minority
populations. Therefore, this research will explore the following questions: (1)
What are the links between sexual orientation and health; (2) What role do
socio-demographic and social-ecological factors play in moderating these
relationships; and (3) Are variations in the timing and pattern of same-sex
orientated attraction, behavior, and identification differentially associated
with health outcomes? This research will contribute to the literature by
employing multiple indicators of sexual orientation available in the National
Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (Add Health). Specifically, this
research will investigate a wide variety of health-related outcomes, including
access to and use of health services; alcohol, tobacco, and drug use; mental
health; and a series of biomarkers designed to measure anthropometric,
cardiovascular, metabolic, and inflammation functioning, novel for this
population. In addition to using these cutting-edge data, I will employ a series
of innovative statistical techniques, including latent class trajectory,
structural equation, and multilevel modeling. Moreover, this research will
contribute to an emerging interdisciplinary bio-behavioral framework within the
field of sociology that stresses the synergistic impact of individual,
environmental, and biological processes on health.

This proposal specifically addresses a target population and goals identified by
the Healthy People 2010 initiative (NCHS 2000). It will generate important
findings for public health policy makers by documenting previously unexplored
longitudinal trends. Moreover, the study provides a unique opportunity to
examine health disparities among a vulnerable population distributed across all
race/ethnic and socioeconomic groups, and in a variety of contexts. The research
will produce results regarding healthy adolescent development, including the
impact of discrimination on health, which may be generalizable to other minority
populations.