* 0927186
* DynSyst_Special_Topics: New Challenges in Non-Smooth Dynamical Systems - Experiments and Analysis
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Lawrence Virgin, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Massimo Ruzzene
* 07/31/2013
* USD 374,516.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal puts forward closely
coupled studies involving experiments, modeling, analysis, and numerical
simulations of fundamental hybrid mechanical systems with piecewise smooth
motion and discrete impact events. The investigators will use recent
developments in the analysis of bifurcations in non-smooth dynamics as a
starting point for the work. The approach taken in this project is to expand the
understanding of the dynamics, stability and bifurcations of systems with
impacts by detailed exploration of two prototype problems: (i) the driven motion
of tethered particles and (ii) the impacting pendulum. These problems provide
solid testbeds for the studies in response to recent interest in bifurcations
due to non-smooth forcing and collisions in multi-element systems. These
problems have significance as basic components in larger-scale mechanical and
industrial systems. They are also very well suited to experimental studies,
allowing for the validation of numerical simulations and simplified mathematical
models. This project will advance the understanding of classes of mechanical
systems ubiquitous in natural and industrial settings. Potential results on
stability and bifurcations will allow for more efficient, productive and
reliable operating conditions. Moreover, they fit into a long-term program for
the study of the feasibility of damage detection via system response to
impactive forcing. Namely, we seek to demonstrate that bifurcations and response
to impactive forcing can be used to diagnose internal structural defects as a
means of nondestructive testing and possible control and suppression of
instabilities. The proposal builds a new collaboration between researchers in
engineering and applied mathematics and will incorporate graduate and
undergraduate student training in an interdisciplinary research program that
will develop coordinated advanced skills in engineering and nonlinear dynamics.
There are plans for ensuring the participation of under-represented groups,
building on recent successes. Results from this project will be disseminated
through journal publications in engineering and applied dynamical systems,
presentations at research conferences and through a project web page and via
connections with Duke University's Center for Nonlinear and Complex Systems.
Research will be augmented by improvements in student training in the
development of courses in engineering and applied mathematics.