* 0927621
* Can Multi-Scale Optics be Fabricated by Ultraprecision Systems - Hierarchical Fabrication Across Seven Orders of Magnitude?
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Matthew Davies, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Zhijian Pei
* 08/31/2013
* USD 299,999.00

The research objective of this award is to apply and extend position measurement
techniques from the fields of scanned probe microscopy and optical lithography
to solve the problem of relative tool positioning at the tens-of-nanometer level
in precision five axis diamond machining. This will enable the fabrication of
novel hierarchically integrated, monolithic, optical structures with size scales
ranging from hundreds of millimeters down to hundreds of nanometers on a single
component. The approach will be to create a fully compensated "machine-within-a-
machine" with uncertainties that are an order of magnitude less than those of
the original system using established thermal control and software error
compensation techniques in precision engineering. Within this smaller work
volume, a tool location system will be designed to locate the relative position
of two single crystal diamond tools with sub-wavelength precision using a
combination of low-force contact and non-contact sensors such as capacitance
based air-bearing probes, quartz tuning forks, and oil immersion optical
elements. The system will be tested by using one of the tools to manufacture a
curved spherical or aspheric optical surface and the other to place an optically
functional subwavelength pattern on that curved surface; a polarization
sensitive lens is an easily tested example.

If successful, this work will result in a paradigm for creating an innovative
class of optics with functionality that cannot be achieved by other methods and
will benefit such diverse areas as medical, military and energy technologies.
This research has the potential to open up new commercial markets for optical
devices. Thus, the overall program also targets multiple, integrated initiatives
for research in education by leveraging existing, on-campus outreach efforts
with the end goal of producing students that are trained to transfer the new
technologies to industry and establish new commercial enterprises as
appropriate.