* 0927033
* IRES:   Interdisciplinary Research on Characterization of Mechanical Properties of Materials
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Sanichiro Yoshida, Southeastern Louisiana University
* Standard Grant
* R.  Clive Woods
* 08/31/2013
* USD 111,208.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The award supports undergraduate students from Southeastern
Louisiana University and other southeastern EPScoR state universities for seven
weeks in Japan conducting research related to characterization of mechanical
properties of solid-state materials at various stages of deformation in order to
better understand the mechanisms of deformation, fatigue and fracture, and its
application to predictive, non-destructive evaluation. In Japan the students
will work with Professor Kensuke Ichinose and other materials scientists at
Tokyo Denki University (TDU). The PI and twelve students from Southeastern
Louisiana University, University of Southern Mississippi and the University of
South Alabama will participate in the three-year program. Student projects will
focus on four research areas: application of electronic speckle-pattern
interferometry (ESPI) to fast phenomena, application of ESPI to fatigue
analysis, photoelastic method of minute stress analysis, and other diagnostic
methods, including ultrasonic and magnetic. The students will have a one-week
predeparture orientation, spend seven weeks in Japan for research at TDU, and
then present their findings at a conference on their return. The program will
build on an existing collaboration between the Department of Chemistry and
Physics at Southeastern Louisiana University and the Department of Mechanical
Engineering at TDU. The students will work on teams with a TDU lead researcher,
a TDU graduate student, and several TDU undergraduates.