* 0927112
* Geoenvironmental Influences on Raman Spectroscopic Monitoring of Chlorinated Solvents
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,10/31/2012
* Joseph Sinfield, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 10/31/2012
* USD 151,308.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This research addresses a multidisciplinary challenge at the intersection of
sensing, environmental engineering and geotechnical engineering focused on
obtaining valid and representative measurements of chlorinated solvents in the
geoenvironment to facilitate cost-effective characterization, monitoring, and
management strategies for sites contaminated with these compounds. These sites
are subject to tremendous variability on multiple scales and frequently involve
an array of additional chemicals. The technology currently available to assess
chlorinated solvents at actionable levels involves costly and sophisticated
instruments that can assess only select compounds, provide information over a
limited spatial extent, and are available to relatively few. There is great
potential to overcome this challenge and transform the state of field monitoring
by taking advantage of recent technological advances in lasers, photonics, and
telecommunications technology to deploy a distributed chlorinated solvent
sensing system based on time-resolved Raman spectroscopy.

Achieving this vision is a multi-stage effort, and hinges on establishing a
fundamental understanding of the factors affecting in-situ Raman spectroscopic
measurements. Thus, the objective of this effort is to assess geoenvironmental
influences on time-resolved Raman scattering observations of chlorinated
solvents under controlled laboratory conditions indicative of those likely to be
present in the field. Specifically, the work will build upon a recently
developed innovative prototype fiber-coupled, time-resolved, Raman spectroscopy
system, to 1) methodically examine the impact of multi-compound backgrounds,
fluorophores, and sample turbidity on Raman observations, 2) provide insight
into data analysis algorithms required to effectively collect Raman signatures
in the presence of fluorophores, and 3) develop recommendations for field use of
time-resolved Raman scattering for chlorinated solvent investigations, and
optical spectroscopic analyses more generally. Overall, progress toward optical
spectroscopic monitoring systems that can be deployed at low cost over large
areas, and yet provide specific analyses of a broad range of chemical compounds
in nearly real-time will offer an unprecedented view of chemical fate and
transport in the geoenvironment. More broadly, this work will advance a range of
fields involving spectroscopic analyses of materials in complex, turbid, and/or
fluorescence limited settings including water quality monitoring, precision
agriculture, petroleum exploration, pharmaceutical quality control, analyses of
biological systems, and assessment of homeland security threats and
environmental disaster impact.