* 0927720
* Collaborative Research: Algorithms for Design of Structured Distributed Controllers with Application to Large-Scale Vehicular Formations
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Mihailo Jovanovic, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* George Chiu
* 07/31/2013
* USD 200,000.00

This award introduces new theoretical and computational tools for the design of
structured optimal controllers for large-scale systems. Standard optimal design
methods result in controllers that demand communication among all subsystems. In
very large systems, this is a costly scheme due to its extensive communication,
computation, and hardware requirements. The PIs will utilize special structures
inherent to certain distributed control problems, such as invariances and
symmetries, to develop a framework for localized control which compares to that
available for centralized design. This research will result in the design of
controllers that posses pre-specified localization and communication
architectures, and are optimal with respect to global cost functionals. The
educational aspect is centered around the development of a new distributed
systems curriculum. This will include new introductory courses that will
familiarize undergraduate and master-level students with the tools for analysis
and design of distributed systems. These courses will emphasize practical
applications and physical interpretations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will
lead to significant technological advances by enabling the optimal localized
control for systems with large number of individual components. Particular
attention will be paid to the design of optimal control strategies for large-
scale vehicular formations. The PIs will train participating students in a
unique interdisciplinary fashion; they will also jointly organize workshops
aimed at bringing together a broad audience of students, researchers, and
industry professionals. These workshops will enhance a cross-disciplinary
character of the proposed work and facilitate transfer of knowledge between the
control theory and engineering practice. The outreach component includes the
PIs' engagement in public seminars discussing the importance control engineering
in transforming the collective decision making strategies employed by natural
fliers, runners, and swimmers to engineering applications.&lt;br/&gt;