* 0927195
* BRIGE: Understanding Mechanisms that Impact the Power Density of an Economical Polymer Electrolyte Membrane Fuel Cell Stack
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Tequila Harris, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 08/31/2012
* USD 187,000.00

The research objective of this BRIGE award is to understand the permeability of
gases through a non-traditional woven structure subjected to non-uniform
porosity. This research will provide a fundamental understanding of the
mechanisms required to develop a functional graduated material with controlled
dimensionality, for use in renewable energy devices. A successful result of this
investigation will be a methodology to develop functional materials with unique
dimensionality, such that the resistance of a gas to flow may be controlled.
Numerical modeling will be conducted to predict how the gases will flow through
the graduated medium and to aid with defining the optimal design. Performance
analysis will be conducted to evaluate the properties of the woven structure in
a functional system.

If successful, the results of this research will lead to a fundamental
understanding of gas permeability through a controlled graduated woven structure
with non-uniform porosity, which is not well understood. Nontraditional porous
media for varying applications have emerged, and such an understanding may
impact the design of these systems according to the resulting properties that
are desired. The proposed work will contribute to this objective by studying the
dimensionality of a woven carbon cloth, which is commonly used in polymer
electrolyte membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs). This work will identify key parameters
that influence the performance of such systems, leading to innovative stack
designs that fundamentally challenge conventional fuel cell configurations and
their effectiveness. Coordinated with the technical objective, the outreach goal
of implementing a collaborative program coined ELECTRoDE (Educators Leading
Energy Conservation and Training Researchers of Diverse Ethnicities) will be
employed.