* 0927734
* Collaborative Research: Efficient Probabilistic Approach Using Order Reduction and Hybrid Models -- A New Paradigm for Structural Dynamic Analysis
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Jiong Tang, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Massimo Ruzzene
* 08/31/2014
* USD 200,000.00

The objective of this collaborative research between University of Connecticut
and Texas A&amp;M University is to develop a new probabilistic framework of
dynamic analysis for handling large-scale structures under uncertainties. In
particular, the research team aims at tackling a number of research challenges
such as high computational cost and difficulty in characterizing model
uncertainties, often encountered in this type of analysis. The approach in this
research is built upon a hybrid modeling and analysis strategy, using both the
computations and measurements of structural modal responses. It features the
combination of structural dynamic model order-reduction, Bayesian response
prediction (based on a set of viable candidate models), and recursive model
updating and verification at multiple stages. To enable the probabilistic
analysis of high dimensional systems, a highly efficient adaptive Markov Chain
Monte Carlo solution procedure will be developed and embedded into the analysis
framework. This framework allows us to evaluate simultaneously the structural
uncertainties and their impact to vibration responses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, the outcome of this research will lead to the concurrent
advancements in both probabilistic structural analysis and Monte Carlo-based
solution techniques. The information of structural uncertainties and their
impact to vibration responses can be used to guide the robust design of
structural products, and also be used to develop thresholds for vibration
response-based online structural monitoring. The collaborative and
interdisciplinary nature of the research will provide unique learning
opportunities for students involved at all levels. The plan for dissemination
will make results widely available, contributing to training analysts and
engineers by presenting at professional conferences, publishing in refereed
journals, and teaching at university-level courses.&lt;br/&gt;