* 0927541
* Collaborative Research:  Design and Fundamental Understanding of Advanced Minimum Quantity Lubrication (MQL) Machining using Nanolubricants
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Ajay Malshe, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Brigid Mullany
* 08/31/2013
* USD 202,339.00

The objective of this collaborative research project is to study the mechanism
of deformation of active molybdenum disulphide lubricant nanoparticles,
integrated with organic molecules. The plastic deformation, and thus formation
of a tribofilm, will be studied particularly when introduced in minimum quantity
lubrication grinding and deep hole drilling. The technical approach to seek the
objective necessitates first to study physical, chemical and tribological
properties of active lubricant nanoparticles compatible with base fluids used in
machining. In the next phase of this study the role of concentration and
quantity of nanolubricant formulations, depth of cut, speed and number of
machining passes will be investigated. The outcome will be assessed
experimentally and partly theoretically using various in situ and ex situ
parameters such as cutting forces, tool wear, surface finish and integrity of
the workpiece, nano and micro structure, location, distribution and chemistry of
the triobofilm, and size and chemistry of debris for studying the role of
tribofilm in reducing cutting forces, increasing tool life and providing better
surface quality of the machined workpiece. Additionally, one study will address
understanding the transient evaporation of oil molecules integrated in
nanoparticles and their subsequent role as an effective vehicle for heat
transfer at the machining interface.

The broad impact of this research is in facilitating the replacement of
recirculating lubrication systems, which are sources of performance variation
and significant waste streams. In addition, it is expected there will be energy
savings and an increase in productivity at low cost in the most demanding
machining applications. Further, this research is an example of how recent
investment in nanomanufacturing in the United States can significantly benefit
traditional machining and manufacturing industries to increase productivity in a
range of infrastructure-related manufacturing industries. Training students in
this nanotechnology will be an important component in the facilitation of a new
generation of innovation.