* 0927837
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Electronic Waste Recycling in South Africa: Transition Management in Practice?
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,02/28/2011
* James Murphy, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2011
* USD 12,000.00

Electronic goods are made of diverse components, including valuable metals and
hazardous materials. Tens of millions of tons of electronic waste (e-waste) is
produced annually across the globe, but only a small proportion of this e-waste
is recycled. While the amount of e-waste continues to rise exponentially as use
of electronics grows internationally, recycling costs prohibit widespread
recycling in the developed nations of the world, such as the U.S. and Europe. As
a result, a global e-waste industry has arisen in which waste is exported into
parts of the world like China, India, and some African countries, where illegal
dumping and informal recycling occur. Recycling practices in many countries
involve the removal of valuable metals, but they employ practices harmful to
people and ecosystems. South Africa is pursuing a relatively unexplored approach
to e-waste: sustainable recycling. South Africa's e-waste goals are being most
progressively advanced through a pilot program in Johannesburg that will charge
recycling fees to consumers, with the fee being used to support waste processing
enterprises. This doctoral dissertation research project will integrate
transition management theory with political ecological perspectives in order to
examine the power relations at play in the creation of this industry as well as
the potential for this project to be scaled out to other contexts. The doctoral
student will use a range of methods, including document analysis; in-depth
interviews with stakeholders, such as e-waste processors, policy makers, non-
governmental organization officials, and consumers; field observations of formal
and informal recycling facilities; and participant observation in planning and
strategizing meetings.

This project is motivated by the magnitude of the e-waste challenge, the
relative impasse over the question of exportation, and the potential for South
Africa to forge an innovative pathway for e-waste management. Project results
can help inform policy makers about the environmental and ecological
consequences of the recycling system as well as the factors in the broader
landscape that must be influenced in order to facilitate a successful
sociotechnical regime transition. Moreover, documenting the power relations
shaping e-waste strategy development and project implementation can help remedy
structural inequalities and empower stakeholders like community residents and
consumers who may be absent from the decision-making process. As a Doctoral
Dissertation Research Improvement Award, this award will provide support to
enable a promising student to establish and strong independent research career.

