* 0927661
* Dynamics of Nanometer Gap Formation in Thermo-Tunneling Devices for Energy Conversion
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Eniko Enikov, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 07/31/2013
* USD 281,986.00

Thermo-tunneling is a term used to describe combined emission of hot electrons
(thermionic emission) and tunneling of electrons through a narrow potential
barrier between two surfaces (field emission). Thermo-tunneling of hot electrons
across a few-nanometer gap has application to vacuum electronics and flat panel
displays, and holds great potential in thermo-electric cooling and energy
generation. Theoretical and experimental studies on thermo-tunneling nano-
structures have shown that the heat removal efficiency of these structures could
approach the theoretical limit known as Carnot efficiency. This project aims to
test a new method for constructing thermo-tunneling devices by forming a very
narrow (1 nanometer wide) vacuum gap across two very smooth surfaces.
Unfortunately, establishment of a nanometer vacuum gap over sufficiently large
areas required for practical use of thermo-tunneling devices is very challenging
and so far has not been demonstrated. The goal of this proposal, therefore, is
to explore and demonstrate the feasibility of creating nanometer vacuum gaps
over extended areas using a dynamic equilibrium between Lorentz, Van der Waals,
and electrostatic forces. The methods of modern dynamical system analysis and
boundary control of distributed parameter systems will be applied to demonstrate
theoretically and experimentally the feasibility of forming such gaps and to
produce a new class of high-efficiency energy conversion devices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; If successful, the proposed research will result in a
novel nanometer gap-forming technique that can be used in solid-state cooling
devices, solid-state thermoelectric generators, and high-speed vacuum electronic
devices for defense (radiation hard) applications. The energy conversion
efficiency of such devices approaches the thermodynamic (Carnot) limit,
therefore the project could lead to tremendous energy savings in cooling and
power-generation applications by replacing mechanical compressors in cooling
applications, or producing a more efficient thermo-electric generators. The
research will provide invaluable training opportunities for graduate students in
the Applied Mathematics Interdisciplinary Program at the University of Arizona
and for graduate student exchange with the world-renowned Department of Applied
Mechanics at the Budapest Technical University of Technology and Economics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;