* 0927333
* BRIGE: Performance-Based Design of Concrete Beams and Slabs Prestressed with Aramid Fiber Reinforced Polymer (AFRP) Tendons
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Monique Head, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 08/31/2012
* USD 175,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this BRIGE
award is to establish a performance-based design methodology to reflect the
response of a bridge system prestressed with aramid fiber reinforced polymer
(AFRP) tendons and subjected to service, cyclic (fatigue), and ultimate loads.
The validation will be performed by conducting experimental tests on two full-
scale specimens consisting of a continuous slab with two bulb T-beams with
continuous monitoring. The experimental results will lead to the calibration of
predictive computational models using state-of-the-art software. The
experimentally validated models will be used to gain new insight into the
behavior and serviceability limit states of the bridge system, particularly at
ultimate load. Emphasis is also placed on material characterization of the AFRP
tendons, prestress losses, effect of aggregate type on prestress losses, and
short and long-term durability of the bridge system. Standard methods for
computing prestressing losses in steel tendons will be used to measure losses
due to creep, shrinkage, and elastic shortening by replacing the modulus of
elasticity of the steel tendon with the modulus of elasticity of the AFRP
tendon. Relaxation loss profiles of the AFRP tendons will be developed based on
the experimental data collected to determine relaxation losses, which have been
less well understood given lack of sufficient experimental
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research will add
to the knowledge base of AFRP prestressing tendons for implementation into
design and performance recommendations for broader impact not only enhancing the
sustainability of bridges but for other structures such as marine structures
that exist in highly corrosive environments. The research is integrated with an
education plan, where the education objective is to promote STEM learning by
exposing students, including underrepresented minorities, from metropolitan
areas in Texas to engineering through outreach activities fostered through
campus visits in conjunction with the College of Engineering. Laboratory
demonstrations and hands-on activities are planned to inform the students about
career opportunities that exist within civil engineering and to stimulate
excitement for learning and discovery.