* 0927029
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Remains of Agriculture: Rural Transformation in Hamakua District, Hawaii
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,02/28/2011
* Nicole Milne, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 02/28/2011
* USD 12,000.00

Recent literature on new rural areas has examined the impacts of rural migrants
(i.e., fragmentation of agricultural land, social segregation, rising land
prices), but has largely overlooked the environmental and stewardship values and
motivations of some exurban migrants and their potential to transition in a new
era in agricultural production and land stewardship. In Hawaii, an influx of
amenity migrants and economic diversification, following the collapse of
plantation economy in the late twentieth century, have led to rapidly changing
rural landscapes. In response, planners and policy makers have turned to
farmland preservation tools to mitigate the changes taking place in the
countryside. However, these tools are rooted in the farmland preservation ideals
of the U.S. mainland, which are in contrast to the economic, social, and
environmental histories of Hawaii's agricultural past where large sugar or
pineapple plantations have dominated the landscape, rural life, and local
economy for over a century. The result is that farm communities in Hawaii
attempt to create, rather than preserve rural landscapes.

Doctoral student Nicole Milne, under the supervision of Dr. Krisnawati Suryanata
at the University of Hawaii Manoa will investigate the social and ideological
role agriculture plays in the lives of Hamakua's rural residents, and how
various stakeholders construct, negotiate, and contest competing visions of the
place of agriculture in contemporary rural Hawaii. The project will collect
primary data through focus group meetings, surveys, participant observation, and
in-depth interviews over 12 months of fieldwork, as well as archival information
derived from state and county institutions, public meetings, and popular media.

This project will critically examine the politics of resource use from political
economy and cultural perspectives to understand how particular visions and
values for an agrarian Hamakua are expressed over others, both within social
discourse and through material practices. It will assist land use planners,
community organizations, and others involved in the design of viable policies
guiding agriculture and land use in rural communities, improve the level of
socioeconomic and agricultural information available to support the development
of sound land use policies, and facilitate discussion, knowledge sharing, and
networking within and between Hamakua's various sub-communities.