* 0927906
* IRES US-Ethiopia: Modeling Drainage Incision on the Ethiopian Plateau
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Mohamed Abdelsalam, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Edward Murdy
* 08/31/2012
* USD 149,298.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Professor Mohamed Abdel-Salam of the Missouri University of Science and
Technology will conduct an International Research and Experience for Students
(IRES) program to support research and educational activities for 9
undergraduate and 3 MS students (3 undergraduate and 1 MS students each year)
from the Department of Geological Sciences and Engineering. Students will be
conducting field-based research within a multi-disciplinary framework focused on
modeling drainage systems incision on the Ethiopian Plateau and examining
possible structural controls induced by the opening of the Afar Depression and
the Main Ethiopian Rift. Addis Ababa University in Ethiopia will be the partner
to Missouri S&T where 4 Ethiopian students will participate in the project each
year. The work plan of the project is designed to ensure effective supervision
and mentoring of all students, and full and equal participation of PIs and
students. Students will conduct geological mapping, geomorphologic studies,
remote sensing analysis, geochronological studies, and Geographic Information
System (GIS) modeling to specifically test two hypothesis: (1) Incision rate of
major drainage systems on the Ethiopian Plateau has been episodic and has
significantly increased at ~10 and ~6 Ma as suggested by preliminary results of
recent NSF-funded research on the Gorge of the Nile. (2) These drainage systems
are controlled by extensional structures associated with the opening of the Afar
Depression and the Main Ethiopian Rift. To address these hypotheses the project
will focus on 3 independent drainage systems; the Blue Nile in year 1, the
Tekeze in year 2, and the Ter Shet in year 3 where the following research
activities will be conducted: (1) Analysis of the Advanced Space-borne Thermal
Emission and Reflection Radiometer (ASTER) data and Digital Elevation Models
(DEMs) extracted from the Shuttle Radar Topography Mission (SRTM) data to guide
field studies to map spatial extent, and structural and stratigraphic positions
of volcanic remnants of different ages; (2) Obtaining 40Ar/39Ar ages of these
volcanic remnants. (3) Using GIS modeling to calculate magnitude and rate of
incision. (4) Using the combined remote sensing and field studies to examine
temporal and spatial relationship between local structures and drainage
distribution.

Intellectual Merit: The intellectual merit of the project lies in that: (1) It
will produce quantitative data to evaluate the relative roles of tectonic uplift
and climate in increasing the rate of incision of drainage systems in regions
dominated by extensional tectonics. (2) It will have significant impact in
understanding uplift history of the Ethiopian Plateau and the dynamics of the
Afar Mantle Plume. (3) It will contribute to the understanding of sediment
budget of the Nile Basin, removal rate of geological material from the Ethiopian
Plateau through time and its transportation to Egypt to form the fertile
floodplain of the Egyptian Nile. (4) The timing and rate of uplift of the
Ethiopian Plateau deduced from drainage incision history have significant
importance for understanding early hominin evolution through forcing an arid-
adaptive evolutionary path for Homo sapiens.

Broader Impact: Research and educational activities of the project will
contribute to the following broader impacts: (1) Reciprocal understanding of
academic and social culture between US and Ethiopian students and researchers.
The US students will be provided an international perspective and experience,
enriching cultural experience, and building relationships that will form the
core of future international research collaborations. (2) Integration of
international research and education for students and broaden participation of
under-represented groups are a primary objective of NSF-IRES program.
Collaboration between US and Ethiopian institutions will contribute to the
development of a diverse, globally-engaged, science and engineering workforce.
(3) Results from the project are expected to produce a series of presentations
in national and international meetings as well as manuscripts prepared by
students to be published in peer reviewed journals. In addition, data produced
from the proposed research can be used for teaching at Missouri S&T and Addis
Ababa University as well as other universities in the US and Ethiopia. (4) The
project will involve a female assistant professor within 6 years of the PhD. The
project will provide her the opportunity to establish her research program.