* 0927796
* Closed-loop Reservoir Management Using a Reduced-order Model-based Control &amp; Uncertainty Propagation Framework
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Uzi Mann, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 08/31/2012
* USD 300,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;This research award is to develop a framework of accurate reduced-
order models that when combined with optimal model-based regulation will enable
improved real-time control of high dimension, complex and nonlinear distributed
parameter systems. The objectives of this research include: (i) develop more
accurate computational models of distributed parameter systems that will
attenuate the problem of adapting the model and (ii) investigate closed-loop
stability of the proposed reduced-order model framework. These objectives will
be achieved using a framework that (i) employs a particular reduced-order model
generated by an accelerated Karhunen-Lo√®ve expansion; (ii) applies both
probability and possibility theories to generate a random-fuzzy variable
description to account for both systematic and random errors associated with
uncertain variables and parameters; (iii) uses an efficient stratified sampling
technique, Latin hypercube Hammersley sampling, to enable effective uncertainty
propagation; and (iv) determines the optimal inputs for future predictions using
a reduced-order, model-predictive, optimal control formulation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We will use existing reservoirs and wells as a
demonstration platform to prove out the proposed framework. It is expected that
this framework will enable maximum production potential of reservoirs and wells
by employing methods that mitigate environmental damage and improve our
understanding of how to manage our existing and future reservoirs and wells.
From a broader perspective, the overarching research needs of accurate modeling
and control technologies are applicable to countless other complex processes
whether fossil-based, biological-based, or otherwise. This award will promote a
significant integration of research, education and industry. It will provide
important research topics to graduate students and educate them as promising
engineers and academics in future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;