* 0927341
* New Approaches and Rapid Assessment of Key Avian Fossils from the Cretaceous of Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 01/03/2009,04/30/2010
* Julia Clarke, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Isern
* 04/30/2010
* USD 22,431.00

This Small Grant for Exploratory Research studies bird evolution from the
perspective of Antarctic fossils. Little studied, these fossils were recently
recognized as definitive evidence that birds coexisted with dinosaurs and
survived the Cretaceous/Tertiary extinction. They also offer key insights into
bird diversification and radiation by contributing new calibration points for
the dating of molecular divergences--changes in DNA--that are the currently the
subject of intense study by the broader paleobiology community. This award
brings paleontologists from the US and Argentina together with all of their
specimens collected over the last twenty years of Antarctic fieldwork. New
methodologies will be brought to bear, including computed tomography (CT) X-ray
scans and rare earth element analyses. The outcomes will address questions such
as: 1) How diverse is this avifauna? 2) What avian lineages are represented? and
3) Was Gondwana a center for avian origination and
radiation?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of broader impacts, this project will
improve access to this unique fossil record by producing casts and a digital
archive of all materials held in the Argentine and US repositories. The award
also fosters international collaboration between the US and Argentina, and
involves new institutional connections in the US, and supports training
opportunities for a US student. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is jointly
supported by the Office of Polar Programs and the Office of International
Science and Engineering. &lt;br/&gt;