* 0927598
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Power Shifts at the World Trade Organization
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2010
* Jeffery Paige, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 06/30/2010
* USD 10,000.00

Large emerging economies, such as China, India and Brazil, are becoming
increasingly important centers of economic and political power, challenging the
traditional dominance of the U.S. and its Western allies. This transformation
has been identified as one of the most important in modern history. The question
of how this shift in power will impact international economics and politics is
at the center of debates in academic, business and policy circles around the
world. This project will address these debates by analyzing current
transformations taking place at the World Trade Organization (WTO). The WTO is a
central institution in the governance of the global economy and one that is
being profoundly affected by changes in the relative balance of power between
states. While the WTO has historically been dominated by the U.S. and a small
group of other rich industrialized states, in the last decade Brazil, India and
China have emerged as major players at the WTO. This project will analyze the
nature of the new power structure emerging at the WTO and assess the impact that
this shift in power is having on the discourse and policies of the WTO. The
study will draw on field research at the WTO in Geneva and in the Trade
Ministries of Brazil, India and China, using a combination of
documentary/archival research, interviews with trade policy-makers, and direct
observation. Analysis of the transformations occurring at the WTO has the
potential to yield rich theoretical insights and inform debates of central
concern to political sociologists regarding the structure and organization of
the global political economy. The question of how changes in the distribution of
power between states will affect the governance of the global political economy
is of major theoretical concern to academics across a range of disciplines as
well as of practical concern to policy-makers. By broadly disseminating the
results of this research, this study will make an important contribution both to
academic theory as well as policy-making.