* 0927014
* Generation of sea sprays and their impact on near surface turbulence and air-sea momentum flux
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Tetsu Hara, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2012
* USD 527,391.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Accurate
predictions/parameterizations of air-sea momentum and heat fluxes are important
because they provide boundary conditions for atmospheric, oceanic and coupled
ocean atmosphere models. In particular, tropical cyclone model prediction is
very sensitive to air-sea flux parameterizations under high wind conditions.
Recent field observations suggest that the momentum flux (drag) coefficient
tends to be much lower than the existing bulk parameterizations at very high
wind speeds. One possible reason for this drag reduction is the effect of sea
sprays generated in great amount by surface breaking waves in high winds.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators hypothesize that: (1) sea sprays play an
important role in modifying the near surface atmospheric turbulence and air-sea
fluxes of momentum and heat at high wind speeds; (2) accurate predictions of sea
spray generation must account for statistics of breaking waves and spray
generation processes from individual breaking wave events over a range of
scales; and (3) accurate modeling of sea spray-turbulence interactions requires
a new numerical methodology that explicitly resolves individual spray droplets
or fluid parcels interacting with the turbulent air flow that is modified by
breaking waves. To test these hypotheses the investigators will pursue a
research program, whose long term objectives are to develop new hybrid numerical
simulation methodologies - combining model components that are among the best
currently available tools - to study sea spray generation processes and
interactions between sprays and near surface turbulence, and to predict sea
spray effects on air-sea momentum and heat fluxes in high wind conditions. As a
first step towards meeting these long term objectives, the focus will be on two
main specific objectives in developing a methodology to simulate: (1) spray
generation processes from one single breaking wave event, using a hybrid
approach combining a fully nonlinear potential wave solver and a Lattice-
Boltzmann method for two-phase fluid dynamics; and (2) interactions between
resolved spray droplets (or resolved small air parcels) and a turbulent shear
flow, using the Lattice-Boltzmann method for two-phase fluid dynamics. Using
this methodology we will investigate the potential effects of sea sprays on the
air-sea momentum flux. The work will be performed as a collaboration between
Drs. Tetsu Hara, Stephan Grilli, of URI, and Manfred Krafczyk, Technical
University of Braunschweig, Germany. In addition the spray generation model will
be validated against laboratory observations, in collaboration with Dr. Fabrice
Veron, University of Delaware.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The broader
impacts of the project are evident in five areas. First, the proposed work
provides a basis for understanding how sea sprays affect air-sea fluxes and how
such modified fluxes consequently impact atmospheric and ocean predictions at
high winds. Estimation of fluxes over the sea surface is one of the most crucial
issues in ocean and atmospheric modeling, including tropical cyclone and storm
surge modeling. In fact, one of the main uncertainties regarding the flux
parameterizations is the effect of sea sprays. his research addresses society?s
need to mitigate and prevent possible natural hazards caused by extreme winds
and waves. The more accurate storm and hurricane forecasts that will result from
this research will thus lead to a longer advance warning and hence increased
preparation time, for mitigating such hazard and hopefully diminishing
fatalities and property damage. The development of a new hybrid approach
combining different numerical methods will benefit not only the field of
oceanographic/atmospheric modeling but also a wide range of applied fluid
dynamics community. Fourth, the project will support two graduate students, and
hence will contribute to the education and training of a new generation of
scientists/engineers, fully fluent with state-of-the-art environmental modeling.
Finally, the proposed work promotes international cooperation in research and
education, since it involves a close collaboration of US and German scientists.