* 0927996
* LEADERS: Leadership for Educators: Academy for Driving Economic Revitalization in Science
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2009,09/30/2014
* Robert Mendenhall, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 09/30/2014
* USD 5,058,244.00

Leadership for Educators: Academy for Driving Economic Revitalization in Science
(LEADERS) is a mathematics and science partnership that gathers and merges the
expertise of four essential entities in the economic revitalization of the Great
Lakes Region - K-12 school districts, higher education, the renewable energy
industry, and informal science education sites. The core partners (the Colleges
of Arts &amp; Sciences and Education at the University of Toledo and the Toledo
Public Schools) and supporting partners (the University of Toledo College of
Engineering, Akron area schools, the Toledo Diocese Schools, the Monroe County
Intermediate School District, Monroe County Community College, the Toledo
Science Center, TechniGraphics, Blue Water Satellite, Wright Center for
Photovoltaics Innovation and Commercialization, and Great Lakes WIND Network) of
the LEADERS partnership share a vision of student-centered education that knits
community economic growth with science education. The goal of LEADERS is to
improve science education by making it relevant to students through the
incorporation of Project-Based Science (PBS) that is linked to the renewable
energies industry and its environmental impacts, which is becoming a vital
element in the economic development of the Great Lakes Region. Drawing from the
four partner school districts, one cohort of six teachers per district are
participating in the LEADERS program for 2½ years per cohort (total teacher
leaders, 24). Teams of teacher leaders from each district include two each from
the elementary, middle, and high school levels. To facilitate district
implementation, one principal and one district administrator are also
participating in the Institute along with their cohort of teacher leaders.
During the summer, teacher leaders complete graduate courses in physics,
chemistry, environmental science, and engineering. Content courses are team
taught by a scientist and a science educator who model blending the content with
PBS. When the teacher leaders return to their respective districts, they are
responsible for overseeing the design and implementation of PBS activities that
connect state and national science standards with relevant applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;LEADERS is striving toward the following
outcomes:&lt;br/&gt; 1) Developing a cadre of effective teacher leaders who are
capable of transforming science education by linking science content with
emerging science-based industries in the Great Lakes Region. &lt;br/&gt; 2)
Increasing the number of teachers in partnering districts who have strong
content, pedagogy and leadership skills and knowledge. &lt;br/&gt; 3)
Transforming existing K-12 science courses to rigorous and relevant science
courses through PBS. &lt;br/&gt; 4) Preparing K-12 students who meet science and
mathematics achievement standards while also becoming interested in science and
technical careers. &lt;br/&gt; 5) Developing community science education
networks that collaborate through the development and implementation of advanced
or improved science courses.