* 0927615
* Development of Chemical Sensors and In-Situ Calibration: Enhanced  Monitoring and Measurement of pH and Redox in Diffuse Flow Hydrothermal  Systems
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2015
* William Seyfried, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 07/31/2015
* USD 488,300.00

This project requests support for development, calibration, and testing of pH
and redox sensors that have recently been incorporated into an auto-calibration
system. pH and redox can control mass transfer between geochemical and
biological systems existing in areas such as diffuse flow hydrothermal habitats
at mid-ocean ridges. To understand the linkages between these systems requires
longer term observations, which create the requirement for in-situ calibration
of pH and redox sensors. With the availability of power sources at/near deep-sea
vents provided by cabled observatories, instrumentation involving in-situ
measurement and calibration will be essential to transform qualitative
observations to quantitative processes. The PIs propose a three year study
involving both field and lab programs with the objective of improving the
performance of chemical sensors in complex chemical and biological systems at
low to moderate temperatures. Phase one of the study involves technical upgrades
to the in-situ calibration device recently deployed at diffuse flows vent sites.
Funds requested will be used to add additional pH buffer fluid reservoirs for
three point pH calibration for the solid state pH electrode. Moreover, the unit
that houses the pH and redox sensors will be redesigned and made smaller to
decrease the internal volume and increase signal response time and sensitivity,
respectively. Phase two entails reconfiguration of the stand alone calibration
unit for real-time measurements, enhancing use with HOV and ROV assets.
Laboratory studies are planned that involve testing of ceramic pH
electrochemical sensor systems and development of a new Na-based reference
electrode that may be particularly suitable for chemical, physical and temporal
conditions consistent with long-term monitoring applications at diffuse flow
hydrothermal vent sites.