* 0927353
* BRIGE:  In-situ Characterization of Fresh-state Microstructure in Cementitious Materials:  Impact of Aggregation Kinetics, Rheology and Hydration
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Raissa Ferron, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 08/31/2012
* USD 180,651.00

The research objective of this BRIGE award are to (1) characterize the fresh
state microstructure of portland cement paste, (2) identify key factors linking
the fresh state microstructure and rheological material functions, and (3) test
the hypothesis that the aggregation mechanisms and morphology of the hydration
products are impacted by shear-induced forces. Key to the success of the project
is quantitative measurements of the fresh state microstructure. An advanced
experimental method that enables in-situ particle size measurements will be used
to characterize the fresh state microstructure. A kinetics-based model will be
used to determine the aggregation mechanisms and disaggregation mechanisms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research will advance
the understanding of the rheological behavior of portland cement-based
materials. From this work fundamental information on structure-property
relationships of cement paste suspensions will be gained. This information can
be used as a knowledge base to help predict how changes in the fresh state
microstructure would impact the flow behavior and mechanical development
cementitious composites. The results of this work are critical to the
discovering of new applications for cementitious materials and for the
development of high performance concrete with adapted rheology. The approach
proposed in this work could be used to characterize the microstructure of other
particulate suspensions, such as drilling fluids, papermaking slurries, sewage
sludge. Integrated into this project are education initiatives aimed at
broadening the participation of underrepresented groups, especially females, in
engineering. The research and educational plan in this BRIGE proposal promotes
an improved understanding of cement-based materials and civil engineering
through research, teaching, learning, and training. &lt;br/&gt;