* 0927660
* Understanding Rheology of Cement-based Materials through Intergrated Experiments and Computations at Multiple Scales
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Kejin Wang, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 07/31/2013
* USD 300,000.00

The objective of this proejct is to develop a predictive model for predicting
rheological behavior of cement-based materials. Using a coupled immersed
boundary method (IBM) - discrete element method (DEM), the model will link
individual particle behavior to the bulk rheological behavior of cement-based
materials at multiple scales. The major research activities will include (1)
utilizing atomic force microcopy (AFM) experiments to calibrate/validate a
coupled IBM-DEM model and to capture the interparticle interactions in a cement
system (nanoscale); (2) establishing a refined coupled IBM-DEM model to predict
bulk rheological behavior of a cement paste in simple shear flow (mesoscale);
and (3) assessing the predictive capability of the model via rheological
experiments of various cement pastes (meso and macro scales). This research
approach/methodology will eventually lead to better macroscale models of
concrete in future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through experiments, theory and
modeling, the project will provide a better understanding of the rheological
behavior of cement-based materials. The developed model will permit more
economical designs by optimizing mix proportions for specified rheological
requirements in concrete practice. The information on the particle interaction
can be adapted by the cement industry for modifying cement chemistry and
physical properties during the cement manufacturing process. The proposed work
requires interdisciplinary knowledge in concrete materials, multiphase flow
modeling, and nanoscale surface engineering and mechanics, and therefore,
students will be trained in a variety of complementary research techniques
during this project. &lt;br/&gt;