* 0927326
* RUI: Magneto-Mechanical Coupling in Isotropic vs. Anisotropic, Hard- vs. Soft- Magnetic Magnetorheological Elastomers
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2012
* Samuel Lofland, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Martin L. Dunn
* 06/30/2012
* USD 78,085.00

Magnetorheological elastomers (MREs) are composite materials, made from rubber
(?elastomers?) and magnetic particles, whose mechanical behavior (?rheology?)
changes in a magnetic field. Theories on MRE behavior assign this change to
magnetic torques developed within the particles. This work, however, addresses
the fundamental difference in behavior between MREs formed from soft-magnetic
particles like iron, which do not develop internal torques, and those formed
with hard-magnetic particles (e.g. permanent magnets) that do generate magnetic
torques. The objectives of this work are to study the effective modulii in shear
and compression, magnetization induced strain (or magnetostriction), and
microstructure of different material compositions. Effective modulii will be
determined by measuring the material?s response to vibration. Magnetostriction
will be measured using optical microscopy. And, the microstructure will be
characterized using x-ray tomography. Finally, the ability of the material to
perform work will be measured by determining the amount of force that can be
generated.

MREs are technologically important because they are expected to perform better
over their working lifetimes than their closest competitors, magnetorheological
fluids. This study is important because the fundamental difference between soft-
magnetic and hard-magnetic particles leads to definitions of several magneto-
mechanical symmetries which may be exploited. For example, the authors have
found that MREs using hard-magnetic particles can serve as reversible actuators
whereas MREs using soft-magnetic particles cannot. This work will engage 10+
undergraduates through Rowan?s Engineering Clinics and Physics Research courses.
Topics from this project will find use in Materials Science, Computational
Materials Science, and (Advanced) Solid Mechanics courses. K-12 students
participating in the Summer Institute in Materials Science, R.U.M.E./C.H.A.M.P.
Saturday Academy, and the EOF/MAP Precollege Institute will also be exposed to
this research.