* 0927962
* Development of Performance-Based Design Guidelines for Integrating Phase Change Materials in Buildings
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2014
* Vincent Blouin, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Bank
* 07/31/2014
* USD 249,986.00

Phase change materials have the ability to store excess heat in buildings and
release it at a later time, thereby reducing temperature fluctuations as well as
heating and cooling loads. However, their integration in a given building
requires generally an extensive engineering study with its associated added
expense. The primary long-term objective of this project is to develop a design
methodology based on a complete understanding of the impacts, benefits and
limitations of phase change materials when integrated in building construction
materials. The approach will combine numerical modeling and experimental testing
to perform extensive parametric studies from which design guidelines will be
drawn. The research will be conducted through a true interdisciplinary approach
by a team of students and faculty from Architecture and Materials Science and
Engineering.

Through the study of phase change materials integrated in construction materials
and assemblies, the proposed work addresses many aspects targeting different
audiences. Therefore, this project has the potential to reach out to a very
large group of academicians and professionals and will have significant
influence in encouraging designers to consider phase change materials as a means
to reduce energy consumption in buildings. The proposed work will provide
opportunities to train students who can enter the workforce with both numerical
and experimental skills enhanced by the interdisciplinary approach. The design
rules and guidelines will provide a low cost alternative and not only facilitate
the building design process but, more importantly, will enable and ultimately
democratize the use of phase change materials in building design.