* 0927129
* BRIGE: Towards the Design and Operations of Effective Relief Distribution Networks
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Soumia Ichoua, Johnson C. Smith University
* Standard Grant
* Mary M. Toney
* 09/30/2013
* USD 175,000.00

The research goal of this BRIGE award is to enhance the performance of relief
distribution networks. To achieve this goal, three research objectives are
targeted: 1- Characterize and understand the resources, the rules and the
processes that govern the design and operations of relief distribution networks.
2- Explore robust modeling and solution approaches that account for uncertainty
in the problem of prepositioning emergency supplies. 3- Investigate the use of
dynamic-stochastic optimization for an effective real-time distribution of
emergency supplies. A key element in tackling the prepositioning problem is to
account for uncertainty while integrating long-term and tactical decisions. This
ultimately leads to large scale problems. Thus, a two stage stochastic
programming model will be developed. Then, a scenario-based approach that
combines a meta-heuristic based on tabu search will be developed. For the real-
time distribution problem, a rolling-time horizon approach that integrates
neighborhood search procedures and fast on-line strategies will be adopted.

If successful, the results of this research will contribute to the improvement
of both pre-disaster preparedness and post-disaster responsiveness. This will
help save lives and mitigate population suffering in case of disasters. The
proposed modeling and solution approaches can also be used to tackle other
dynamic disruption-prone systems such as the deployment of troops and equipment
in a battlefield or commercial disruption-prone supply chains. The award will
also broaden the participation of underrepresented groups in engineering.
Minority undergraduate STEM students will be introduced to research in decision
sciences and system engineering. In addition, seminars will be organized to
promote the interaction of students with positive role-models. Finally, outreach
activities will be conducted to encourage middle and high school students to
pursue higher education in the fields of system engineering and decision
sciences.