* 0927576
* Managing Evacuee Ingress: Network Interactions and Community Hosting Performance
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Scott Robinson, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 08/31/2011
* USD 320,048.00

This project addresses challenges associated with mass evacuations during
disasters. Prior research on disaster evacuations has mostly focused on how, and
why, large numbers of people move out of a disaster area. This project instead
addresses how well communities can absorb and manage the needs of evacuees
moving into their area. This is an important issue because the needs of evacuees
extend well beyond the narrow question of how to get them out of harm's way. The
study will look at how governmental agencies interact with nongovernmental
agencies (e.g. voluntary organizations, faith-based groups, and private sector
service providers like nursing homes) during an evacuation. Specifically, it
examines (1) how governmental and nongovernmental organizations perform in terms
of working together on critical tasks when managing evacuees entering a given
geographic area, (2) how and why governmental and nongovernmental organizations
interact and collaborate (or why not) while hosting evacuees, and (3) what these
organizational interactions mean for evacuation management practices and
outcomes for evacuees. The researchers will develop an analytic framework to
explain evacuation management performance by examining recent major hurricane
evacuations in Florida, Alabama, Texas, and Louisiana; it will also compare
outcomes in those areas to other major evacuations in Oklahoma and California.
The investigators will conduct analyses by creating an inventory of community
resources related to evacuation management, measuring and assessing how
"networks" of organizations interact, and by identifying, measuring and
assessing key indicators of evacuee management performance in a "hosting"
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The benefits of this project take several forms.
The potential impacts of the study include the following: (1) improving future
planning and preparedness efforts by better understanding community performance
in terms of hosting incoming evacuees, (2) improving planning and preparedness
in this area especially helps those most vulnerable to the negative effects of
an evacuation (e.g. elderly, disabled persons, lower incomes families), and (3)
advancing graduate student and professional training in this area. The project
also offers benefits in terms of research innovation: (1) for the first time, it
provides systematic empirical evidence that accounts for how networks of
governmental and nongovernmental organizations (both nonprofit and for-profit)
separately, and in coordination, respond to disaster evacuation on the issue of
managing the needs of evacuees entering a hosting area, (2) it identifies and
provides a list of performance measures at a community level for how well the
needs of evacuees are met when they move into a new area - measures that do not
exist at present, and (3) it produces evidence on what factors are most
important to relatively stronger or weaker performance for communities when they
are required to manage the needs of evacuees entering their area. In sum, this
project represents research that will help improve disaster evacuation
management practices in the United States.