* 0927637
* High Yield Self Assembly of Functional Thermoelectric Devices
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* George Nolas, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 07/31/2014
* USD 383,071.00

The research objective of this award is increase rate and yield of microscale
self-assembly processes. In self-assembly, components are designed to
spontaneously bond when brought together as by mixing or agitation. The rate of
component assembly and the process yield depend on the characteristics of the
interaction processes. The research approach will first validate and refine
force and energy models of individual self-assembly bonds. These bond models
will provide key inputs into a stochastic process models that relate
controllable process parameters to process rate and yield. The models will be
experimentally validated through assembly of a function microsystem?a micro
thermoelectric cooler. The micro thermoelectric cooler will be assembled from
high performance nanostructured thermoelectric materials to validate the
predictive capabilities of the models. Deliverables include capillary bond
models, general self-assembly process models, experimental model validation,
process of generating models of related processes, documentation of results, and
educational outreach to K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the
results of this research will enable large scale integration of components too
small to effectively pick up and manipulate using current assembly techniques.
This will improve performance of microsystems by enabling integration of new
materials and devices. For example, smaller thermoelectric elements can be
integrated for more efficient cooling of electronic and photonic equipment and
lower cost recovery of waste heat. The models and the methods for building them
developed through this project can be adapted to self-assembly using other bond
types and at other size scales. Examples from this work will be incorporated
into presentations to K-6 students to teach important concepts about energy and
to increase students? recognition of the role science and engineering play in
their lives. High school demonstrations will be used to recruit students for
hands-on lab work on the project during the summers. Advances from this project
will also be integrated into graduate and undergraduate courses.&lt;br/&gt;