* 0927790
* Uncertainty Reduction by Testing, Inspection, Health Monitoring, and Maintenance (THIM) in Probabilistic Product Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Raphael Haftka, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Paul Collopy
* 07/31/2013
* USD 319,326.00

The research objective of this award is to investigate the effect of after-
design activities on the safety of products and to incorporate them with
probabilistic product design. Products are not only made safe by good design,
but through an array of risk-reduction measures during their lifecycle. Risk-
reduction measures include tests of components or prototypes, health monitoring,
such as engine lights that alert the user about impending problems, inspection
and maintenance (THIM) processes. Current design practices for minimum risk or
high reliability only account for uncertainty information available at the
design stage without considering future reductions through THIM processes hence
falling short of achieving optimal solutions in terms of cost and safety. The
research effort will address modeling the future uncertainty reduction
associated with THIM in the present design process, as well as the simultaneous
probabilistic design of both products and THIM processes for reducing lifetime
costs for a given desired level of safety, or alternatively, maximizing the
level of safety for a given amount of lifetime costs.

If successful, this technology will be a breakthrough to reinforce the
competence of the American manufacturing/design industry. The integrated THIM
design will completely transform the conventional design concept to design for
lifetime with uncertainty. Successful development of a lifecycle probabilistic
design framework will also elevate the designer's approach to the increasingly
available THIM processes from their current state of heuristic and qualitative
methods, to the same level of single-stage probabilistic design, which would
result in improved product reliability and efficient cost allocations.
International collaboration will be enhanced by working with a Ph.D. student
from an international joint Ph.D. program in France. An undergraduate student
from an underrepresented group will also particiapte in the research. Technology
transfer will be ensured through offering a course on uncertainty modeling and
design; organizing an internet conference on probabilistic design and a workshop
on probabilistic modeling and design for lifecycle; presentation at professional
conferences; and journal articles.