* 0927098
* Time Series Particle Flux Measurements in the Sargasso Sea
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Maureen Conte, Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences (BIOS), Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 09/30/2013
* USD 1,374,485.00

Since 1978, the Oceanic Flux Program (OFP) has continuously measured particle
fluxes in the deep Sargasso Sea. The three decade OFP time-series is, by far,
the longest of its kind and unique in its focus on the deep ocean. OFP has
produced a unique, albeit edited, record of temporal variability in the so-
called biological pump, a term loosely applied here to material transfer from
the surface to the deep ocean. The OFP provided the first direct evidence for
seasonality in the deep ocean and the tight coupling between deep fluxes and
upper ocean processes. It has provided clear evidence of the intensity of
biological reprocessing of flux and scavenging of suspended material in
mesopelagic waters. The record has documented interannual and longer variations
in deep fluxes and shorter term fluctuations driven by the interactions between
mesoscale variability and meteorological forcing. The time-series is becoming
long enough to begin study of variability in terms of multiyear basin-scale
climatic forcing, such as the North Atlantic
Oscillation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will provide renewal funding for
this unique and fundamental oceanographic time-series. As the record gets
longer, we are better able to put into perspective the observed fluctuations in
terms of the interplay between climate and ocean functioning. The colocation of
coordinated and complementary research programs at the Bermuda Time-Series Site-
the OFP mooring, the Bermuda Atlantic Time-Series (BATS) shipbased
biogeochemical observations, and anticipated future moored and autonomous
technologies such as gliders present unparalleled opportunities to study the
coupled interactions among ocean physics, biology and chemistry and material
fluxes, and how these in turn are linked to atmospheric and climatic forcing.
New analytical techniques, unimaginable when the OFP first began, are being
applied to the sample archive, revealing new information about ocean processes
that is embodied in the composition of recovered flux
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There will be several significant broader
impacts: (1) Systematic, long-term biogeochemical observations, such as those
provided by the OFP, are essential to gain an understanding of natural oceanic
variability and to provide a reference point in which to interpret the
repercussions of possible future climate change scenarios. (2) Previous NSF
review panels have recognized the OFP as an invaluable "community resource". The
OFP will continue to share its resources- sample material, data, ancillary
shiptime, and use of the mooring platform- with researchers and students to make
possible a diverse range of investigations at a very low cost to the community.
(3) The OFP sample archive is a rare treasure. The sample material to be
collected will continue to be invaluable for current and future biogeochemical
and climate studies. (4) Educational experiences provided by the OFP will
broaden the research experiences and science horizons of many young
investigators at a critical juncture. Of particular value are opportunities to
become directly involved with observational oceanography, time-series research
and integrated ship-based research activities occuring at the Bermuda Time
Series site.