* 0927235
* Collaborative Research: Does coupling between the inner shelf and surf zone regulate larval supply to intertidal populations?
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2013
* Ad Reniers, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 12/31/2013
* USD 234,533.00

Many intertidal invertebrates and fishes have complex life cycles that include a
planktonic larval phase. At the end of their pelagic development, larvae must
return to shore and cross the surf zone. The purpose of this study is to
investigate for the first time the role of surf zone hydrodynamics in the rate
of delivery of cyprids of intertidal barnacles to the shore. To exploit the
greater physical oceanographic understanding of the hydrodynamics of sandy beach
surf zones, this initial study will focus on cyprid settlement on hard
substrates in surf zones associated with sandy beaches. In the first two years
of the study, the investigators will carry out an intensive two-month physical
and biological study of a reflective and dissipative surf zone, respectively. At
each site they will sample cyprids in the waters of the inner-shelf, just
outside the surf zone, and within the surf zone and they will measure settlement
on plates in the intertidal zone. At the same time they will collect physical
oceanographic data with both in-situ instruments and a fleet of GPS-equipped
surface drifters to describe the hydrodynamics of the surf zone. The time series
of the physical and biological data will be correlated to investigate mechanisms
of delivery of cyprids to the shore. To simulate the hydrodynamic processes
responsible for the transport of larvae, the investigators will use a 3D model,
resolving both the horizontal and vertical structure of the unsteady nearshore
flow. To evaluate potential transport of larvae through the surf zone, a
biological module describing the spatial distribution of the larvae will be
coupled to the hydrodynamic module to predict the pathways of the larvae and
compare with observations. Intensive sampling will help provide insight into the
actual processes transporting cyprids from the inner shelf, through the surf
zone, and to the intertidal zone. During each summer, weekly barnacle
recruitment and daily cyprid settlement will be measured for two months to
settlement plates at reflective and dissipative beaches in central California
and southern Oregon. Population densities at many beaches along the West Coast
will be surveyed each year to determine if a latitudinal gradient in wave energy
is correlated with adult barnacle population
densities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because the fundamentals of surfzone dynamics
are universal, results of this research will be broadly applicable not only
along the West Coast, but worldwide. This project will have significant impacts
on education and public outreach. It will support three graduate students and
nine undergraduate students and will create new research opportunities for
students of diverse backgrounds from three undergraduate institutions, local
high schools and the public. The research will be included in the curriculum of
intensive hands-on courses, and undergraduates will participate in the research
while learning how a real-world research project addresses fundamental
questions. Both a website that highlights findings and an interactive display
for visitors to the Bodega Marine Laboratory will be developed. A model coupling
nearshore hydrodynamics and onshore transport across the surf zone will be made
available to the community to stimulate research into this emerging research
topic.