* 0927875
* Doctoral Dissertation: Police Responses to Protest Activities in 30 U.S. Cities, 1996-2006
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* John McCarthy, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2010
* USD 10,000.00

Social movement scholars have long recognized the importance of understanding
the police handling of protest events, referred to as protest policing. Most
protest policing theory focuses on aggregate differences between nation-states.
Yet emerging research on policing in the U.S. suggests that contextual, meso-
level processes may also be important. Accordingly, we pose three research
questions: 1) Is there theoretically meaningful variation in protest policing
patterns across U.S. localities? 2) Is protest policing shaped by city level
variation in socio-economic and political environments where contentious action
occurs? 3) Are nation-state level theories of protest policing useful for
understanding variation across American cities?

To address these questions, we examine protests in thirty large U.S. cities
between 1996 and 2006. Our research design involves creating a data set that
combines a systematically coded sample of protest events drawn from local
newspapers, organizational characteristics of municipal police departments, and
ecological characteristics of each included city. This design allows us to use
multilevel models to address our questions. We expect our research findings will
revise and strengthen existing sociological theories of protest policing and
social movements. Additionally, by incorporating data about police departments
and community context, we hope to bridge the theoretical gap between the protest
policing, criminological, and policing research literatures.