* 0927323
* GOALI: Quality Mining - A Novel Framework for Quality Monitoring and Control for Data-rich Manufacturing Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* William Woodall, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Edwin Romeijn
* 08/31/2013
* USD 304,498.00

This grant provides funding to develop new quality tools for manufacturing
systems through incorporating computer and information science principles, such
as those used in web mining. These newly envisioned quality methods will make
use of data mining techniques such as association, clustering, and significance
as a means of handling large amounts of process and product data being collected
in current complex manufacturing systems in order to transform the data into
usable knowledge. These new quality tools will be developed to store, organize,
analyze, model, and visualize large, heterogeneous data sets associated with
manufacturing systems for continuous quality and reliability quantification and
improvement. These techniques will transform the current data-push quality
approach, where reports are often generated without a clear purpose, into a data
pull system where the quality system will reflect an awareness of the task
environment while reacting to a fault (alarm condition) or a user query. This
work includes a strong collaboration with QMC LLC, a data management company who
will implement the developed tools, FARO, provider of dimensional data
acquisition systems, and Ford Motor Company, who will provide a test bed to
validate the proposed tools in an industrial environment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research will redefine current quality
control methods through transforming low-level data into high-content
information leading to a deeper understanding of manufacturing and service
systems. This will allow for quicker and more accurate failure detections,
leading to a significant increase in quality. In addition, the ability to
effectively handle data-rich manufacturing systems will stimulate the
development and incorporation of advanced sensor and data collection techniques.
This will produce a continuous quality improvement attitude based upon
heterogeneous data management.