* 0927607
* Collaborative Research: Priority Dispatching of Patients in the Aftermath of a Mass-Casualty Event
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Serhan Ziya, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Edwin Romeijn
* 08/31/2013
* USD 360,443.00

This grant provides funding for the development of simple but effective decision
rules for allocating scarce resources (such as ambulances and operating rooms)
to patients in the aftermath of mass-casualty incidents. The problem
formulations are based on the model of Sacco Triage Method (STM), which was
proposed to obtain a good patient allocation policy in real-time by solving a
linear program. This research will significantly expand on the model of STM by
introducing stochastic components that are highly relevant in practice and also
by placing it within a dynamic programming framework for a better understanding
of decisions for dynamic patient triage. Instead of using the model to obtain a
solution in real time, it will be used to investigate structural characteristics
of optimal or near-optimal policies and also to develop heuristic methods when
optimal policies cannot be characterized or are not easy to implement. A
comprehensive simulation model will be developed, which will be used in testing
the performances of the proposed policies and
guidelines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this research will provide
scientific support for the emergency response community in their revived effort
of developing effective emergency response policies. The main objective of this
work is to identify effective but also simple rules so as to make them more
appealing for practitioners. The research will identify broad guidelines that
can be easily adopted in the field. These guidelines will essentially determine
the type of the prioritization policy to be used depending on easily observable
measures such as the approximate total number of casualties. The proposed work
will also contribute to the classical job scheduling literature in Operations
Research since it involves the analysis of a novel formulation for a job
scheduling problem that arises in many different settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;