* 0927876
* HBCU-Targeted Infusion Project:  Training undergraduate students in bio-fuels:  From the research laboratory to the market place
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Lawrence Pratt, Fisk University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2012
* USD 149,832.00

ABSTRACT HRD 0927876&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fisk University is enhancing the
education of undergraduate students in traditional and alternative energy
sources through a combination of course work and undergraduate research. Unlike
other undergraduate research programs, this project is actively training
students to take their ideas and research results to the market place, resulting
in new minority owned businesses related to alternative energy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program has three major components. First, we are
developing a new course in "Energy and Fuels". This course is for science majors
who have a good basic science background but do not have specialized knowledge
from advanced courses. The second component is undergraduate research experience
in alternative fuels. This element serves the dual function of providing an
advanced laboratory in which students learn the techniques, and a way for
students to perform and publish original research in alternative fuels. Finally,
participating students are taking an existing class in "Entrepreneurial
Development", where they are learning to put their ideas on alternative energy
into a formal business plan. Mentoring is also being provided for students who
wish to start energy related businesses on graduation&lt;br/&gt;