* 0927319
* BRIGE:  Anisotropic Deformation and Damage Mechanisms in Al-Mg Bi-modal Grain Size Alloy
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,10/31/2010
* Leila Ladani, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 10/31/2010
* USD 175,000.00

The research objective of this BRIGE award is to investigate physical mechanisms
of inelastic deformation and damage in Al-Mg bi-modal grain size alloys. Effect
of different parameters such as strain rate, microstructure, temperature, and
anisotropy on physical mechanisms of damage will be investigated through
experiment. In order to explore the deformation mechanisms of larger grains and
nano-crystalline matrix separately and to be able to evaluate the contribution
of these two, specimens without large grains and with different volume ratios of
large grains are tested. Due to anisotropic nature of these materials, the tests
will be conducted in different orientations to compare the deformation rates and
mechanisms as well as strength. Microstructural analysis will be conducted
before and after test using SEM and TEM to explore deformation mechanisms and
microstructural evolution. Micro-structural based constitutive models will be
developed for this material to model inelastic deformation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research will provide
fundamental science and technology on polycrystalline plasticity and damage
mechanisms as well as constitutive equations for Al-Mg bi-modal grain size
alloys. These constitutive equations will take the microstructural effect into
account and will be capable of determining the deformation rates in different
orientations. In addition, the results from these studies will provide the
necessary framework, experimental techniques, and knowledge to allow
investigations of cyclic fatigue and damage in micro structurally non-uniform
anisotropic material. This knowledge will assist the community in designing more
reliable, cost effective and intelligent structures. Broader societal impact of
this project is enhanced by outreaching women and minorities and
underrepresented groups, attracting k-12 students to higher education in the
area of science and technology and enriching graduate and undergraduate
curriculum through systematic channels.