* 0927103
* BRIGE: Development of an Implantable Biomimetic Angular Rotation Sensor for Overcoming Vestibular Dysfunction
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Pamela Bhatti, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 07/31/2012
* USD 175,000.00

BRIGE ECCS-0927103: Development of an Implantable Biomimetic Angular Rotation
Sensor for Overcoming Vestibular Dysfunction&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This award is
funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to develop a small, low power
sensor based on the human vestibular sensor for a vestibular prosthesis. The
vestibular system establishes a sense of body position, maintains balance, and
helps to stabilize vision during movement. Dysfunction in the vestibular system
can often lead to debilitating symptoms of postural instability, visual
blurring, disorientation and falling. Some patients may benefit through
conservative treatment and rehabilitation. But for those who do not, especially
those suffering from vestibular dysfunction in both inner ears (bilateral),
there is currently no effective alternative. The long-term goal of the work is
to provide such individuals with an option-an implantable biosystem that
emulates vestibular function-a vestibular prosthesis. By sensing angular head
rotation and directly stimulating vestibular nerve fibers located in the inner
ear, the prosthesis conveys otherwise absent head rotation cues to the central
nervous system. To accomplish this goal, this effort proposes to overcome two of
the most significant technical challenges faced when developing a fully
implantable system-the large size and excessive power consumption of the angular
rotation sensors. Thus, the objectives of this project are (1) based on a
biomechanical model of the human semicircular canal, fabricate a micromachined
polymeric diaphragm angular rotational sensor, (2) benchmark the sensor with
existing sensor technology (gyroscopes), and (3) determine the surgical
approach, site of implantation, and histologically assess the tissue response of
the sensor to validate its biocompatibility and
stability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits: Failures in the vestibular
system are especially pronounced in the elderly where falls related to balance
instability are associated with high rates of mortality and morbidity,
contributing significantly to today's skyrocketing healthcare costs. Past
efforts toward a vestibular prosthesis have relied upon external gyroscopes.
Although such an approach is potentially scalable with MEMS technology, power
consumption remains a challenge. When considering a three-axis fully implantable
system, a revolutionary low-power sensing mechanism is paramount. This research
will be the first to assess the efficacy of a passive MEMS-based biomechanical
analogue to the natural human sensor and will present a radical approach to low-
power inertial sensing&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The proposed
biosystem could greatly improve the quality of life for individuals with
bilateral vestibular dysfunction. In addition, the proposed sensing mechanism
may serve as an external vestibular system for wearable balance prostheses that
utilize sensory substitution strategies, such as vibrotactile displays and
electrotactile tongue activation. To broaden the participation of
underrepresented groups, the PI pursues a strategy for integrating research with
outreach, mentoring and teaching to reach students across the K-graduate
continuum. For example, at the K-12 level the PI delivers science nights at the
Fernbank Science Center Museum in Atlanta, GA, and plans for reaching a large
underrepresented population by working with a local middle or high school
science teacher to develop lectures and science modules. At the college level,
the PI mentors upper-level female students participating in guided research in
her lab, and is recruiting undergraduate research students nationally through an
NSF-supported REU program.