* 0927797
* Processes controlling cross shelf exchange in the Amundsen/Bellingshausen Seas
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2014
* John Klinck, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 09/30/2014
* USD 564,937.00

The West Antarctic Ice Sheet (WAIS) is losing volume at an increasing rate which
is contributing to sea level rise. One proposed reason for the increased basal
melt is a change in either the temperature or quantity of warm Circumpolar Deep
Water (CDW) that moves onto the shelf and flows underneath the floating ice
sheet. The WAIS rests largely on bedrock below sea level; so, as the ice melts,
seawater can intrude under it causing it to float and exposing more ice to warm
water. Calving of icebergs, runoff and basal melt due to oceanic water are the
three major causes of volume loss for the WAIS. Basal melt is second in
importance but the processes and driving mechanisms for the intrusion of oceanic
water are not well understood. Possible dynamical processes are bottom Ekman
layer transport, inertia-bathymetry interaction, Antarctic Circumpolar Current
(ACC) density variation due to thermal wind, ACC dynamic instability,
atmospheric forcing, and ice shelf circulation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The investigators propose to analyze
the importance of each of these processes on cross shelf transport of CDW along
the Antarctic continental shelf of the Amundsen and Bellingshausen Seas. The
research hypothesis is that there is no direct or indirect effect of the
atmosphere on oceanic processes that cause exchange of CDW along the shelf break
of the Amundsen and Bellingshausen Seas. The alternative hypothesis is that the
atmosphere has a dominant effect on oceanic processes that produce exchange of
CDW along the shelf break of the Amundsen and Bellingshausen Seas. Process
simulations will be conducted with an ocean-ice model (the Regional Ocean
Modeling System with dynamic sea ice and ice shelves) that represents the
character of the Amundsen and Bellingshausen shelves to test the influence of
each process on shelf break exchange, transport across the shelf and basal melt
of the ice shelf. Two realistic calculations will represent the Bellingshausen
Sea and Amundsen Sea shelf area, respectively, forced by high resolution
atmospheric forecasts and using boundary information from the large scale ocean
models. Each models will have a 2 km (or smaller) grid spacing to properly
represent baroclinic processes. Cross shelf transport of CDW and heat flux to
the base of the ice shelf will be analyzed for each of these simulations. The
relationship of these diagnostics to surface forcing and ACC speed as well as to
atmospheric indexes (ENSO and SAM) will be
determined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The climate of the Antarctic
Peninsula and West Antarctica is changing rapidly. Furthermore, the WAIS is
losing volume at an alarming rate, creating an urgent need to understand the
processes by which warm oceanic water moves across the shelf under ice shelves
and contributes to basal melting and, in some cases, to accelerate movement of
the nearby ice sheets. This model study will identify processes affecting the
intrusion of this oceanic water onto the shelf. It will also associate
variability in the ACC in this region with climate indexes to project these
results into the future to estimate the effect of oceanic changes on ice sheet
movement and melting. A post-doctoral fellow will be train in ocean-ice
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;