* 0927512
* Collaborative Research: Sources and Sinks of Stoichiometrically Imbalanced Nitrate in the Laurentian Great Lakes
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2009,09/30/2013
* Jacques Finlay, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 09/30/2013
* USD 824,761.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over large scales encompassing
heterogeneous conditions, biogeochemical mechanisms act to achieve a
stoichiometric balance between nitrogen and phosphorus. Locally, however,
imbalances can develop. The Laurentian Great Lakes are a vast freshwater system
where nitrate has been steadily accumulating for decades. Previous work has
shown that in Lake Superior, the headwaters of the system, nitrate enters the
lake water primarily due to in-lake biogeochemical processes, not due to passive
accumulation of nitrate as a conservative substance as previously believed. An
extreme stoichiometric imbalance of nitrate/phosphate ratios (~ 10,000 by moles)
is present and is apparently growing. This set of prior findings opens up two
major questions. First, what are the principal biogeochemical control points
that tip the N cycle toward buildup of excess nitrate? And second, how does the
extreme stoichiometric imbalance affect the ecology and evolution of Lake
Superior's biota? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, researchers at the
University of Minnesota - Twin Cities and the Bowling Green State University,
who previously documented the nitrate buildup in Lake Superior, will continue
their research program and address these two questions. The project is organized
around making comparative measurements of N assimilation, nitrification,
denitrification, anammox, and microbial community structure in Lake Superior and
in the central basin of Lake Erie. These two environments differ greatly in many
ways including redox state and organic carbon production rates. From the
standpoint of N balancing mechanisms, they can be considered end members within
the Laurentian Great Lakes. Lake Superior contains an endemic assemblage of
heterotrophic and autotrophic microbes, whereas the comparable organisms in Lake
Erie and other Great Lakes represent cosmopolitan clades. Connections between
the extreme stoichiometric imbalance in Lake Superior and the unique microbial
assemblage are unknown but will be examined in this study. Additional data will
be collected across a larger region of the Upper Great Lakes including Lake
Huron and northern Lake Michigan. Up-to-date mass balance budgets of nitrogen of
the most of the Great Lakes (Lake Superior is already done) will be constructed
and linked with hydrologic fluxes to gain insights into the dynamics of N across
the entire Laurentian Great Lakes System. Observations of water chemistry will
be made with ship-board sampling together with field-deployed nitrate sensors in
shallow and deep waters. Process studies will be performed in the water column
and at the sediment-water interface and will involve sensitive stable isotope
techniques. These will include measurements of NO3 and NH4+ uptake into
different size fractions, exchanges of different forms of N and C between the
water column and sediments, nitrification, denitrification, and anammox. The
diversity and abundance of ammonia oxidizing Archea (AOA) and bacteria (AOB)
will be studied using quantitative real time PCR and DGGE. Similarly, the
genetic composition of denitrifyers and anammox bacteria will be studied to see
if they too are represented by novel clades in Lake Superior. Cultured
nitrifyers will be characterized in terms of growth under different conditions
typically encounterd across the Great Lakes. The project will yield valuable
information and insight into the operation of the nitrogen cycle under
conditions that promote stoichiometric imbalances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The Laurentian Great Lakes are a valuable regional resource and an
immense reservoir of planetary fresh water. Lake Superior is often considered to
be relatively pristine but the ultimate source of the N converted to nitrate in
the lake is as yet unknown and may involve past changes to the watershed or
other anthropogenic factors. This project will support the training of a
Postdoctoral researcher and graduate students both in Minnesota and in Ohio. The
student line allocated to BGSU will be reserved for a graduate of the BGSU-
Lorain County Community College (LCCC) University Partnership B.S. in Biology
program, an innovative program created to provide the residents of Lorain and
surrounding counties, which form part of Ohio's economically-depressed "rust
belt", a chance to enroll in bachelors programs while attending LCCC. Students
enrolled in the University Partnership participate in NSF-funded undergraduate
research and this project will afford an opportunity for a LCCC student, many of
whom are considered "non-traditional", to work towards earning a graduate
degree.