* 0927470
* Collaborative Research:  Frontal Interaction and Atmospheric Forcing North of Cape Hatteras, an Analysis and Modeling Study
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Ruoying He, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 12/31/2012
* USD 233,326.00

This study will examine the dynamics of the interaction of a shelfbreak jet with
a western boundary current and associated offshore transport of shelf water
masses. This situation occurs in the north Pacific (Kuroshio/Oyashio), south
Atlantic (Brazil/Malvinas currents), and Cape Hatteras (Gulf Stream,/shelfbreak
front). The focus will be on the region north of Cape Hatteras, where the
shelfbreak front detaches from the continental shelf and becomes entrained in
the Gulf Stream. The science questions to be addressed are: --The response of
the shelfbreak jet (acceleration/deceleration and separation from the
continental shelf) to motion of the Gulf Stream front relative to the
shelfbreak, -- Response of the shelfbreak front to forcing by strong wind stress
and surface heat loss -- Dynamics by which outer shelf water is entrained into
the Gulf Stream -- How the shelf dynamics are affected by the narrowing shelf
width approaching Cape Hatteras, with focus on the vorticity dynamics.

A combination of existing high-resolution data sets including those collected
during the Frontal Interactions Near Cape Hatteras (FINCH) program as well as a
sub-regional numerical model to investigate these questions will be utilized.
The numerical model will be a ?child? sub-domain of a larger scale model of the
entire Middle Atlantic Bight. Supporting data including sea surface temperature
and satellite-based altimetry will also be used to gain insight into frontal
motions and their response to forcing.

Intellectual Merit This work will be of importance to understanding fundamental
dynamics of shelf water export in a known region of mean offshore transport. The
sub-regional model will be important in understanding long-term trends in fresh
water transport and shelf-slope exchange in this area. This region is similar to
other important regions of large shelf export including the Kuroshio/Oyashio
convergence in the north Pacific and the Malvinas/Brazil current convergence in
the South Atlantic. This is also a region where organic carbon transport from
the shelf to the deep ocean is important.

Broader Impacts The Hatteras region contains numerous commercial fisheries as
well as endangered marine mammal species. Results will be communicated to
appropriate fisheries scientists and cetologists. The modeling effort will
include graduate student support. Gawarkiewicz will continue activities at the
Children's School of Science at Woods Hole, where he has been on the Board of
Directors for five years, and has initiated the purchase of oceanographic
instruments (including a video-equipped ROV), spoken extensively in classes,
assisted in recruitment and evaluation of teachers, and helped develop course
activities for a number of classes.