* 0927478
* Electronic Structure Studies on Prismatic Dislocation Loops
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Vikram Gavini, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Siegmund
* 06/30/2014
* USD 295,017.00

The embrittlement of metals subjected to radiation is a long-standing problem in
various applications including nuclear reactors. The formation of prismatic
dislocation loops (dislocation loops whose Burgers vector has a component normal
to their plane) is widely believed to be an important factor leading to
radiation damage in metals. With the growing interest in nuclear energy, there
is a compelling need to understand the properties of these defects and their
influence on the structural properties of materials. This project undertakes a
fundamental study through quantum mechanically informed calculations to probe
into various aspects of prismatic dislocation loops, which include nucleation,
growth and migration of these defects, and their influence on the structural
properties of materials. In order to conduct these studies, the investigator
will develop coarse-graining techniques that enable electronic structure
calculations at macroscopic scales. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Development of the
proposed coarse-graining techniques will bridge the materials science and
mechanics viewpoints of materials behavior, which will have a transformative
impact in facilitating the design and development of new multi-functional
materials. The physical insights provided by this project can guide the design
of new materials which provide enhanced performance under radiation exposed
extreme thermo-mechanical environments. Moreover, this project will provide
education and training for a diverse group of students in a highly
interdisciplinary field on the interface of materials physics, applied
mathematics, mechanics, and high-performance computing. &lt;br/&gt;