* 0927949
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: A Multi-Proxy Approach to Understanding Environmental Dynamics in Old-Growth Rocky Mountain Juniper Woodlands, New Mexico, U.S.A.
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Henri Grissino-Mayer, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 08/31/2011
* USD 11,700.00

Long-lived trees provide multi-millennial records of the principle environmental
factors associated with annual tree growth, such as precipitation and long-term
climate oscillations. Dendrochronologists have established that some
Southwestern conifer trees, including Douglas-fir, ponderosa pine, and Rocky
Mountain juniper, can live to old ages in certain forest settings. Previous
research on the remote lava flows at El Malpais National Monument (EMNM) and
Cibola National Forest (CNF) located near Grants, New Mexico set the stage for
this project. Here, conifers largely comprise a stunted woodland that harbors
pockets of exceptional old-growth trees, some trees being over 2,000 years in
age. The lava flows are, in effect, island ecosystems that exhibit a very
different flora than the surrounding landscape which has a different substrate.

Doctoral student Mark Spond, under the supervision of Professor Henri Grissino-
Mayer, will use cross-dated Rocky Mountain juniper samples collected from the
lava formations at EMNM and CNF to assess multi-scale relationships between
monthly and seasonal climatic factors and Rocky Mountain juniper growth of the
past 2,000 years. This study also investigates relationships between Rocky
Mountain juniper growth at EMNM/CNF and within and between 10-year climate
patterns (e.g., El Niño-Southern Oscillation and the Pacific Oscillation) and
regional weather patterns (e.g., North American Monsoon). Smaller-scale
vegetation dynamics within the old-growth woodlands at EMNM are assessed by the
creation of permanent study plots, compilations of age structure data, and
comparisons of repeated photographs. The results of this research will answer
both theoretical and applied questions: Which climate variables correlate best
with Rocky Mountain juniper growth? What is the average rate of annual growth
for Rocky Mountain juniper? What relationships exist between Rocky Mountain
juniper growth and climate patterns? What changes in vegetation can be observed
in the old-growth mixed-conifer woodlands of EMNM between the 1940s and the
present? And finally, can Rocky Mountain juniper tree-ring data aid in providing
an expanded framework for water resource availability in the American Southwest,
an area prone to extremes in hydrologic properties?

This research will assist local and regional government officials in developing
policies that can effectively address such issues as water allocation, invasive
vegetation treatment, prescribed burn schedules, wildfire management, and other
management issues in western New Mexico. Currently, the International Tree-Ring
Data Bank (ITRDB) does not include Rocky Mountain juniper tree-ring data from
the American Southwest. Rocky Mountain juniper chronologies produced by this
doctoral dissertation research will be submitted to the ITRDB. Findings will be
shared with land management officials and the broader scientific community
through the dissertation, several professional presentations, and peer-reviewed
journal articles. This research will also be incorporated into educational
programs for K-12 students and teachers, conservation organizations, and
government officials in Tennessee and New Mexico, using the successful model of
the University of Tennessee's GK-12 Earth Project, funded by the National
Science Foundation. The Principal Investigators of this research are committed
to involving underrepresented groups in all phases of their project, and have
successfully recruited several female undergraduate students to assist on this
project.