* 0927216
* Active Noise Control Systems for Windows Using Transparent Carbon Nanotube Actuators
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Rajesh Rajamani, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* George Chiu
* 08/31/2013
* USD 300,000.00

This project explores the development of double-glazed windows with embedded
active control systems to achieve significant reduction in noise transmission.
The motivation for this work comes from the fact that homes close to airports
and highways in major metropolitan areas suffer from serious noise problems.
Windows constitute the primary path through which aircraft noise enters a home.
In contrast to other active noise control approaches previously attempted in
homes and offices, this project aims to reduce the noise that enters the home in
the first place rather than actively trying to cancel noise in a room after the
noise has already entered the home. Specifically, the project will: a) develop
carbon nanotube based thin film speakers that are transparent, b) develop an
adaptive noise control system for the windows application, c) develop signal
processing algorithms to obtain a time-advanced reference signal for the
controller and to isolate room audio interferences, d) experimentally evaluate
the performance of a prototype window.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The active noise
cancellation developed in the project also has significant applications beyond
windows. These include noise cancellation panels for machinery, transparent
incubators for pre-term babies in neonatal intensive care units and aircraft
cabin noise reduction applications. The educational objectives of the project
include incorporation of class projects focused on noise and vibrations for
school students from the Highland Park High School. The project will also
recruit minority and women undergraduate students through a specialized summer
REU program, providing them an opportunity to work on cutting edge research and
motivating them to pursue graduate studies.