* 0927243
* BRIGE: Ignition, Burning Rate, Chemistry and Transport Properties of Alternative Fuels
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Li Qiao, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Ted A. Conway
* 09/30/2012
* USD 161,168.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)." PI: Qiao, Li Proposal Number: 0927243

This proposal targets on an emerging area of alternative fuels that have great
significance for the economy, transportation and power generation systems. In
our global, just-in-time economy, American competitiveness and innovation
require an affordable, diverse, stable, and environmentally acceptable fuel
supply. Simultaneous with efforts to increase the fuel efficiency and decrease
the environmental impact of power generation systems, a new, diversified fuel
source future is emerging in the marketplace as we move forward into the new
century. Reliable design and optimization of advanced energy conversion systems
will rely on a fully understanding of the chemical and physical properties of
fuels. The next generation fuels are likely to be much different from current
fuels. These fuels will be produced from alternative sources such as oil sands,
oil shale, coal, as well as from a variety of biomaterials, all of which are
fundamentally different from current petroleum-based fuels. New alternative
fuels can be even more complex with increased fractions of compounds such as
oxygenates napthenes and olefins, whose chemical properties and combustion
kinetics are poorly known. There is an urgent need to understand the chemical
and physical properties of alternative fuels.

The overall objective of this proposal is to study ignition, burning rate,
chemistry, and molecular transport of surrogate and alternative fuels by a
combined experimental and modeling study. The objectives will be pursued through
an extensive experimental and modeling program that will include to: (1) Measure
flame speed, minimum ignition energy, and Markstein number of surrogate and
alternative fuel-air mixtures at elevated temperatures and pressures, with
dilution, and for a wide range of fuelequivalence ratios; (2) Numerically
simulate the planar laminar premixed flames, including complex chemical kinetics
and molecular transport; (3) Numerically simulate the time-dependent flame
propagation and study the effect of fuel Lewis number and stretch on flame
dynamics; (4) Investigate the ignition behavior of extra lean alternative fuel-
air mixtures using laser-induced spark ignition.

Intellectual merit: The proposed research has the potential to (1) Provide a
fundamental experimental database covering a wide range of parameters for
validation kinetics and models of surrogate and alternative fuels that we have
little knowledge of; (2) Improve our understanding of the effects of fuel
chemistry and molecular transport on flame properties; (3) Improve our
understanding of the ignition behavior of extra-lean alternative fuel-air
mixtures by laser-induced plasmas. The research activities complement the PI?s
education plan which is focused at: (1) Developing new courses in energy; (2)
Developing high-school student research program with an emphasis of attracting
high-school girls to engineering and science; (3) Recruiting women graduate
students and providing research opportunities for women undergraduate students
by collaborating with the Women in Engineering Program of Purdue University.

The broader impact of the research proposed is significant. The results will
lead to a fundamental understanding of the ignition, burning, chemistry and
transport properties of surrogate and alternative fuels, a complex and untested
range of fuels. The results will improve our modeling and simulation capability
for predictive design and thus will speed the development of the next generation
of clean, fuelflexible and efficient energy conversion systems. The results will
also assist in integrating new alternative fuel resources into the power
generation devices, reducing our dependence on foreign oil. Additional broader
impact contributions are associated with the educational activities, which are
designed to benefit a broad group of individuals, especially women.