* 0927004
* Proposal for Support for the Fourth MC4BSM Workshop and the Workshop on Missing Energy Signals at LHC; Davis, CA
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2010
* Hsin-Chia Cheng, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 04/30/2010
* USD 10,000.00

This proposal is to provide partial support for two international workshops to
be held at the UC Davis in April 2009. The two workshops ?Missing Energy Signals
at LHC? workshop, and the fourth workshop in the ?Monte Carlo Tools for Beyond
the Standard Model Physics? (MC4BSM) series are to be held at University of
California, Davis and take place on consecutive days, ?Missing Energy Signals at
LHC? workshop on April 1?2 and MC4BSM on April 3?4, 2009. The purpose of the
?Missing Energy Signals at LHC,? workshop is to discuss the strategies to search
for new physics with jets/leptons plus missing energy signals and how to
identify the new physics if such experimental signals are discovered at the
Large Hadron Collider (LHC). New physics with missing energy signals is highly
motivated as most new models with a dark matter candidate will produce such
signals at the colliders when the dark matter particles escape the detector.
However, searching for such signals and identifying the underlying physics are
highly non-trivial because the backgrounds and the detectors need to be
understood very well in order to establish such signal events and the missing
information carried away by the missing particles needs to be reconstructed to
identify the new physics. The workshop will bring together both experimentalists
and theorists who are experts in this area to discuss the best approaches to the
questions from experimental searches to the model identi&#64257;cations. The
series of the MC4BSM workshops aims to gather together theorists and
experimentalists interested in developing and using Monte Carlo tools for Beyond
the Standard Model Physics in an attempt to be prepared for the analysis of data
focusing on the Large Hadron Collider. Since a large number of excellent tools
already exist for the study of low energy supersymmetry and the MSSM in
particular, this workshop will instead focus on tools for alternative TeV-scale
physics models. The broader impacts are that the discovery of new physics in the
LHC era will require close collaborations between experimentalists and
theorists. These workshops provide a platform for such collaborations through
detailed discussion and idea exchanges. New tools and strategies will be
developed to make the studies and experimental searches of the new physics more
e&#64256;ective and powerful. The emphasis will be to enhance the discussion and
collaborations between the theorists and the experimentalists along the topics
of the workshop. All the talks will be recorded and posted together with the
slide &#64257;les on the workshop website for everyone to access.