* 0927930
* Collaborative Research: Mitigating the Cost of Anarchy in Complex Supply Chain Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Joseph Geunes, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 07/31/2013
* USD 172,411.00

This project supports a collaborative research program that will lead to an
improved understanding of effective coordination of complex decentralized supply
chain operations in practice. While decentralized supply chains permit firms to
become adept and efficient at performing specific functions, efficient
performance of individual supply chain functions does not ensure that the entire
system operates as efficiently as possible. For decentralized systems in
particular, incentives at different supply chain stages are often misaligned.
Despite a high degree of efficiency within each stage, this incentive
misalignment can and often does lead to avoidable losses in the system.
Coordination among stages becomes a critical factor in mitigating these losses.
The main goal of this project is to develop effective, intuitive, and
efficiently implementable coordination mechanisms for improving performance and
efficiency in complex operations systems. The project will emphasize solutions
that can be applied broadly and effectively in industry to systems involving
economies-of-scale in activity costs. By evaluating an array of intuitive and
easily implemented schemes, this work will lead to an improved understanding of
the structure of effective coordination mechanisms in practical and complex
supply chain operations environments.

By developing new decision models for coordinating operations in complex systems
with nonlinear revenue and cost functions, this project will contribute to the
state of knowledge on how organizations can (i) achieve coordinated operations
in decentralized systems with realistic cost and demand characteristics, and
(ii) understand the implications of operations decisions from a systems view.
The resulting modeling, analysis, and algorithmic development will also
contribute advances in applied parametric optimization theory and large-scale
problem solving. Beyond the economic impact of enabling streamlined operations
in complex systems, which can create substantial economic value for firms, this
work will serve to deepen our understanding of complex systems that operate in a
decentralized manner.