* 0927356
* Repeat Disaster Impacts to Infrastructure Networks and their Effects on Economic Agent Recovery
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2014
* Scott Miles, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 09/30/2014
* USD 249,824.00

Research shows that infrastructure damage from repetitive hazard events and the
ensuing reduced service has a strong, negative impact on business and household
economic performance. Databases and methods exist related to infrastructure
damage and loss. Little exists with respect to infrastructure restoration over
time and the relationship to local economies. There is a critical need to
develop and validate models of infrastructure and economic interdependency and
recovery from disasters. This project will develop a database of infrastructure
damage, service loss, and restoration in Western Washington, a region with high
frequency moderate and large-scale flood events. Moreover, it will use this
infrastructure damage database to develop a spatially explicit economic recovery
model to quantify and validate linkages between infrastructure damage and
economic loss and recovery. This work will build upon ResiliUS, a prototype
computer model of loss and recovery of critical community services from
disasters, developed by the project?s principal investigator. The database
framework and computer model will be designed to be easily transferable to other
parts of the United States. The goal of this project is to advance knowledge on
several fronts: 1) a database framework for measuring, assessing, and monitoring
infrastructure impacts on the economy, 2) a populated database of infrastructure
service loss and restoration over time - to our knowledge the first multi-
service, geographic and longitudinal baseline on infrastructure damage and
service downtime linked to economic agent performance, 3) a modular community
disaster loss and recovery model with geographic representation of
infrastructure system components and economic agent location, 4) a prototype
approach for visualizing large amounts of geographic data on service loss and
recovery, and 5) model application in two Western Washington communities, aimed
at validating and collaboratively assessing the model as a tool for enhancing
the monitoring of infrastructure restoration and economic recovery and policy
making to support community disaster resilience.

The data collected as part of this project will provide valuable insight
regarding policies and plans to reduce infrastructure service loss and the
impacts of that loss on the economy. A secondary component of this project will
be to investigate effective methods for communicating and visualizing both the
data collected and outputs of the ResiliUS computer model to stakeholders, such
as emergency managers, elected officials and urban planners. As such, the
project will include a community collaborative model assessment conducted in two
Western Washington counties. Undergraduate and graduate students will be exposed
to the research process through research assistanceships, paid internships,
volunteer data gathering opportunities, and in-class service learning projects.
The results from this study will be disseminated through academic journals,
academic conference presentations, and local emergency management and planning
association meetings.