* 0927786
* GOALI: Electrochemical Nanofabrication of High-Anisotropy Bit-Patterned Magnetic Arrays using Self-Limiting Ion Milling Fabricated Templates
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Dmitri Litvinov, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2014
* USD 285,998.00

The objective in this research is to demonstrate electrochemically fabricated
magnetic bit-patterned media using precision fabricated templates to achieve
data storage densities above ten terabit per square inch, far surpassing what is
available in today?s even most advanced magnetic data storage
systems.&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposed multifaceted research
is to contribute to the understanding of the materials science and engineering
of underpotential codeposition of magnetic alloys, the potential of self-
limiting ion milling for ultrahigh density square matrix template
nanofabrication, and the effects of spatial confinement on face-centered-cubic
to face-centered-tetragonal phase transformation kinetics in ultrahigh
anisotropy iron-platinum materials system. The availability of ultrahigh
magnetic anisotropy nanostructured arrays that will be developed in the course
of this project will further facilitate the fundamental studies of the
scalability limits of magnetic recording.&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this
research is to enable a range of transformative data-storage applications such
as probe-based data storage, in which two-dimensional arrays of read/write
nanotransducers are used to address the bits on patterned media. Extremely high
data storage bit densities to be explored in the course of this project will be
sufficient, for example, to serve all the data storage needs of the world?s
largest corporation with a single desktop computer! The proposed program will be
integrated with existing NSF-REU, RET, and NUE programs as well as State-
supported programs, in which the investigators actively participate, to enhance
the recruitment of women and underrepresented minorities into the fields of
science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;