* 0927741
* GOALI: A Phased Approach for Investigating Trust and Trustworthiness in Forecast Information Sharing
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2009,02/28/2010
* Ozalp Ozer, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Cerry M. Klein
* 02/28/2010
* USD 278,572.00

This grant provides funding for determining the role of trust in forecast
information sharing. Consider, for example, the process through which a
manufacturer (such as Hewlett-Packard) solicits forecast information from a
retailer (such as BestBuy). The manufacturer uses this forecast information to
plan for production and capacity. When the communication is non-binding, the
retailer has an incentive to inflate demand forecast to assure abundant supply.
The lack of credible information sharing leads to well-documented catastrophic
outcomes. Yet, some firms manage to share information credibly even when
communication is non-binding. In this research, predictive mathematical models
and human-subject experiments will be developed to determine how the level of
trust and trustworthiness among firms affect forecast information sharing and
decision-making. These models will be validated with empirical data to ensure
their applicability and abilities in predicting actions.

The primary goal is to develop a scientific understanding of trust and
trustworthiness in strategic forecast information sharing. A new mathematical
theory will be developed to model trust and enhance the neoclassical economic
models (such as, game-theory) that assume humans make decisions based on
pecuniary payoffs with self-interested motives. The new theory will provide a
framework to estimate the level of trust (that the manufacturer has for the
supplier's information) and trustworthiness (that impedes the retailer to
inflate forecast information). This new model will help prescribe policies to
better coordinate forecast information sharing and optimize decisions, such as
capacity investment. The research will determine when trust can facilitate
cooperation and how trusting behavior alters a firm?s forecast management and
contracting strategy.

Conceivably, this research may also help develop a new paradigm in designing
contracts that include considerations of trust, non-pecuniary issues and human
emotions. Since this project is in collaboration with Hewlett Packard, the
results is likely to be transferred into business practices.