* 0927634
* Fabrication of Freeform Hierarchical Micro/Nanostructures by Control of Capillary Interactions with Aligned Carbon Nanotubes
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2009,01/31/2013
* Anastasios John Hart, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 01/31/2013
* USD 320,049.00

Despite the excellent properties of individual carbon nanotubes (CNTs), their
properties as assemblies are typically poor due to the low packing density even
when they are self assembled to create vertically aligned ?forests? during
growth. This renders current CNT forests inadequate for most MEMS device
applications, and also largely prevents their compatibility with post-processing
by traditional microfabrication. This project will overcome the barrier to use
of CNTs in microfabrication by creating a new manufacturing process for robust
and complex three dimensional microstructures made of aligned CNTs. This process
consists of growth of CNT forests by thermal chemical vapor deposition, followed
by controlled densification of the CNTs using capillary forces. Because
capillary forces can infiltrate CNT forest microstructures individually, this
process can create a wide variety of shapes in parallel. Building from our
recent demonstration of this ?capillary forming? process, we will: (1) perform
rigorous experiments on capillary forming of a library of archetypal CNT shapes,
and relate the results to CNT structural characteristics in a nondimensionalized
fashion; (2) create a finite element model that couples the free energy balance
at a dynamic liquid-vapor interface to the deformation of a CNT forest, and
compare the model results to experiments; (3) measure their mechanical
properties of the freeform CNT structures by nanoindentation; and (4) create and
test polymer-coated and metal-coated CNT cantilevers for application as
anisotropic wetting surfaces and microspring contacts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit will result from our understanding of
how to engineer robust freeform structures of CNTs, and more broadly of how a
balance between surface tension and elastic forces governs the organization of
fibrous networks. These insights will relate to self-assembly in natural systems
and will be applicable to other nanostructured materials. We will connect our
findings to broad audiences across multiple disciplines through: involvement of
minority undergraduate and graduate students in research; a new undergraduate
laboratory experiment involving CNT growth and capillary forming; and by
creating structural models and exhibits in collaboration with artists and
architects.&lt;br/&gt;