* 0927539
* A Multi-functional Fiber Optic Sensor Platform Using a Time Domain Sensing Scheme
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Chuji Wang, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 09/30/2013
* USD 182,000.00



This project investigates a new concept of a multi-functional fiber optic sensor
platform in the field of fiber optic sensors and sensor systems. The primary
research goal is to investigate, develop, and achieve a conceptually new multi-
functional fiber optic sensor system to demonstrate the new concept, which will
be achieved by using the newly developed fiber loop ringdown (FLRD) technique.
FLRD measures a single variable, time, to detect any quantity of interest, e.g.,
pressure, temperature, strain, concentration of a chemical species, etc. This
universal time domain sensing scheme offers the potential of multiplexing
multiple FLRD sensor units into a single sensor system to simultaneously sense
multiple quantities with high sensitivity, high speed of detection, and minimal
adverse impacts from intensity fluctuations of the light source.

Specific research objectives include: 1) Design, fabricate, and evaluate each
individual FLRD sensor unit for the detection of different measurands. 2)
Design, develop, and fabricate a multi-functional fiber sensor system. 3)
Develop and optimize data processing algorithms. 4) Demonstrate and evaluate
performance of the sensor system in terms of functionality, network capability,
data transmission and processing efficiency, and capability of maintaining high
performance (sensitivity, accuracy, selectivity, and robustness of each
individual sensor unit and the speed of the whole sensor system). This project
will involve one graduate student and one undergraduate student from Applied
Engineering Physics.