* 0927836
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Social Norms and Industry Practices in Gamete Donation
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2010
* David Johnson, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2010
* USD 2,895.00

SES-0927836 David R. Johnson Katherine M. Johnson Pennsylvania State University,
University Park

Infertility and reproductive technologies have increasingly entered public
consciousness, but sociologists have not studied the fertility industry--an
industry central to many ethical debates. This research examines organizations
in the industry that provide gamete donation. These donations have inherently
transgressive possibilities in that they collide with cultural norms about
family creation and involve manipulating minute aspects of human reproduction
with far-reaching social implications. The research engages ethical issues, but
draws on a sociological perspective to address social institutions and
inequality. The research poses three central questions: 1) How do organizations
in the fertility industry help to create, delineate, and define families, 2) How
do gender norms manifest in procedures for sperm and egg donors?, and 3) Does an
organization's socioeconomic context impact donor procedures? The research
design involves primary data collection via content analysis of websites for
fertility clinics, egg donor agencies and commercial sperm banks in the U.S.
These represent three main sectors of the industry that provide gamete donation
services. Websites are a medium that conveys information to potential clients
about services, but they also express cultural norms through explanations of
these services. The investigator will also code the contents of donor
applications to collect demographics on the donor and the socio-economic context
of the organization.

Broader Impacts. The study seeks to contribute to sociological knowledge on
human reproduction, using gamete donation to highlight and examine cultural
assumptions and expectations about new reproduction technologies. More broadly,
it seeks to bolster empirical grounding for ethical debates by improving our
understanding of the deployment of reproductive technology.

