* 0927241
* Collaborative Research: US GEOTRACES North Atlantic Section - Nd isotope distribution: sources, sinks and internal cycling
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2014
* Katharina Pahnke, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 02/28/2014
* USD 284,682.00

The objective of the US GEOTRACES program, a newly initiated international
oceanographic program, is to identify processes and quantify fluxes that control
the distributions of key trace elements and isotopes in the oceans and to
establish an understanding of the sensitivity of these distributions to changing
environmental conditions. Neodymium (Nd), a rare earth element, is supplied to
the ocean via continental weathering, and its isotopes have been identified as
an important ocean tracer that could potentially improve our understanding of
water mass pathways, as well as identify sources and sinks of trace elements in
modern and past oceans. Scientists from Columbia University, the University of
South Carolina, and the University of Hawaii will be conducting a rigorous
survey of the distribution of dissolved seawater Nd isotopes and concentrations
along the 2010 GEOTRACES North Atlantic zonal section. Results from this study
will determine how well Nd isotopes track advected water masses in marginal and
open ocean settings, estimate the Nd contribution from submarine groundwater
discharge, and determine atmospheric Nd input and fluxes into and out of marine
sediments. This research will aid scientists in determining the oceanic
distribution of Nd isotopes on a global scale. The educational impacts of this
research include support for a graduate and postdoctoral student, as well as
training opportunities for an undergraduate student.

