* 0927178
* NEES Operations
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2015
* Thalia Anagnos, Purdue University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2015
* USD 100,615,646.00

Earthquakes and tsunamis have the potential within the United States to cause
significant casualties and damage to buildings, bridges, critical utility
lifelines, and other civil infrastructure. To reduce this risk, the George E.
Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES) originated as a
national, multi-user research infrastructure to enable research and innovation
in earthquake and tsunami loss reduction, create an educated workforce in hazard
mitigation, and conduct broader outreach and lifelong learning activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Purdue University, through this cooperative agreement,
will lead, manage, operate, and maintain NEES from FY 2010 to FY 2014. NEES
consists of (1) a managing headquarters located at Purdue University, (2)
fourteen, state of the art earthquake engineering and tsunami experimental
facilities located at and locally operated by universities across the United
States, (3) the NEEShub cyberinfrastructure framework, and (4) powered by
NEEShub, the NEES Academy for education, outreach, and informal science
education. Information about NEES is available at
http://www.nees.org.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NEES facilities, located at
Cornell University; Lehigh University; Oregon State University; Rensselaer
Polytechnic Institute; University at Buffalo, The State University of New York;
University of California, Berkeley; University of California, Davis; University
of California, Los Angeles; University of California, San Diego; University of
California, Santa Barbara; University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign; University
of Minnesota, Twin Cities; University of Nevada, Reno; and University of Texas
at Austin, include single (outdoor), dual, and triple shake tables; geotechnical
centrifuges with in-flight biaxial shakers and robotic tools; a tsunami wave
basin; laboratories for testing large-scale structures, soil-foundation-
structure interaction systems, and lifeline systems; mobile geotechnical and
structural testing field equipment; and two permanently instrumented field sites
in southern California. Other organizations participating in NEES operations
include Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory; San Jose State University;
University of Florida, Gainesville; University of Kansas, Lawrence; University
of Michigan, Ann Arbor; and University of Washington, Seattle.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For intellectual merit, NEES provides the earthquake and
tsunami hazard mitigation communities with a research infrastructure to make
discoveries, translate discoveries to engineering demonstrations, develop
innovative technologies, and transition technology advances to industry,
engineering practice, and seismic design provisions. The experimental facilities
and a user-requirement driven cyberinfrastructure powered by NEEShub provide an
open access, collaborative, and data-rich experimental and analytical
infrastructure for research, education, and technology transfer across
earthquake engineering and related fields. NEEShub, which is based on HUBzero
technology previously developed at Purdue University, seamlessly integrates the
fourteen facilities and their telepresence capabilities, a publicly accessible
curated data repository, web-based collaborative tools, access to leading edge
compute resources, and open source computational tools. Using Internet2, the
NEES cyberinfrastructure will enable hybrid testing methods (coupled
computational and physical simulations) as well as multi-site hybrid simulation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts are realized through open access to the
NEES infrastructure for research and education. Technical staff operating the
experimental facilities and cyberinfrastructure powered by NEEShub offer
training workshops to help researchers, educators, and students discover and use
NEES resources. NEEShub's user-friendly, web-based tools facilitate access to
NEES resources; contribution of research findings, experimental data,
educational materials, and computational and visualization tools; and the reuse
of NEES experimental data for follow-on research. NEES provides for the
integration of research findings and activities with education, outreach, and
training, thus enabling the smooth transition of ideas from conception to
education to practice. NEES has the potential to become the global resource for
earthquake engineering simulation and education, serving not only researchers in
countries advanced in seismic design and construction, but also as a 24/7
resource for researchers in countries with less developed civil infrastructure
and seismic provisions. The NEES Academy provides a community resource for
educational materials, on-line learning, and outreach across the age spectrum.
The NEES Academy supports outreach to the profession, providing a mechanism to
bridge theories to practice and the needs of practice to research priorities.
Faculty and staff at the NEES facilities support ongoing local outreach efforts,
such as K-12 camps, museum exhibits, and informal science education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is part of the National Earthquake Hazards
Reduction Program (NEHRP), http://www.nehrp.gov.