* 0927724
* Collaborative Research: LES &amp; Modeling of Turbulence on Shallow Shelves under Combined Langmuir, Tidal &amp; Convective Forcing with Comparison to VADCP Observations
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Chester Grosch, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2013
* USD 554,972.00

Intellectual Merit: Langmuir supercells (LSC), Langmuir circulations that engulf
the entire water column during strong wind/wave forcing of shallow seas, were
first identified in 2003 from vertical-beam acoustic Doppler current profiler
measurements at the LEO15 cabled observatory off New Jersey. Similar
measurements have been made more recently at the Navy's R2 tower on mid-shelf
off the coast of Georgia, under different wind, wave and tidal forcing
conditions. These unique data sets provide an opportunity, when combined with
large-eddy simulations (LES) to investigate the interaction of several
turbulence generating mechanisms in shallow seas. It is proposed to study the
interaction between LSC, the tidally-forced bottom boundary layer, wave breaking
and stratification (stable and unstable) from analysis of the LEO15 and R2 data
sets and large-eddy simulation of LSC carefully guided by the observations. Once
validated by comparison with the observations over the range of forcing ratios
that characterize these data sets, the multi-process LES will allow exploration
of non-dimensional forcing parameters outside this range, allowing assessment of
the effect of LC on shelves other than those for which measurements exist.
Simulations will be performed spanning parameter space. In traversing the
parameter space, different turbulent regimes will be encountered such as
Langmuir-dominated turbulence, convection-dominated turbulence and shear-
dominated turbulence. Regime diagrams will help establish bulk forcing
conditions for which LSC is dominant. Understanding of the interactions will
lead to increased understanding of the dynamics of these various kinds of
turbulence and to improved turbulence parameterizations for inclusion in large-
scale coastal circulation models accounting for Langmuir turbulence. The
modified parameterizations are expected to lead to improved predictions of
vertical mixing on shallow shelves, ultimately leading to improved prediction of
cross-shelf flows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: This project will
result in improved shallow-water turbulence parameterizations accounting for
wave-current interaction implemented within a number of widely used circulation
models available to the general oceanography community. The proposed
developments are focused in the coastal ocean where the effect of the bottom is
important. Many continental shelves are biologically highly productive, for
example the Bering Sea Shelf, one of the major United States fisheries. This
research will increase understanding of the mechanisms controlling vertical
mixing and cross shelf transport of biologically active materials and sediment.
The parameterizations developed and the inclusion of important physics should
improve the accuracy of models of coastal ocean flows at different resolution
levels, ultimately proving important for coupled physical-chemical-biological
models. This project will provide funding for a post-doctoral fellow who will
train in multidisciplinary fields spanning fluid dynamics, physical
oceanography, numerical methods and experimental methods. Dr. Tejada-Mart√≠nez,
one of the co-PIs, is a scientist in an under-represented minority group. For
outreach, Dr. Savidge participates yearly in training sessions for high school
teachers through Skidaway?s local connections, and through research colloquia
for pre-service teachers at Armstrong Atlantic State University in Savannah.
Visual displays will be provided for the general public, adding to a computer-
based interactive presentation BOTTOMS-UP in the Marine Education Center and
Aquarium on Skidaway Island and on Jekyll Island, in conjunction with Savidge's
planned HF-radar installation there. Important results from this modeling
project will be incorporated in these developing displays. While details of
modeling may be difficult to express to non-scientists, it will be possible to
illustrate improvements in model performance during major wind-forcing events,
and to emphasize the importance of such models in predicting larval and sediment
transport in the nearshore coastal ocean that is of most interest to the general
public.