* 0927697
* GOALI/Collaborative Research: Functionalized Nanodiamond Reinforced Biopolymers for Microporous Surgical Fixation Devices
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Donggang Yao, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 07/31/2013
* USD 156,000.00

Abstract &lt;br/&gt;The objective of this award is to explore new composite
nano-manufacturing methods to enhance mechanical integrity of biopolymers and to
investigate a new micro porous structure which will assist in bioactive material
delivery in surgical devices. The approach will be: 1. Conduct biomaterials and
nano-diamond (ND) composite research to optimize the polymer/ND interface and
mass production technique to manufacture ND reinforced biopolymers. 2. Identify
suitable structural and bioactive materials for a strong fixation device body
and efficient bone/tissue healing and growth. 3. Research on a new technique:
gradient cellular structure to generate bio-reagent storage and passage micro
pores to not only assure the device mechanical strength but also assist in
bioactive materials delivery. 4. Conduct various mechanical and biological
testing to find, control, optimize and integrate all required functionalities
for the surgical device. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The benefits and broader impacts
of this research will be: Provide an innovative way to increase the mechanical
integrity of biomaterials and replace current passive orthopedic surgery devices
with active devices; a strong relationship with Arthrex, Inc. will be built for
the new technology development and transfer; three doctoral students and two
senior design teams will be trained; engaging students with design projects in
nanomanufacturing, bioactive fixation devices and bio-reagents delivery. The
project will be used in outreach workshops for local high school and community
college students, including many underrepresented minority students to showcase
high-tech nanomanufacturing and surgical engineering applications. &lt;br/&gt;