* 0927736
* High Throughput Process Screening and in-situ Characterization for  Graphene Synthesis
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* William King, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 07/31/2013
* USD 365,002.00

This research program will develop a new tool which will allow the rapid
processing of nanomaterials grown by chemical vapor deposition. The proposed
technique will use an array of micro-hotplates which can be independently
controlled to simultaneously produce a wide range of processing environments,
lowering the time for processing by nearly 100,000 times. The tool will be
applied to the synthesis of graphene which is under consideration for use in
transparent flexible electronics, but can also be used for a wide range of
nanomaterials. The micro-hotplates will also allow for monitoring of the rate of
growth during synthesis. Additional methods will be used to characterize the
electrical, optical, and structural properties after growth. The success of this
tool will allow for the rapid optimization of processing environments for
nanomaterial growth which will help speed the introduction of new nanomaterials
into devices. At present, such rapid screening tools do not exist for
nanomaterial synthesis. Furthermore, this platform will enable an understanding
of how temperature variations affect the structure and growth of nanomaterials
which is necessary for the scale-up to mass production systems. Results from
this work will be used in the development of new nanotechnology tutorials
presented at national conferences. In addition, results will be used to help
develop new courses focused on nanomaterial processing and characterization.
Finally, a focus on undergraduate and underrepresented student participation
will be a primary goal of this effort in order to expose underserved groups to a
broader area of engineering and science.