* 0927427
* Collaborative Research:  Coupled Thermal-Hydrological-Mechanical-Chemical-Biological Experimental Facility at DUSEL Homestake
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Nuri Uzunlar, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 07/31/2012
* USD 66,247.00

This project will develop a preliminary design and work-breakdown-structure for
a large-scale subsurface experimental facility to investigate coupled thermal-
hydrological-mechanical-chemical-biological processes in fractured rock at
depth. The experiment will be part of the proposed Deep Underground Science and
Engineering Laboratory (DUSEL) in the Homestake Mine, South Dakota. Many natural
and engineered earth systems involve coupling of multiple processes in rocks
that vary across a wide range of scales. The most pervasive process in the
Earth?s crust that gives rise to strongly coupled phenomena is the flow of
fluids (water, CO2, hydrocarbons, magmas) through fractured heated rock under
stress. Understanding changes in the reactivity, deformability, life-supporting
and transport properties of rocks that fluids infiltrate is important in a broad
range of geological engineering and geological science endeavors. Despite this
fundamental importance, the interactions remain poorly understood.

The project will: (1) Determine properties of Homestake rocks: geological,
geochemical, mechanical, thermal, isotopic, and reactivity. (2) Upscale these
data to elucidate transport mechanisms (conductive versus convective), natural
reaction rates in fractures, and microbial community evolution. (3) Evaluate
monitoring strategies, in-situ probes and sampling methods, and necessary
measurements. (4) Select a candidate site for the evaluating coupled processes.
(5) Develop a work-breakdown-structure. (6) Develop a coupled numerical model to
evaluate potential effects on the rock mass and optimal heater configuration,
power, and monitoring borehole orientations.

The models and insight from these experiments will have broad applicability to
engineered systems, e.g., enhanced geothermal systems, CO2 sequestration and
subsurface contaminant transport. Educational outreach will involve facility
tours and a traveling benchscale ?mock-up? demonstration experiment.