* 0927315
* Predicting Disrupted Network Behavior
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Bradley Love, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Konstantinos Triantis
* 09/30/2012
* USD 331,963.00

As people interact at a large-scale within infrastructure systems (such as
roadway systems), the area of network modeling is often employed to characterize
the impact of the resulting behavior. Traditionally, the concept of network
equilibrium has been employed which models the long-term steady state behavior
of many individuals each acting in their own self interest. While equilibrium
has been critical for infrastructure planning and management, it requires
several key assumptions such as familiarity and rationality which may not hold
true in high stress disruptive situations. This research project addresses new
models for network behavior when significant disruptions occur which upset the
expected network state. The primary hypotheses of this research is that
individuals can transform and adapt previous expectations based on their
perception of the disruption as well as information learned en-route and that in
unfamiliar cases network users place greater weight on system and context-
specific characteristics such as route and road geometry, risk preference, and
travel constraints (e.g., when unfamiliar with the true expected cost, users may
select a longer path simply because it moves them closer to the destination
initially). This research will discern these new individual behaviors through
psychological experiments and then develop novel mathematical formulations for
the resulting network impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By adopting the new problem
characteristics noted in the previous paragraph, fundamentally new mathematical
system descriptions and predictions can be developed for large-scale networks
subjected to disruptions. By achieving superior prediction capabilities,
substantial societal improvements are achievable by being able to better prepare
for disaster and evacuation possibilities. Furthermore, by better understanding
non-equilibrium behavior even substantial near-daily non-extreme improvements
are achievable such as mitigating the impact of non-recurrent congestion and
traffic incidents (both areas which have long complicated transportation
planning). Numerous broader benefits will also be seen beyond transportation
systems. As this research addresses the fundamental problem of network behavior,
numerous fields which employ network models can adopt aspects of the new
behavioral models. Educationally, substantial benefits will result from the
closer consideration of network modeling with psychological behavior. Further,
outreach efforts will be conducted by both Co-PIs and in conjunction with
programs sponsored by UT Austin to introduce students to research and practice,
with an emphasis on recruiting a diverse mix of undergraduate and graduate
students. Through such programs (including the Advanced Institute and US Intern
program at UT-Austin combined with the NSF REU program) the PIs have been
repeatedly successful in the past in recruiting such a diverse mix of students
and are committed to forming a closely cooperative interdisciplinary research
effort.