* 0927407
* Effects of sea level on wave-driven inundation for reef-fringed shorelines
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2009,09/30/2013
* Janet Becker, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 09/30/2013
* USD 1,584,380.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A field experiment is proposed to
examine wave-driven coastal inundation along vulnerable atoll shorelines in the
Republic of the Marshall Islands (RMI). A goal of the proposed research is to
estimate coastal inundation (regional sea level + tidal height + wind-driven
surge + wave setup + wave run-up) driven by wave transformations across fringing
reef topography. Based on previous studies at Ipan reef, Guam, it is anticipated
that water level over the reef will strongly control the inundation amplitude.
To assess the conditions favorable for inundation, ocean wave and water level
conditions will be measured in the deep ocean with a directional wave-rider buoy
and across the reef with current meters, pressure sensors. Video imagery will be
used to assess the penetration of turbulent wave bores over the reef flat, and
to obtain time series of the shoreline position in conjunction with high
resolution T-LiDAR surveys. Estimates of reef roughness will be obtained to
assess swell dissipation due to bottom friction. Meteorological sensors will be
used to monitor local wind and atmospheric pressure forcing. The dynamics of
wave transformation over the reef will be assessed and incorporated into a
single parametric model based on observable properties that define the incident
wave conditions and reef dimensions, and the community model XBeach will be
evaluated with the observations. The proposed observations will guide the
development of an inundation model that will provide a tool to assess coastal
inundation risk for future sea level rise scenarios at RMI and other island
nations. Elements of the observing system and the parametric and/or numerical
inundation model will be transferred to agencies within the RMI for ongoing
coastal management and assessment purposes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
merit: Coral reefs typically act as natural breakwaters for island shorelines.
Elevated water levels due to storm wave set up, however, have been shown to
alter the dynamics of wave transformation on fringing reefs. A better
understanding of sea level effects on wave-reef interactions is necessary to
obtain quantitative estimates of coastal inundation and run up for reef fringed
shorelines. This project aims to acquire and analyze in situ measurements across
a fringing reef with a large tidal range during large wave events to (1) assess
the effect of sea level rise on the dynamics of wave transformation and wave
driven inundation and (2) develop quantitative prediction tools for coastal
inundation for atolls and reef-fringed shorelines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impact: This project will deliver a predictive model to assess coastal
inundation for future sea level rise scenarios at RMI and other island nations.
Dissemination of relevant information to the public will be developed as part
the Pacific Islands Ocean Observing System (PacIOOS). Elements of the observing
system and the numerical inundation model will be transferred to agencies within
the RMI for ongoing coastal management and assessment purposes. Results will be
communicated to the oceanographic community by presentations at international
meetings and by publications in peer-reviewed journals. This collaborative
project will provide training for one postdoctoral researcher and RMI students
and technicians through scientific exchanges with SOEST researchers and Sea
Grant outreach specialists.&lt;br/&gt;