* 0927689
* Magnetic Field-Assisted Processing of Piezoelectric/Magnetostrictive Thin Film Composites to Enhance Properties
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 07/31/2013
* USD 361,129.00

The research objectives of this grant lie in elucidating the fundamental
mechanisms that enhance crystallographic texturing of thin film, multi-phase
multilayers obtained by magnetic field-assisted processing. This research will
answer the essential questions that determine if magnetic field assisted
processing can have a transformative effect on magnetostrictive/piezoelectric
(MS/PE) thin film composites (TFCs). Towards this end, a number of
magnetostrictive and piezoelectric materials will be studied, including soft and
hard PZT compositions, PMN-xPT compositions, a wide range of doped and undoped
nickel and cobalt ferrites, and Terfenol-D. Specific issues to be addressed
include controlling the microstructure of piezoelectric and magnetostrictive
materials independent of layer thicknesses, impact of microstructural control on
the behavior of the various layer interfaces, and the relationships between
piezoelectric and magnetostrictive layer texture and the interlayer property
coupling. These are the key questions that determine if magnetic field
processing can become a key element for manufacturing high performance
multilayer TFCs for multiferroic applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results
of this grant will play an important role in bridging the gap between developing
the underlying science basis for magnetic field processing of
magnetostrictive/piezoelectric TFCs with the technological impact of a
manufacturing-relevant technique for producing high quality multilayer films.
These films can then be engineered for compositions, layer thickness, number of
layers, etc., to suit applications such as high sensitivity, portable, magnetic
field sensors and terrestrial energy harvesters. The availability of multilayer
films with epitaxial-like microstructures and properties will provide an
important new direction for the development of multiferroic systems. The
educational and outreach activities will be executed in three modules: graduate
student education and mentoring, including the development of a new graduate
course on Ferroic Materials: Structure, Properties, Manufacturing and
Applications, research experience for undergraduate students, and K-12 outreach
activities for female and minority engineering students.