* 0927475
* Context-Aware Information Access for Rapid On-Site Decision Making in Construction, Maintenance, and Inspection of Civil Infrastructure Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Atul Prakash, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* elise miller-hooks
* 08/31/2014
* USD 399,994.00

The objective of this project is to design, implement, validate, and demonstrate
a new, self-contained, context-aware Information Technology (IT) that will
automatically provide constructors, maintenance crews, and reconnaissance
inspectors with accurate, prioritized, contextual information for making
critical, real-time decisions during construction, maintenance, and inspection
of constructed facilities. The research objective will be achieved by developing
a context-sensing framework that will accurately track a mobile user's 3D
spatial context in an arbitrary indoor/outdoor environment using a novel
combination of GPS and wireless positioning technologies. Specific information
of interest to a user at a given time will then be retrieved by interpreting
spatial context with a high level of precision, allowing the identified
contextual information to be accurately prioritized. The project's educational
objectives are intricately related to the research, and include workshops for
constructors, engineers, inspectors, researchers, and educators; curriculum
development and improvement; and strategies to recruit and retain the brightest
women and minority engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is critical
because the inability to identify and access relevant information at times of
need is the primary obstacle that prevents rapid and optimal decision-making by
constructors, engineers, and maintenance crews, as well as by reconnaissance
inspectors who respond to events (e.g. earthquakes) that damage the built
infrastructure. Success in this project will notably improve jobsite
productivity, accuracy, and safety, as well as enable a significant leap over
current practices of operation, maintenance, and building reconnaissance that
are often error-prone, time consuming, labor intensive, and primitive. The
research results will be applicable to solve a wide range of engineering
problems in construction and civil engineering, as well as other domains such as
manufacturing, shipbuilding, and transportation. This project will significantly
help the career development of graduate and undergraduate students, including
women and minority engineers who will actively participate in the research
activities and prepare to become tomorrow's engineers. The project will lead to
new software tools and training materials that will be widely distributed to the
construction, facilities management, and reconnaissance research and
professional communities to enhance scientific and technological understanding.