* 0927995
* Collaborative Research: Global/Local System Identification of Strongly Nonlinear Dynamical Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Lawrence Bergman, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 07/31/2013
* USD 269,059.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this award is
to develop a method for system identification that is applicable to a general
class of dynamical systems with nonlinear, time-varying and non-smooth effects.
This is dictated by the realization that as engineering systems become more
complex reflecting multi-physical effects and possessing responses across
different time and frequency scales, the likelihood exists that they will
exhibit strongly nonlinear and nonstationary behavior, sensitive to initial and
forcing conditions and parameter uncertainty. Examples include structures with
loose mechanical joints undergoing vibro-impacts, and ultra-flexible structural
components with strong geometric nonlinearities. The approach relies solely upon
direct time series measurement and post-processing, leading to dual global /
local identification of the dynamics and data-driven reduced order models
(ROMs). Key to this approach are slow/fast partitions of the measured time
series, which when combined with powerful post-processing algorithms lead to
identification of the dimensionality of the governing dynamics and derivation of
accurate ROMs with many applications, including control-oriented design,
condition monitoring, and damage detection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful,
this research can have immediate impact and be transformative in the fields of
system identification and structural health monitoring. Indeed, the capacity of
the proposed method to separate smooth from non-smooth effects in measured time
series allows for rapid detection of non-smooth dynamics often associated with
damage (i.e., cracks, failed bearing, etc.). Results will be disseminated to
encourage application. Outreach activities will be undertaken, particularly in
the vicinity of New Mexico State University (NMSU) which has a large population
of underrepresented minority students, through mentoring programs, laboratory
visits by high school students, and teacher training in the area of dynamical
systems. The PIs plan to work with the Society of Hispanic Engineers and the New
Mexico Alliance for Minority Participation, and other organizations at NMSU to
increase the enrollment and graduation rate of underrepresented groups in
engineering.