* 0927287
* Ocean Carbon and Biogeochemistry Project Office
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2009,02/28/2014
* Heather Benway, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 02/28/2014
* USD 2,246,732.00

In January, 2006, an Ocean Carbon and Biogeochemistry (OCB) Scientific Steering
Committee (SSC) was created by NSF, NASA, and NOAA to provide leadership to the
U.S. ocean research community by identifying research priorities and promoting,
planning, and coordinating collaborative, multidisciplinary research
opportunities in ocean biogeochemistry. In conjunction with the founding of the
SSC, the OCB Project Office was established to provide scientific and logistical
support for the SSC and OCB activities. Over the past three years, the OCB
Project Office has established an annual OCB summer science meeting series,
conducted targeted scoping workshops on specific science questions, supported
U.S. participation in national and international science and coordination
activities, hosted a minority student program, and created an OCB website and
newsletter for distribution of OCB results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under this
award, researchers at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution will receive
renewal support to continue the activities of the OCB Project Office: 1) Provide
logistical support to the OCB SSC for its meetings, production of reports, and
other SSC activities; 2) Organize community workshops, short courses, and
symposia; 3) Communicate OCB products and activities to the national and
international scientific community and broader audiences, serving as a clearing
house for information related to U.S. and international ocean carbon cycle
science programs; and 4) Interface with other national and international carbon
cycle science programs and activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts In
the face of climate change and associated changes in atmospheric composition and
ocean chemistry, a more comprehensive understanding of ocean biogeochemistry and
ecosystem processes is critically needed to improve our predictive capabilities
and provide the framework for the development of sound adaptation strategies.
The OCB Project Office will facilitate a more integrated scientific approach by
providing critical coordination and logistical support to enhance the efforts of
the U.S. research community. Through a grassroots, community driven approach,
the proposed OCB workshops and courses will give OCB scientists a public venue
for discussing research challenges and implementation approaches to address OCB
research priorities. The Project Office will support the OCB SSC and other OCB
subcommittees (i.e., ocean acidification, time-series) which provide valuable
guidance on U.S. research priorities and coordination efforts. Another
increasingly important role of the OCB Project Office is to engage the OCB
community in other national and international carbon cycle science programs and
activities (e.g., NACP, IOCCP, IMBER, etc.) thus placing ocean biogeochemical
research in the broader context of marine ecology, global carbon cycle, and
climate science. The communication of OCB activities and priorities is
fundamental to community building and outreach. The Project Office will work to
expand the OCB network by continuing production of a regular newsletter,
augmenting OCB?s web presence by expanding its project information, field
opportunities, and tools and resources for OCB scientists, and developing hands-
on outreach products for scientists, educators, and policy makers.&lt;br/&gt;