* 0927269
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Interrelations between Fear and Development Work in Guatemala: A Multi-Perspective Analysis
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* James Biles, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2011
* USD 12,000.00

In recent years numerous countries have emerged from large-scale, intra-state
conflicts. A common characteristic in these post-conflict societies has been a
noted influx of development aid. The legacy of violence in these countries
presents unique challenges for the implementation of development projects. As an
inevitable response to long-term systemic violence, fear remains a vital issue
among the citizenry of many post-conflict societies. Previous research has
investigated the cultural and historical processes which underpin the emergence
of fear in various societies. As both a project and a process, development also
has received a great deal of scholarly attention. What has been less studied is
the role played by fear in the implementation and outcomes of development
projects. Utilizing the case study of a highland community in post-conflict
Guatemala, this doctoral dissertation research project will analyze the ways in
which fear and development interrelate and act upon each other in complex ways.
This study also will investigate how communities reconcile fear to improve
livelihoods. Because development initiatives in post-conflict societies often
seek to promote opportunities and alternatives to the legacies of fear, the
study of hope is inherent to any study of fear. As such, the relationship
between development initiatives at the local level and the emergence of hope, in
the forms of resilience and resistance, is an important component of this
project. The doctoral student undertaking this research will use long-term
ethnographic fieldwork, semi-structured interviews, and archival research to
provide in-depth data on the perceptions and realities of actors at local,
national, and international levels regarding the specific ways in which fear
shapes and is shaped by development interventions. Subsequent analysis and
integration of the collected data will incorporate triangulation, drawing
together data collected from various sources using a range of collection
procedures. The student expects that triangulation will highlight commonalities
and contrasts in the findings, confirming shared perceptions and revealing
points of disjuncture and contestation among various stakeholders regarding the
ways in which fear impacts the conceptualization, accommodation, and negotiation
of development interventions within local communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
interface of fear and development represents an overlooked area of inquiry, with
potential benefits for scholars and development actors in Guatemala and other
post-conflict societies. By linking these two formerly disparate discourses,
this project will reveal underlying processes that potentially confound
development initiatives at the local level. Such findings will provide a unique
contribution to research on the theory and practice of development and will be
relevant to several constituencies, both within the communities in Guatemala and
within the networks of transnational actors at multiple scales. By identifying
interrelations between fear and development and by examining concomitant
implications for the practice of development, this project will identify more
general insights that can then be applied to other development settings. The
identification of useful comparisons with other post-conflict societies both
within Latin America and in other geographic contexts will have widespread
implications for public policy. Furthermore, this Doctoral Dissertation Research
Improvement award will contribute to the development of a strong, independent
research career. This award is jointly supported by the NSF Geography and
Spatial Sciences Program and the NSF Office of International Science and
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;