* 0927455
* Financial Analysis and Optimization for Linear Scheduling Model of Construction Projects with Integrated Singularity Functions
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Gunnar Lucko, Catholic University of America
* Standard Grant
* Konstantinos Triantis
* 07/31/2013
* USD 173,464.00

The objective of this project is to investigate a novel approach for planning
construction projects by modeling, analyzing, and supporting the optimization of
their cash flows with a unique type of mathematical expressions called
singularity functions. These versatile functions define sequential ranges for
the variable of interest, which can be of any order. They had been used in
engineering to describe and solve varied loading scenarios onto structural
elements and under a prior research study were newly applied to linear
schedules, i.e. two-dimensional plans for work progress over consumed time that
created improved analytical capabilities in terms of the time component.
However, the central element of cost, which occurs as outflows for e.g.
materials, equipment, and labor versus inflows from owner's progress payments,
remained unsolved. Its complex behavior is impacted by the timing of activities
and payment requests and receipts, which in turn are subject to various
constraints, e.g. financing terms and conditions. The ability to manage these
elements impacts the profitability of any construction firm directly and
ultimately determines its economic survival. Despite this fundamental
importance, cash flows have been viewed as being difficult to describe in one
comprehensive model and were typically merely approximated or even averaged.
This project will remedy this conceptual gap in the body of knowledge that will
also build a direct link between the scheduling and budgeting functions of
project management. The resulting method will function in synergy with linear
schedules and also as a stand-alone solution.

To ensure the practical applicability of this research, the project will include
a collaboration with partners companies from the construction industry who have
agreed to provide real project data for validation of the new approach. These
projects will serve as case studies to test the algorithm and the new functions
that will express e.g. one-time or repeated payments, principal and interest,
and possible special provisions, e.g. owner's retainage that is withheld until
completion. Their detailed annotated analysis will be shared with the firms and
in a seminar for project managers. The research work will be interwoven with
educational outreach activities in campus programs of student organizations and
at a high school mentoring program that revolves around construction careers.
The PI will contribute a game-style exercise on basics of financial planning to
its group of minority youth, which will be disseminated through the national
mentor organization. Students in this program can use this newfound knowledge
when working on their publicly presented team project and may also benefit from
it for their personal lives. Students at the PI's institution will receive
course modules on the new financial planning, whose effectiveness will be
measured. The graduate research assistant will participate in a carefully
designed program that will encompass a series of training elements in research,
teaching, and service to prepare for an academic career. Overall, this project
bears the potential to become an important addition to the toolkit of project
managers in construction and other industries by providing an methodology for
integrated cash flow modeling, analysis, and optimization that is both useful in
practice and eminently teachable. It will contribute to society by (a) improving
the financial planning capabilities of contracting firms to support their
profitability, (b) broadly educating the graduate assistant, (c) engaging the PI
in a project that fuses research, teaching, and service work, (d) increasing the
awareness of underrepresented youth with respect to financial planning and
careers in the construction industry in, and (e) laying the foundation for
further innovative modeling that advances project planning.