* 0927554
* A New Paradigm for Scalable Fabrication of Polymer Nanofibers by Bulk Shear and Phase Separation
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Orlin Velev, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 07/31/2012
* USD 192,000.00

The research objective of this award is to develop a new efficient and scalable
technique for the fabrication of polymer fibers as small as 200 nm in diameter
from a number of solution-processed polymers. It is based on a bulk process of
antisolvent-induced precipitation under shear stress in viscous media. The
project will allow moving the technology from exploratory research to the
engineered fabrication of regular and composite nanofibers. It will seek to
establish universal molecular entanglement rules for fiber formation. Polymer-
solvent interactions will be investigated to quantify the competitive kinetics
of fiber formation, due to shear and phase separation, and fiber hardening, due
to solvent and antisolvent diffusion. This method has specific advantages for
production of composite fibers since it does not involve extrusion through
nozzles and avoids the problem of clogging due to particle aggregation.
Principles for making functional fibers and rods will be established. These
fibers and rods will contain catalytic and magnetic nanoparticles, enzymes and
cellulose nanocrystals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this research will
result in new large-scale technologies for making functional micro- and
nanofibers. Such economic nanofiber production could immediately improve the
prospects of manufacturing of highly efficient filters, functional textiles,
scaffolds for tissue engineering, and substrates for flexible electronics and
immobilized biocatalysts. The method allows the creation of biodegradable and
multifunctional fibers by incorporation of inorganic and organic particles and
biomolecules. It can be specifically relevant for sustainable technologies,
since it is capable of creating high value products from solutions produced
during polymer recycling. A postdoctoral researcher will be trained in a
combination of fundamental science with technology development, entrepreneurship
and interactions with industrial researchers. The project will also provide a
training ground for undergraduate researchers as its scientific components
relate to environmental protection and sustainable technologies. &lt;br/&gt;