* 0927040
* Modeling and Motion Planning for Autonomous Skid-Steered Vehicles
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Emmanuel Collins, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 07/31/2012
* USD 250,000.00

This research focuses on developing and experimentally verifying dynamic models
for 3D motion of skid-steered wheeled vehicles, a large and important class of
outdoor vehicles, which are often preferred for all-terrain mobility due to a
robust mechanical structure. In addition, the research will employ the developed
3D models in motion planning. The modeling is based on rigorous dynamic
analysis, but requires experimentation to determine key parameters, particularly
the shear deformation modulus, the coefficients of friction, and the rolling
resistance. The research also emphasizes the inclusion of the motor speed
controllers to obtain closed-loop models that are less sensitive to model
uncertainty and can hence provide better predictions of vehicle performance for
motion planners. The primary motion planning methodology used in this research
is called Sampling Based Model Predictive Control and is a variant of model
predictive control that takes advantages of the computational speed of sampling
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Skid-steered autonomous ground vehicles (AGVs) are
expected to be used extensively in unstructured, outdoor, undulating
environments for tasks such as search and rescue, homeland security, fire
fighting, reconnaissance, and surveillance. These tasks will greatly benefit
from efficient motion planning for the AGVs, which can be accomplished by using
SBMPC in conjunction with the dynamic models of the vehicles developed in this
research. The end result is time-optimal trajectories, energy-efficient motion
planning, reliable energy predictions for mission completion and refueling,
motion planning in the presence of non-fatal mechanical failures (e.g., flat
tires), and less frequent replanning due to more accurate predictions of vehicle
motion. The detailed modeling, control and planning procedures are expected to
be applicable to the growing and increasingly important class of skid-steered,
unique mobility platforms such as RHex and Wheg robots, which are expected to
find increasing use due to more flexible mobility, e.g., the ability to climb
complex obstacles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;