* 0927424
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Changing Logic of Ethnic Classification in China
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2010
* Christopher Sullivan, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2010
* USD 9,000.00

SES 0927424 Thomas Gold Christopher Sullivan University of California, Berkeley

This research project examines the changing logic of ethnic classification in
China. In the mid-1950s, a gathering of preeminent Chinese social scientists and
Communist Party cadres was given the task of partitioning China?s diverse
population into distinct ethnic categories using explicitly non-biological
criteria. Yet less than 50 years later, the development of the field of genetics
in China and the initiation of the Chinese Human Genome Project in 1991 have
spurred a flurry of medical and genetic research on ethnicity in China. This
dissertation research project explores three questions: 1) why has ethnic
classification in China shifted from a socio-linguistic project in the 1950s to
a biologically based one beginning in the early 1980s; 2) what are the resulting
tensions between these two competing logics of ethnic classification; and 3) why
it is necessary for the Chinese government to distinguish between who is and who
is not ethnically Han Chinese? This project examines the changing logic of
ethnic classification using a combination of archival research, content
analysis, and interview data. Data will be collected in seven Chinese cities:
Beijing, Shanghai, Kunming, Urumqi, Guangzhou, Guilin and Lanzhou. China offers
an interesting case to explore the importance of racial and ethnic
classification projects in modern state formation and nation building, economic
development and modernization, and in shaping systems of racial and ethnic
domination.

Broader Impacts

This project seeks to create opportunities to engage the public on how genetic
science and research has influenced our understandings of ethnic identity and
ethnic boundaries. Of particular interest is finding ways to engage the public
on how seemingly objective categories like race and ethnicity vary over time and
place--issues that are beyond the scope of the public's everyday imagination.
Such research is necessary not only in the classroom, but also in public
discourse. In addition, this research project will foster knowledge in a part of
the world where race and ethnicity are often overlooked. This research project's
commitment to producing public sociology will contribute to the National Science
Foundation's goals of integrating research and education; advancing diversity in
science; enhancing scientific and technical knowledge; and benefiting society.