* 0927530
* Experimental Investigation of Microstructural Effects on Deformation and Fracture Mechanisms in Nanostructured Metallic Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Samantha Daly, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Siegmund
* 08/31/2013
* USD 320,090.00

PROJECT ABSTRACT: Experimental Investigation of Microstructural Effects on
Deformation and Fracture Mechanisms in Nanostructured Metallic
Materials&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will be awarded using funds made
available by the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5), and meets the requirements established in Section 2 of the White House
Memorandum entitled, Ensuring Responsible Spending of Recovery Act Funds, dated
March 20, 2009. I also affirm, as the cognizant Program Officer, that the
proposal does not support projects described in Section 1604 of Division A of
the Recovery Act. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this award is
to experimentally investigate the effects of microstructure on the thermo-
mechanical behavior of nanostructured metallic materials. Nanostructured metals
(metals with grain sizes on the order of hundreds of nanometers) are an exciting
class of materials that have shown the rare ability to be simultaneously strong
and ductile. The effort in this award will focus on understanding the
deformation mechanisms in these materials by quantifying the real-time
development of full-field strain in grains and across grain boundaries, and
relating this strain to the local microstructure as determined by in-situ
electron backscatter diffraction. The research will utilize Aluminum, Magnesium,
and their alloys as model materials to investigate the thermo-mechanical
response of two very different crystallographic systems at ultra-fine grain
sizes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The experimental and modeling efforts performed
with this award will greatly enhance our understanding of the fundamental
mechanics of intermediate grain sizes, and our ability to design and develop
processing tools to tailor the mechanical properties of these materials. In
addition to the fundamental impact of this research, understanding the
deformation mechanisms in nanostructured Aluminum and Magnesium is of critical
industry importance due to the suitability of these metals for superplastic
forming. Project outreach includes a partnership with a local school system that
involves the participation of graduate students in the investigator?s research
group as Teaching Fellows, and the creation of a web-learning module on
experimental techniques for middle school and high-school students.