* 0927863
* Collaborative Research: Zooplankton feeding at the base of the particle maximum: Gatekeepers of the Vertical Flux?
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2014
* George Jackson, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 09/30/2014
* USD 312,657.00

A range of observations suggest that zooplankton act as gatekeepers for material
leaving the euphotic zone. This study will investigate the interactions of
zooplankton with other particles using a suite of autonomous and tethered
instruments in conjunction with finescale water sampling. The SOLOPC (Sounding
Oceanographic Observer with Laser Optical Plankton Counter) will be the
autonomous instrument and provide hourly profiles of zooplankton and other
particles. Previous sampling with the SOLPC indicated a diel cycle of production
and abundance of particles in the euphotic zone and their sinking and
consumption, presumably by zooplankton observed at the base of the particle
abundance maximum. The SOLOPC senses particles, including zooplankton and
aggregates, and measures their equivalent spherical diameters which can be used
to compute particle size spectra. However, it is difficult to use the SOLOPC to
distinguish among particle types, such as copepods, larvaceans, and aggregates,
particularly if they are small. The research will include an intensive field
study that will take place in Monterey Bay and use adaptive sampling to observe
near SOLOPCs with a new, AUV-borne imaging system, ship-based CTD and MOCNESS
sampling, and MBARI's ROV Ventana. The investigators will alter a SOLOPC to be
stationary relative to an isopycnal and use the particle counts that it
accumulates to calculate a flux spectrum. They will combine the flux and
concentration spectra to estimate particle sinking velocities as a function of
particle diameter. Zooplankton feeding in the water column will be estimated by
analyzing the gut fluorescence of animals caught in zooplankton nets and by
counting the distribution of fecal pellets in water samples. Results will
enhance the understanding of the role of the zooplankton as gatekeepers in the
vertical flux of particles and, hence, the biological pump. The study will also
provide new insight into factors that affect zooplankton behavior and ecology.

Broader impacts will include mentoring of a graduate student and a postdoctoral
researcher, strong collaborations among diverse institutions, instrument
development and technology transfer, broad dissemination of results, and
contribution to society by better understanding of processes key to the carbon
cycle. A PhD student at SIO and postdoctoral investigator at TAMU will be
mentored by Checkley and Jackson, respectively. Collaborating institutions
include SIO, TAMU, LUMCON, MBARI, BIO, and Université de Paris VI. The SOLOPC,
modified to measure flux as a well as profile, and REFLICS are intended for
acquisition and use by other researchers worldwide. Results will be presented at
national and international meetings and published in the peer-reviewed
literature. The understanding we gain of role of the zooplankton as gatekeepers
of the vertical flux will contribute valuably to understanding of the biological
pump and the carbon cycle.