* 0927841
* IRES US-Botswana: Research Opportunities to Investigate Carbon Cycling in the Okavango River Delta, Botswana for US Undergraduate &amp; Graduate Geoscience Students
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Eliot Atekwana, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* DeAndra Beck
* 08/31/2013
* USD 149,924.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Eliot Atekwana of Oklahoma
State University will conduct an International Research and Experience for
Students (IRES) program to support research and educational activities over 3
years for 6 undergraduate and 3 MS students to investigate carbon cycling in the
Okavango River delta, Botswana, Africa. The University of Botswana (UB) and the
UB Harry Oppenheimer Okavango Research Center (HOORC) will be partners, and 3
undergraduate and 3 graduate students from UB will participate in the project.
The student activities will be supervised by PIs from OSU (Atekwana - Aqueous
geochemistry, stable isotopes; Cruse - Organic geochemistry, trace elements),
and collaborators from UB (Molwalefhe - Hydrogeology), and HOORC (Ringrose -
Soils; Masamba - Hydrology, water quality) with complimentary expertise. The
work plan ensures effective mentoring of all students, and full and equal
participation of Botswanan collaborators and students. The proposed research and
educational activities will engage students in field-oriented, hypotheses-driven
research on carbon cycling. The Okavango River delta is the ideal setting for
this project because (1) river water transit time through the delta is 5-6
months and (2) the delta is in a semi-arid climate where &gt;96% of the water is
lost through evapotranspiration. The Okavango River is unique in that it is the
only river system in the world where long water transit time and
evapotranspiration enhance solute mass transfer from the river to sediments via
evapo-concentration driven by terrestrial vegetation. On a global scale, the
Okavango River delta is one of the largest riverine wetland systems, yet its
role in carbon cycling is unknown. Students will conduct field experiments to
test three hypotheses: (1) Vegetative evapo-concentration plays a critical role
in carbon mass transfer of riverine dissolved inorganic carbon; (2) Carbon
sequestered as carbonate minerals in sediment and surfaces of islands and
floodplain by evapoconcentration of groundwater is cycled to the river during
flooding; and (3) Carbon in groundwater in the Okavango delta is derived from
river water. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Quantifying carbon
cycling in large riverine systems such as the Okavango is critical for assessing
the role of biogeochemical and physical processes on CO2 evasion to the
atmosphere. Evapotranspiration and evapo-concentration in the Okavango delta
likely plays an important role in coupled solute and carbon cycling. How evapo-
concentration affects the cycling of carbon between river water, sediments, and
groundwater is not well documented nor understood. Therefore the results of the
student research activities will fulfill fundamental knowledge gaps in overall
understanding of the role of vegetation on carbon cycling. In addition, this
research experience will provide students the opportunity to explore answers to
other basic science questions related to the important topic of carbon cycling.
The research activity proposed is potentially transformative because it will be
shown for the first time that vegetative evapotranspiration affects carbon
cycling. This concept has not been previously associated with the role of
vegetation in carbon cycling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The proposed
research and educational activities have three broader impacts: (1) Reciprocal
understanding of academic and social culture between US and Botswanan students
and scientists. US students will gain an international perspective to their
education and an enriching cultural experience. They will also acquire personal
contacts to build relationships that will form a core for future international
collaborations and learn the logistics associated with international research.
This international collaboration will contribute to the continued development of
a diverse, globally-engaged, science and engineering workforce. Two early career
faculty (Cruse and Molwalefhe) will be mentored on international collaboration
by senior PI?s as part of this program. (2) Broaden participation of
underrepresented groups by targeting students in the Oklahoma Louis Stokes
Alliance for Minority Participation for this project. (3) Results from the
proposed research will be widely disseminated to enhance scientific and
technological understanding by scientists and policy-makers. Students
participating in this project will make several presentations at scientific
meetings, as well as prepare manuscripts to be published in peer-reviewed
journals. Additionally, data from the proposed research will be used for
teaching several geochemistry courses at OSU and UB. &lt;br/&gt;