* 0927164
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Habitat Mapping and Species-Environment Interactions of Rare Species using Multi-Sensor Remote Sensing: Case Study: Endangered Mangrove Finch
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2009,01/31/2012
* Benjamin Heumann, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 01/31/2012
* USD 11,808.00

Understanding the limits and shifts of the geographic distribution of species is
an important area of research for conservation biology, landscape ecology, and
biogeography. Modeling distributions provides useful information about the where
and why of species distributions including ecosystem services, functions, and
patterns of biodiversity, as well as detailed understanding of species-
environment interactions. Identification of critical or potential habitats of
rare and endangered species is particularly important for conservation biology.
The data requirements of models used to map species distributions remain a
significant challenge. While species occurrence data are field based,
environmental data need to be continuously represented, and therefore, remote
sensing offers unique possibilities as a data source. There are many challenges
to mapping species distributions through space-based remote sensing including
data quality, image processing and information extraction, data fusion and
integration, and model selection and variable characterization. While numerous
studies have used remote sensing to map habitats, very few have done so using
environmental data that are truly suitable for capturing the species-environment
interactions of interest at the appropriate spatial scales. The primary
objective of this research is to model the potential suitable habitat and
geographic distribution of rare and endangered species using the mangrove finch
in the Galapagos Islands as a case study. The mangrove finch is an endemic
species to Isabela Island in the Galapagos Archipelago, Ecuador. To model
habitat for many animal species including birds, the challenges related to
environmental data require a multi-sensor approach that describes not only
vegetation cover and the spatial organization of the landscape, but the vertical
structure of vegetation, such as canopy height, branching characteristics, and
other biophysical parameters, including biomass or leaf area. This study will
use a multi-sensor remote sensing approach to combining passive optical and
active microwave sensors to characterize mangrove forests by extent, species
composition, biomass, and canopy height at the finest resolution possible given
available technologies. These data will be incorporated with field observations
of the mangrove finch using the species distribution model, MaxEnt, to predict
and map suitable habitat. The results of this research will include maps of
mangrove tree species, canopy height, and biomass, and suitability of potential
mangrove finch habitat, as well as detailed species-environment
relationships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this study will contribute to
furthering the methods and techniques of mapping species distributions. This
research will demonstrate the potential for space-based habitat characterization
and species distribution mapping of rare and endangered species. The research
could serve as a model for future conservation research and applications through
the data fusion approaches to be developed. The results of this research have a
direct application in the Galapagos Islands, a UNESCO Biosphere Reserve and
World Heritage Site. This research will produce habitat suitability maps of the
mangrove finch to assist conservation biologists with an on-going captive
breeding program to increase and maintain the mangrove finch population.
Likewise, the species-environment relationships that will be generated can be
used to help conserve existing mangrove forests. Maps describing the species
composition and physical structure of mangrove forests will provide the first
comprehensive representations of mangrove forests in the Galapagos Islands and
thus serve as a baseline from which to track future dynamics of mangrove
forests. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also
will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong
independent research career.&lt;br/&gt;