* 0927383
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Alternative (to) Development on the Tibetan Plateau: The Case of the Anti-Slaughter Movement
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,02/29/2012
* Emily Yeh, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 02/29/2012
* USD 11,960.00

Since Deng Xiaoping's economic reform in the 1980s, the Chinese state has
extended and intensified its economic development agenda, trying to shape its
citizens to become rational market actors who prioritize commodity production.
In Tibetan pastoral areas, this takes the form of efforts to develop the
livestock industry by encouraging herders to intensify production. As a result,
Tibetan herders have become involved in selling ever-larger numbers of yaks to
Han and Chinese Muslim traders. However, reforms also allowed a measure of
religious freedom. In the past five years, many lamas (religious leaders) have
become concerned about the mass sale of livestock for slaughter, because the
Buddhist principle of cause-and-effect suggests that killing is a serious sin to
be avoided.

Ph.D. student Fnu Gaerrang, under the supervision of doctoral advisor Dr. Emily
Yeh at University of Colorado at Boulder will conduct research on how the lamas,
using their tremendous influence and authority, have initiated an anti-slaughter
movement, persuading people to take oaths to stop selling livestock for
slaughter - precisely the opposite of what the state suggests they must do to
become "developed." Many Tibetan herders have participated in these movements,
even though their livelihoods depend heavily on the sale of animal products.
Despite loss of income, many claim that their lives are better off. By examining
this paradox of why herders feel better off even though their income has
decreased, this research project investigates how Tibetan herders and lamas
negotiate the imperatives of state and market to articulate their own
understanding of development. It explores the relationship between Tibetan
Buddhist revival, new economic reforms, and the cultural transformation of
Tibetan herders in the market economy since 1980s. The research will use mixed
methods, including household surveys, in-depth, semi-structured interviews,
analysis of texts and visual media, and participation observation, over a period
of 12 months in Tibetan areas of China's Sichuan province.

The project makes several theoretical and empirical contributions. By examining
the role of Tibetan Buddhism in development, first, it will contribute to
analyses of the role of religious idioms in the negotiation of development.
Second, it will contribute to our understanding of the intersection between
globalized free market/free trade, and global religious revival. In addition,
through a focus on ethnographic and other field-based research methods rather
than analysis of canonical texts, the project develops a geographical approach
to the study of Tibetan Buddhism. The research project will also have
significant broader impacts. In the context of Chinese assimilative economic
development in Tibet that is imposing an increasing threat to Tibetan cultural
identity, the examination by this project of the responses of Tibetan lamas and
herders to state economic projects has practical implications for how Tibetan
culture can be sustained as China continues to grow as an economic power. The
co-PI will communicate project findings through publication in Chinese and
Tibetan. The analysis of the tension between Chinese state development and
Tibetan Buddhism will provide policymakers with a new way of thinking about the
integration of the economic development with cultural sustainability.