* 0927445
* Macrophyte-induced variability in coastal ocean pH and consequences for invertebrate larvae
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2009,03/31/2014
* Lisa Levin, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 03/31/2014
* USD 370,016.00

Increased concentrations of atmospheric carbon dioxide are acidifying the marine
environment at unprecedented rates. However, relative to the open ocean,
predictions of ocean acidification for the coastal ocean are confounded by the
greater inherent variability of carbonate chemistry which includes strong
variability induced by macrophyte photosynthesis and respiration. This proposal
addresses the interplay between anthropogenically driven pH changes and the
inherently variable coastal ocean's carbonate chemistry, and will directly test
the implications for a potentially sensitive life form, invertebrate larvae.

The objectives of this study are to measure the impact of key coastal habitats
on natural pH variance, and to evaluate the implications these pH regimes have
for developing invertebrate larvae. The investigators will incorporate natural
variability into a series of laboratory and in-situ transplant experiments to
test how pH levels, variability regimes, and physiologically-relevant thresholds
affect the health of marine invertebrate larvae. They will test the hypotheses
that (1) Macrophytes induce variability in carbonate chemistry in a predictable
spatial and temporal context corresponding to cycles of primary production and
community respiration. (2) Planktonic invertebrate larval health is sensitive to
decreased pH, but negative effects are ameliorated when incorporating variable
pH. (3) Sensitivity of invertebrate larvae to decreases in pH is a function of
developmental mode: calcifying larvae are more sensitive than non-calcifying
larvae, and planktotrophic (feeding) larvae are more sensitive than
lecithotrophic (non-feeding) larvae. To test these hypotheses the investigators
will characterize temporal and spatial carbonate chemistry variability at kelp
forests and seagrass beds in San Diego, California. With discrete water samples
for the determination of total alkalinity and dissolved inorganic carbon, and
continuous autonomous instruments which measure pH, salinity, and temperature, a
statistical characterization of carbonate chemistry variability they will
identify diurnal, seasonal and spatial trends as well as frequencies of maximum
variation, rates of change, lowest potential pH (extreme statistics), and
biologically-significant thresholds. Subsequently, prominent macrophyte-induced
pH regimes will be mimicked in laboratory experiments and incorporated with
ocean acidification predictions to test effects of (a) decreased pH (8.1 to
7.3), (b) varying pH about the mean, (c) changing variance about mean pH, and
(c) pulsed exposure to extreme low pH, on larval survivorship, growth, and
calcification responses of multiple species. A comparative assessment of the
larval responses will provide scientists, managers, and policy-makers with
predictions of larval types (and thus populations) most sensitive or tolerant to
forecasted pH regimes. Complementary field experiments will expose laboratory-
spawned larvae to known spatial and temporal pH gradients under ambient cycles
of temperature, light, and food. Larvae will be outplanted at CO2 vents in
Ischia, Italy, and in southern California kelp and seagrass beds. This study is
the first to investigate the implications of pH declines on larval development
under natural fluctuating regimes, and in the field. Together, these laboratory
and field studies will offer a mechanistic understanding of the effects of
natural variance of carbonate chemistry in the context of ocean acidification.

The Project will build capacity for the next generation to address ecological
problems associated with ocean acidification. It will incorporate
interdisciplinary graduate student training, involve new faculty, and promote
undergraduate student engagement via field and laboratory experiences for
underrepresented minorities. Findings will be integrated into graduate courses
in BO, benthic ecology, marine chemistry, and seminar courses. Strategic
partnerships have been established with educational programs that target middle
school girls in San Diego, the nation's science-interested public, and
precollege students involved in science fairs. The PIs will blend basic science
concepts concerning coastal habitats and acidification with enduring educational
resources to enhance scientific understanding by students and the public.