* 0927304
* BRIGE:  A Research and Education Program for the Multiphase Analysis of Third-Body Contaminants in Cyclical Rolling-Sliding Contact
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Elon Terrell, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 08/31/2012
* USD 175,000.00

The research objective of this BRIGE award is to gain a physical understanding
of the behavior of an interface between two lubricated surfaces that are
contaminated with solid particles and involved in cyclical rolling-sliding
contact. The primary testbed for this research involves the gear teeth of a
power transmission device that has been infiltrated with solid contaminants. A
vital aspect of this work involves the combined modeling of the various physical
interactions that take place within this interface, including lubricant fluid
flow, particle motion, particle-surface contact, and the resultant abrasive wear
that is experienced by both surfaces. An additional component of this work
involves a series of experimental wear measurements which will be conducted
using a geartrain test rig. The results of the experimental geartrain tests will
be compared to the predicted wear from the model in order to verify the modeling
accuracy.

If successful, the results of this research will enhance the academic
understanding of contaminated rolling-sliding contact, and will also aid in the
prediction of overall gear life as a function of its exposure to varying levels
and types of contaminants. This research confronts an important challenge
involving the lifetime performance of mechanical power systems which are exposed
to extreme environmental conditions. Such systems, which have recently emerged
as enabling technologies for numerous applications ranging from power generation
to space exploration, must be designed and tested for their ability to withstand
infiltrated contaminants. The existence of an experimentally-validated model for
contaminant-based wear prediction will aid to optimize geartrain design for wear
resistance, and will also decrease the number of required field tests, thus
reducing costs. Additionally, this project will serve to enhance the
participation of underrepresented minorities who pursue engineering careers
through the use of seminar modules and research activities that are geared
towards pre-college minority students.