* 0927238
* Collaborative research: A systems biology approach of diatom response to ocean acidification and climate change
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2014
* E. Virginia Armbrust, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 09/30/2014
* USD 398,613.00

Advances in systems biology enable new approaches to understand the carbon cycle
and carbon sequestration research across different scales of organization,
linking single cells to ecosystems, with broad impacts. Systems biology is a
robust, holistic, hypothesis-driven, quantitative, integrative and iterative
discipline that enables comprehensive understanding of model organisms by
utilizing genomic and computational tools that provide the power for linking
gene expression, phenotype, and the environment. In a systems approach, cells
are studied as an integrated whole to explain the overall response and dynamic
change in the full spectrum of molecules (DNA, RNA proteins and metabolites),
and their relationships (biological networks). The publication of the genome of
T. pseudonana allows a universal analysis and understanding of the regulation of
primary production of diatoms in response to ocean acidification and climate
change. Global understanding of the mechanisms of regulation of carbon fixation
by diatoms is now possible. This project will focus on characterizing - at
molecular and cellular levels using a systems approach - the response of diatoms
to ocean acidification and climate change, essential to understanding the future
of the ocean's "biological pump". The broader goal of this project is to
understand the contribution by diatoms to carbon cycling at a biogeochemical
level. This project will generate a model of the global expression of all genes
in the diatom T. pseudonana and will enable us to anticipate how higher CO2 and
temperatures, lower pH will affect the ability of diatoms to sequester carbon in
the oceans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project include
addressing global challenges to society such as climate change and ocean
acidification. Because diatoms are at the basis of food webs that support
important fisheries, these disturbances will have a direct effect on marine
ecosystems, carbon sequestration, and the world's food supply, thus indirectly
influencing the world's socioeconomic landscape. The results from this study
will have potential applications for geochemists, biogeochemists, biological
oceanographers and paleo-scientists. This project will foster collaboration
between scientists from different institutions and contribute to the training of
two postdoctoral associates and four undergraduates students. Systems biology is
in its infancy in marine sciences and training of scientists in this cross-
disciplinary area will spur development. This grant will also develop
educational tools (a classroom kit) for the understanding of carbon cycling for
K-12, the population of future scientists that will be afflicted by the 21st
century environmental conditions.