* 0927109
* BRIGE: Proposal to Study Self-Assembling Siderophore Vesicles
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Abigail Richards, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Ted A. Conway
* 08/31/2011
* USD 175,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;PI: Richards, Abigail&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
0927109&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Surfactant molecules have the
ability to alter interfacial characteristics and phenomena. This proposal will
fund an investigation into the conditions affecting both micelle and vesicle
formation by biosurfactant siderophores, the sodachelins, as well as determine
the stability of these vesicles in a variety of conditions, once formed. The
sodachelins are a group of novel amphiphilic siderophores (iron chelating
molecules) secreted by a soda lake bacterial isolate. Until recently, most
research involving siderophore production has focused on pathogenic microbes or
those inhabiting non-extreme environments. Over the past decade, studies focused
on marine microbes resulted in the discovery of several new siderophores with
novel traits such as UV-induced iron reduction, micelle formation and
ironinduced vesicle formation. An in depth study of the sodachelins will further
elucidate factors governing micelle to vesicle transitions.&lt;br/&gt; The
sodachelin siderophores consist of a peptidic, iron-chelating head group
appended to a series of different fatty acid tails of various carbon length (C10
to C14) and level of unsaturation. The sodachelins are very similar in structure
to other known amphiphilic siderophores, produced by marine bacteria, which are
reported to form micelles that can self-assemble into vesicles, forming small
nano-spheres on the order of 200nm. This self-assembly is triggered by the
addition of excess iron, beyond what is already coordinated by the iron
chelating head group, generating a spherical structure with iron rich surfaces.
Because of structural similarities of the sodachelins to these molecules, it is
hypothesized that the sodachelins will also form micelles and vesicles in a
similar mechanism. Proposed work involves and analysis of the conditions
favoring vesicle formation by the sodachelins, as well as mechanisms that may
facilitate a controlled disaggregation of the vesicles. Two methods of
disaggregation will be studied.&lt;br/&gt; Because the sodachelins were
previously found to undergo a UV-induced photolysis it is postulated that UV
exposure could trigger a controlled disassembly of the vesicles. A second
possible mechanism of vesicle disassembly to be tested in this research is the
removal of the iron coordinated on the outer vesicle surface by a strong metal
chelator. The iron coordinated by the outer shell is thought to be coordinated
with lower affinity and may be easily removed upon the introduction of another
metal chelator, inducing the disaggregation of the vesicle structure. The study
of the controlled formation and disruption of the vesicles may lead to future
advances in biocide applications and drug delivery
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The work proposed will lay the
foundation for future investigations by the PI in biocide delivery applications
and investigations of vesicle stability under shear stress in flow conditions.
While this is primarily a research proposal, a second, but more important
deliverable is to broaden the participation of underrepresented groups in
science and engineering. The PI, herself a young investigator in her first
tenure track appointment has budgeted for both graduate and undergraduate
student support. A female American Indian undergraduate student is currently
working for the PI as an undergraduate research assistant and will be funded in
the future on this project. The PI and this undergraduate will visit Montana
Tribal colleges to present experiences and opportunities available in science
and engineering careers. A Hispanic American doctoral student has also been
identified to conduct much of the research outlined within and will serve to
increase the number of minorities serving as role models at the doctoral level.
Also provided in this proposal are opportunities are for local high school
students to work with the PI on a portion of this proposed research during the
summer. Finally, the PI will actively disseminate advancements made through this
work at scientific meetings, peer reviewed journal articles and the Soap Lake
Conservancy?s Science Symposia which is a bi-annual presentation of research
involving Soap Lake delivered to the lay, rural community-members living near
the lake.&lt;br/&gt;