* 0927493
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Effects of Family Instability and Complexity on Mother and Child Well-being
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2009,11/30/2010
* Alan Booth, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 11/30/2010
* USD 10,000.00

SES-0927493 Alan Booth Cassandra Dorius Pennsylvania State University,
University Park,

It is widely accepted among family scholars that relationship instability is a
stressful experience in the lives of most mothers, fathers, and children. In
general, when people experience a disruption, such as a divorce, they score
lower then continuously married individuals (or children of these individuals)
on a variety of wellbeing indicators. And oftentimes these negative consequences
can extend several years beyond the disruption event. Largely missing from the
extant literature, however, is scholarship on specific patterns of instability
that may be influencing the long term wellbeing of mothers and children above
and beyond an individual disruption, or even a measure of aggregate disruptions.
In particular, little research has been done on the influence of "multipartnered
fertility" (or MPF) which occurs when adults have children with more than one
person. Inherent in MPF instability are at least two relationship formations,
one dissolution, and time in a single parent home, as well as a complex amalgam
of legal and social relationships between mothers, children, and biological
nonresident and step-fathers, and family units comprised of step- and half-
siblings. The aim of this research is to be the first empirical study of the
long-term consequences of multipartnered fertility on the lives of mothers and
their adolescent children. This will be accomplished by using a
multigenerational, longitudinal, and nationally representative sample of a birth
cohort of women who were followed from adolescence to the end of their
childbearing years and linking their MPF histories to self-reported measures of
mother and child wellbeing across a variety of domains. This project will
evaluate (1) the characteristics of women who engage in MPF (assessed prior to
their first relationship dissolution), (2) the long term consequences of MPF on
women?s self-reported depression, alcohol abuse, and physical health, and (3)
the affect of maternal MPF on adolescent wellbeing in terms of timing of first
sexual experience, internalizing and externalizing problems, and the likelihood
of a teen birth. For all indicators, analyses will parse out the specific
influence of patterned instability (MPF) compared with measures of global
instability to untangle the unique effects of multipartnered fertility. And,
drawing on work by previous scholars and utilizing a life course perspective, we
will examine several mechanisms for linking this particular pattern of
instability to selected mother and child outcomes, including: fertility staging,
strain theory, family instability effects, and selection effects.

Broader Impact. Given the dramatic changes in family life over the past half
century, there are many questions among scholars, policy makers, and
intervention specialists about the long term influence of family instability on
the lives of mothers and children. Furthermore, little is known about the
mechanisms that may exacerbate (or attenuate) the problems associated with MPF
instability. This project has important implications for influencing the way
scholars and policy makers address these significant questions. A better
understanding of the consequences of MPF instability, as well as the social
mechanisms that might underlie adjustment to this instability, may point to more
effective intervention programs and family policy, as well as broaden the
research agenda of contemporary family scholars to include new approaches to
studying these pressing questions.