* 0927572
* Collaborative Research:  Validation, Calibration, and Prediction of Computer Models with Functional Output
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Ying Hung, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Edwin Romeijn
* 07/31/2012
* USD 112,536.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current research in Bayesian model
prediction and validation of computer models mainly focuses on computer
experiments with single output and fixed input variables. The proposed research
focuses on Bayesian approach for calibration, validation, prediction, and
experimental design of computer models with functional output. Bayesian
predictive models for calibrating computer models based on functional computer
outputs and physical observations will be constructed. Methods and metrics for
calibrating and validating computer models will be developed. Experimental
design and optimization strategies for data collection will be established.
Theoretical properties of the developed methodologies will be investigated and
assessed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the research results will bridge
the gap between statistical researchers and engineering practitioners, and
stimulate additional research that improve effective and efficient utilization
of expensive computer models developed by scientists and engineers. There is an
increasing demand for accurate predictive models and metrics for calibrating and
validating computer models from model analysts and engineering designers. The
proposed research will allow scientists and engineers to effectively assess and
evaluate expensive computer models for various scientific and engineering
applications, including IC packaging and fabrication, chemical and nuclear
energy equipment development, cellular material design and manufacturing, nano
material design and manufacturing, etc. The major impact of the proposed
research is to improve the effectiveness of computer model developers (model
analysts) and users (scientists and engineering designers) in scientific
understanding as well as in design and manufacturing in various important
scientific and engineering applications.&lt;br/&gt;