* 0927909
* Image-Based Characterization and Multi-Scale Modeling of Bone
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Iwona Jasiuk, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Siegmund
* 08/31/2013
* USD 301,350.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This project addresses multi-scale characterization and modeling bone, with a
focus on identifying the differences between normal and osteoporotic bone.
Osteoporosis is a silent bone disease which is characterized by low bone density
and deterioration of bone structure resulting in bone fragility and an increased
risk of fractures. The combined experimental and modeling approaches will link
the image-based characterization techniques (measuring structure, composition,
and properties) and computational methods (using mechanics, physics and
mathematics tools) to yield a more complete information on properties of bone;
methods are applicable to the analysis of other biological and synthetic
materials.

This research will advance understanding of structure-property relations in bone
and will lead to the development of tools for an early diagnosis of
osteoporosis. It will also will benefit the field of orthopedics and will lead
to a better understanding of bone fractures, stresses around implants, and the
effects of bone diseases on mechanical properties of bone. In addition, the
results of this research will give guidance on the design of bioinspired
structural materials. This project will also serve as a training ground for
students and will lead to a course on modeling of biological materials. To
extend the reach of this research beyond academia, the images obtained as a
result of this research will be integrated into the two established educational
outreach programs at the University of Illinois, the Bugscope and the Virtual
Microscope projects which provide real-time web-based control of a scanning
electron microscope to K-16 school children natiowide.