* 0927688
* IRES: A US-Cameroon Collaboration for Information Technology in Healthcare (E-Medicine) Research in Resource-Poor Contexts
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Carlos Thomas, Southern University
* Standard Grant
* Edward Murdy
* 08/31/2012
* USD 149,745.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Victor Mbarika of Southern
University, Baton Rouge will direct this research and educational program.
During the summer and winter breaks of its three year duration; the Dr. Mbarika
and Co-PI, Dr. Carlos Thomas, will establish an educational partnership between
Southern University, two Universities in Cameroon--The University of Buea and
The University of Yaounde Medical School (a teaching hospital). Two
undergraduate and two graduate students will be selected from Southern
University1 and the same number will be selected from two institutions in
Cameroon. These students will collaborate in developing and publishing
e-medicine case studies that will be packaged with multimedia features and
delivered through the Internet and CDs for teaching Global E-Health issues in US
and African classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: In recent years,
students have been involved in international research that has led to multiple
conference and journal publications based on data collected, but students have
never involved in developing case studies on these projects. Based on research
and proof of concept from previously funded research, rigorous theory-driven
case studies on emedicine implementation in Cameroon will be developed. The
proposed project will develop information technology students with a global
perspective on how such technologies are implemented in resourcepoor settings of
developing nations. These experiences will be used on ongoing projects on
emedicine implementation in rural parts of the US, creating a reverse (South to
North) knowledge transfer. Further, this will move the researchers from current
knowledge on e-medicine transfer in developing nations whereby previously the PI
had largely focused on surveying multiple projects from afar. He will now be
able to study specific e-medicine projects to gain a more intimate knowledge of
the subject domain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The proposed project
will provide a deeper understanding of e-medicine in resource-poor communities
in developing and developed nations. The case studies developed through this
collaboration will be packaged in multimedia CDs as well as on the Internet for
use in classes anywhere in the world. Publications resulting from this project,
including a book on global e-health issues in resourcepoor settings could be
used in information technology courses. Local professionals and
paraprofessionals will be trained using the teaching materials and tools
generated by the case studies to better equip them to maximize their use of
technology in e-Medicine. Professionals and para-professionals can will
information from the case studies to not only address fears and concerns
affecting their support and participation in e-medicine service delivery, but
also to refine and improve their approaches to emedicine. Facilitating
collaborative cross cultural research to generate solutions to global problems
will help create productive world citizens and contributors to a sustainable
future. Current multimedia case study collaborations will allow for broader
dissemination of these IRES cases at 20 different institutions in the US.
Furthermore, the PI?s strong affiliation with Multimedia Educational Resources
for Learning and Online Teaching, (MERLOT) an NSF funded project, will provide a
platform for even more dissemination opportunities across multiple discipline
communities of the organization.&lt;br/&gt;