* 0927255
* Ocean acidification in a California upwelling zone:  A sentinel site for impacts on open-coast and estuarine foundation species
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Ann Russell, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 07/31/2013
* USD 650,214.00

The absorption of human-produced CO2 into the oceans is decreasing seawater pH
and causing marked declines in the saturation state for calcium carbonate, a
major building block for shells, skeletons, and tests of many marine species.
Such changes (collectively termed "ocean acidification") have the potential to
devastate a broad array of organisms, both at the level of individuals and at
population and ecosystem scales. Although awareness of these issues is rapidly
growing, most of what is known is based on studies of coral reef organisms and
plankton. This project will enhance understanding of impacts from ocean
acidification by providing rigorous data on several new fronts applicable to
temperate systems. The project will operate within one of the strongest
upwelling centers of the eastern Pacific, where global trends in acidification
are amplified by the presence of cold water characterized by already-high levels
of aqueous CO2. Using an integrated, comparative approach that exploits the
expertise of oceanographers, marine chemists, and biologists, the investigators
will explicitly couple moored and shipboard measurements of seawater chemistry
to controlled laboratory and field studies of biological responses. Two vital
foundation species (the California mussel, Mytilus californianus, and the
Olympia oyster, Ostrea conchaphila) will be targeted. These two species play
disproportionately important roles in open-coast and estuarine systems,
respectively. Larvae (which are often the most vulnerable stages) of mussels and
oysters will be cultured under elevated-CO2 conditions through the full pelagic
period and into juvenile life. Growth and survivorship will be quantified, and
water temperature and salinity will be varied to test for interactive effects of
multiple factors. Intraspecific variation in response of larvae from different
parental lineages will be examined. 'Carry-over?' effects that originate from
exposure during the larval stage, but influence subsequent juvenile growth and
survival, will be determined both in the laboratory and using field outplants.
Because larval and juvenile stages play important roles as demographic age-
structure bottlenecks, overall population consequences will be estimated through
comparison of observed impacts on early life stages to other recognized sources
of recruitment variation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oceanographic sampling conducted
as part of the study will provide a unique baseline data set of the carbonate
system within an intense upwelling system, and will extend an existing decade-
scale record of pH in a local estuary. The sampling will also be integrated into
a developing, larger scale ocean acidification monitoring network involving
other researchers distributed along the west coast of North America. In the
educational realm, the study will provide interdisciplinary training and
research experience for a graduate student, and will create unique opportunities
for students from under-represented (especially Latino) groups via links to
Bodega Marine Laboratory?s successful REU program and publicly accessible summer
curriculum. Findings will be incorporated into a new NSF-funded Graduate/K-12
program at BML, as well as its public education program, which is highly active
and reaches more than 10,000 people each year. In outreach arenas beyond BML,
the project team will work with a nonprofit organization to lead secondary
teacher workshops and build interactive displays that bring scientific concepts
directly to middle school students. At the level of the university and in
academia more generally, research findings will be incorporated into
undergraduate and graduate courses, and will be disseminated to scientists,
resource managers, and the general public via traditional professional venues.