* 0927100
* BRIGE: Peptide-Based Cues for Mesenchymal Stem Cell Differentiation in Cartilage Graft Applications
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Julie Liu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Ted A. Conway
* 08/31/2012
* USD 175,000.00

0927100 Liu

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

Designing materials with cues to induce or enhance adult stem cell
differentiation into cartilage cells would improve treatment options for
patients suffering from osteoarthritis, a degenerative disease that affects
articular cartilage. Healthy cartilage protects load-bearing bones and serves as
a lubricant for moving joint surfaces but once damaged, cartilage has a limited
regenerative potential. There is increasing interest in developing tissue
engineered cartilage replacements using adult stem cells seeded on a scaffold.
These cells are often differentiated in vitro using soluble growth factors and
chemical compounds. Some of the drawbacks of this method include the extensive
cell culture time, the use of super-physiological concentrations of growth
factors, and the difficulty in maintaining the articular cartilage phenotype and
preventing cartilage hypertrophy. Development of materials that incorporate cues
for targeted cell differentiation could circumvent these issues and have the
added benefit of facilitating the design and construction of a complex three-
dimensional tissue.

Intellectual Merit The proposed work will investigate peptide sequences that are
derived from chondrogenic growth factors and have been shown to elicit activity
in other biological systems. The objectives of this work are to 1) evaluate
soluble peptides for their ability to induce or promote mesenchymal stem cell
differentiation into cartilage cells, 2) investigate synergistic effects and
maintenance of the cartilage phenotype using experimental design techniques, and
3) develop a novel protein-based scaffold and demonstrate the activity of these
peptides within the context of a three-dimensional scaffold. The results from
this proposal will demonstrate proof of principle and serve as preliminary data
for a future NSF proposal that establishes the peptides as a general design rule
by systematically examining them in the context of different scaffolds. The
future proposal will also explore the interactions of biochemical and
biomechanical properties in controlling cell differentiation. In addition, the
work proposed here will demonstrate the utility of a new resilin-based protein
scaffold containing chemical and photocrosslinking sites. These results will
serve as the preliminary data for a separate proposal that investigates the
biocompatibility, mechanical properties, and in vivo use for cartilage
engineering applications.

Broader Impact The proposed work will improve technologies for treating
cartilage damaged from disease or injury. In addition, the methodology developed
here can be extended for use in other applications such as bone or soft tissue
grafts and for the design of multicellular tissues such the liver or
vascularized organs. The PI is committed to the recruitment and retention of
underrepresented groups in engineering and will engage in individual and group
mentoring of female students (high school, undergraduate, and graduate). As part
of the Women in Engineering Program, she is actively involved with the graduate
mentoring program and is developing a laboratory module to introduce high school
students to a high-throughput technique used to evaluate tissue engineering
scaffolds. Undergraduate students from underrepresented groups will be recruited
through the Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (LSAMP) Indiana to
participate in research during the summer and academic year. The work will also
train a female graduate student and mentor her through the process of obtaining
a faculty position where she will serve as a role model and mentor to future
students. The research will be integrated into the development of undergraduate
and graduate level courses on tissue engineering and protein engineering. These
courses will emphasize critical analysis and introduce students to cutting edge
technologies through the use of primary literature papers.