* 0927430
* What is a "compelling experience"? Reconceptualizing what counts as realism in the U.S. armed forces' simulations, exercises, games and instructional technologies
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2009,12/31/2010
* Sharon Ghamari-Tabrizi, Ghamari-Tabrizi         Sharon         M
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 12/31/2010
* USD 82,048.00

This project examines the meaning of ?compelling experiences? in connection with
several military training simulations as variously understood by the simulation
makers, the entertainment industry, and military professionals. Under a previous
NSF grant, the PI completed thirty months of ethnographic fieldwork at several
production facilities in the US where the Army has collaborated with
entertainment industry professionals in producing video games, narrative and
interactive films, and immersive virtual reality environments for training
soldiers deploying to the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq. The current grant will
underwrite return trips to original field sites for follow-up interviews and
document collection, as well as funds for two short trips to consult with
members of the Army test and evaluation community, some of whom are skeptical of
the entertainment industry's involvement in defense training technology.

The primary reason for the follow-up research is that the research question has
shifted from inquiring into the meaning of a simulation's fidelity for its
makers to its compellingness, and that the focal point of the research has
shifted away from multiple settings of simulation production to alternations in
the cultural foreground and background. The new questions will explore the
emotional and cognitive cues that constitute the compellingness of a simulation.
The new set of questions will include the following: What are the emotional cues
you are trying to create in your project? How do you know if you have succeeded
in triggering a response? What are the sensory prompts that you have added to
intensify the emotional response of the user? How did you originally translate
the training objectives laid out in the project requirements document into a
narrative? How does the fully-fleshed out story map back onto the training
objectives? How did you fix the emotional cues to narrative events? How do you
translate the cognitive demands of the training objectives into prompts and
triggers for the right behavior and emotion in the user? How are you testing the
compellingness of your simulation? How do you know whether you have achieved it?

The Department of Defense's entertainment-based training technologies have fused
the once separate domains of work and play. Whereas the original research
examined how defense simulation makers strive to make the simulated environment
look like the real world, the current research will look at how the
modernization of training and warfighting make the real world look like the
simulated world of entertainment. The research will examine how the simulation
developers believe that learning, thinking and deciding, training to operate
machines in small groups, training to communicate to crewmates near and far, can
take place within the evocative space of a story world. It will also explore
whether the story worlds that confront them in public culture turn out to be the
actual means with which they grasp their own lives.