* 0927821
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Human Territoriality in Conservation Conflicts: Territorial Tactics of Marine Reserves in the Bahamas
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Becky Mansfield, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Thomas J. Baerwald
* 08/31/2011
* USD 12,000.00

Marine Protected Areas (MPAs) are an increasingly popular strategy for
conserving marine resources. MPAs set aside a portion of the ocean as a nature
reserve from which limited or no fishery resources may be taken. This study will
look at the proposed creation of three "no-take" MPAs in the central Bahamas to
question the ways that MPAs create state controlled territory in a space that is
assumed to be non-territorial. The typical assumption in conservation policy
that oceans are non-territorial, and hence open access, potentially overlooks
existing claims to territory by local fishers. Existence of these previous
claims may contribute to local resistance to conservation projects. This study
breaks new ground by investigating how de facto territories of fishers are
overwritten by MPAs. The study will examine multiple viewpoints by looking at
ways that policy makers, marine scientists, fishers, and other stakeholders
conceive of the spaces of the ocean in terms of resource use. The research seeks
to answer three questions: 1) Do local fishers make claims to de facto
territories that are then subsumed by conservation areas, and if such
territories exist, where are they, and how are they conceptualized? 2) What are
the understandings of ocean space held by other actors in the MPA creation
process, do they contribute to conflict over conservation, and if so, in what
ways? 3) Do MPAs change both local spatial practices and territorial claims, and
if so how do they change? Data will be collected to answer these questions using
semi-structured interviews and participatory mapping of the ocean. The inclusion
of policy makers in this data collection will allow for the documentation of
additional competing claims.

By collecting spatial data about the ways that people claim part of the ocean as
territory, this study will be able to look at how competing claims to ocean
resources overlap with conservation policy and thus lead to conflicts. While
previous studies in the area have documented that people in general support the
idea of conservation, there are unanswered questions as to why those same people
may strongly opposed MPAs as a conservation strategy. This study will likely
show how resistance to conservation projects may not necessarily be an
opposition to conservation per se, but about the right to control traditionally
used spaces. By investigating both the spatial practices and the local
perceptions of the spaces in question, this study will contribute to a more
robust understanding of marine environmental conflict, and of human-environment
relations more broadly. Further, the lessons from this study may also provide
avenues for further research on conflict over other forms of conservation. This
study aims towards an understanding of conservation conflicts as a spatial,
territorialized power relation operating at several scales. As a Doctoral
Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to
provide a promising student to establish a strong independent research career.