* 0927648
* GOALI: Nonlinear, Multi-modal, and Stochastic  Dynamics of Low-stiffness Microcantilevers in Liquid Environment Atomic Force Microscopy
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Maozi Liu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 07/31/2013
* USD 365,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to study the
nonlinear, multi-modal, and stochastic dynamics of microcantilevers tapping on
samples in liquids to significantly improve next generation dynamic Atomic Force
Microscopy (dAFM) for biology and medicine. The proposed work will develop new
imaging modes and cantilever designs to greatly enhance nanoscale material
property contrast, such as molecular elasticity and recognition, in liquids
while applying gentle forces on fragile biological samples including cells,
membranes, viruses, and proteins. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Accurate mathematical
models will be developed to simulate the dynamics of low-stiffness AFM
microcantilevers in liquids by systematically including hydrodynamic coupling
effects, stochastic Langevin forces, nonlinear tip-sample interactions such as
chemical bond forces, and multiple cantilever eigenmodes. Investigations will
focus on the dependence of momentary excitation, a non-resonant modal
interaction, on: local elasticity and molecular recognition, and bifurcations
from single to multiple tapping oscillations. New dAFM modes in buffer solutions
will be developed based on these mode coupling phenomena to experimentally
resolve variations in local elasticity and molecular recognition on biological
molecules in buffer solutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;dAFM has become a major
scientific technique for nanometer resolution imaging and materials property
characterization. The development of new high-resolution, gentle force, material
contrast modes for dAFM of biological samples in liquids would broadly benefit
biology and medicine, for example, by providing sensitive maps of protein
markers on a cancer cell or drug receptor sites on a cell, thus enabling
discoveries in early disease detection and drug discovery. The results could
also provide insight into the dynamics of a wider class of systems that are
strongly affected by nonlinearities, hydrodynamics and Langevin forces, for
example, particles in optical traps, nanomechanical cantilever sensors for
biochemical detection in liquids, DNA, biopolymers, and cilia and flagella of
eukaryotic cells.