* 0927387
* GEOTRACES: Determination of copper distribution, speciation, and its relationship to picoplankton community structure for the U.S. GEOTRACES Zonal North Atlantic Survey Section
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2009,11/30/2011
* James Moffett, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 11/30/2011
* USD 397,358.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;GEOTRACES is a newly initiated
international oceanographic program to identify processes and quantify fluxes
that control the distributions of key trace elements and isotopes in the oceans
and to establish an understanding of the sensitivity of these distributions to
changing environmental conditions. A scientist from the University of Southern
California plans to participate in the 2010 North Atlantic GEOTRACES cruise to
collect and analyze samples for total dissolved copper (Cu) and copper
speciation. The objective is to determine the relationship between Cu cycling
and its speciation over wide range of oceanographic regimes (i.e., shelf and
slope waters, oligotrophic surface and thermocline, eastern boundary upwelling)
with a vast array of other parameters, particularly particulate metals and
particle-reactive isotopes. Coupled with particulate metal and particle-reactive
isotope data obtained by others, the role of speciation in influencing Cu:C and
Cu:N in sinking particulate matter, and dissolved N:Cu and P:Cu ratios in deep
water, will also be assessed. In addition, via a collaboration with two
molecular biologists at no cost to the project, the ecotype population of
cyanobacteria throughout the section will be characterized and the relationships
between metal geochemistry and the control of cyanobacterial community structure
will be established. As regards broader impacts, one postdoc and one graduate
student would be supported and trained as part of this project.