* 0927290
* Carbon isotopic heterogeneity in modern bacterioplankton: Model systems for understanding paleoenvironmental signatures.
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Peter Girguis, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 07/31/2012
* USD 516,154.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Through research in the past two decades, the science community has seen a
revolution in the understanding of marine microbial diversity. Molecular
sequencing has revealed several previously unknown major groups of Bacteria and
Archaea, yet total marine microbial diversity exceeds current species estimates.
Preliminary research from Harvard University shows a systematic difference in
the carbon isotope signature between bacterioplankton and eukaryote plankton,
such that modern bacterioplankton show evidence of a carbon isotope shift. By
sampling bacterioplankton from diverse regions of the surface ocean, researchers
from Harvard University will examine patterns of carbon isotope distribution in
marine surface bacterioplankton to identify the metabolic differences among
microbial communities of various surface water types.

Results from this research will enhance the current understanding of upper ocean
carbon recycling and the action of the biological pump. In addition this
research may identify and refine potential differences between export of
microbial biomass in oligotrophic open ocean environments and organic-rich
continental margin environments. This information could allow for scientist to
understand the implications of past and future warm climates on marine microbial
diversity.

This research will provide support for a postdoctoral researcher, as well as two
graduate students. The PIs involved in this project will also utilize the
results to host a community outreach event in collaboration with the Harvard
University Microbial Sciences Initiative.