* 0927391
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Water Resources Development and National Identity Building in Northwestern China
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2009,02/28/2011
* Timothy Oakes, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Thomas J. Baerwald
* 02/28/2011
* USD 12,000.00

National identity has as much to do with daily practices as it does with
dramatic events. Expressions of national identity in China are often associated
with passionate outbreaks of popular sentiment, most often directed against
other countries. This study will consider the role of water development in
creating everyday national identity by examining a recently completed water
development project in Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region. Water resources
development is an appropriate venue to examine the nation-building associated
with daily practices, both because development plays a major role in
contemporary national identity in China, and because water resources have long
been associated with state power in China. This study will address the question:
Does the Chinese state use water resource development to promote national
identity building in western China? This question will be answered by asking two
sets of sub-questions: 1) How do state entities frame the construction of water
development projects in Ningxia with respect to Chinese national identity? and
2) How are such narratives interpreted by commingled ethnic Han and Hui project
participants? Does development reproduce national identity in everyday
practices? The first of these will be answered through a discourse analysis of
state planning documents and publications intended for the general public, as
well as through key-informant interviews with state planners. The second set of
questions will be answered through eight months of participant observation and
interviews. Participant observation will examine how daily practices of water
management do or do not come to symbolize national identity. Purposefully
sampled interviews with 90 individuals in three communities, each differing
ethnic composition, but all affected by the same drinking water and irrigation
project, will illuminate how the planned beneficiaries of a development project
interpret state narratives.

This study will examine the role of water resources development in shaping
national identity. It will contribute to the study of how national identities
are formed on a daily basis by considering the role of economic development in
such identities. This contribution will be made in the context of rural China,
where previous studies have not compared national identity among Han and ethnic
minority groups. This research also broadens recent research on the politics of
water in China by moving beyond examining the relationships between government
agencies to consider the role of water in shaping the everyday lives of
individuals. This project has the potential to impact understanding of
development in Chinese national identity, as well as the management of water, a
crucial global resource. This project will also contribute to the education of a
doctoral student, and fostering long-term academic connections between the
United States and China.