* 0927574
* GOALI: Causation-Based Quality Control - A New Paradigm to Achieve Effective Monitoring, Diagnosis, and Control for Complex Manufacturing Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Jianjun Shi, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Diwakar Gupta
* 08/31/2014
* USD 395,487.00

This grant funds the development of "causation-based" quality control
methodologies. A causal model, represented by a general probabilistic network or
a probabilistic graphical model, is adopted to represent causal relationships
among quality and process variables. The first effort is to develop engineering
knowledge enhanced causal modeling with the focus on integrating the engineering
domain knowledge into the causal structure learning and parameter estimation
with the consideration of sensing data uncertainties. Based on the causal model,
causation-based monitoring and diagnostic algorithms will be developed through
explicit decomposition according to their causal relationships for diagnostic
capability enhancement. In addition, on-line causation-based control and
intervention will be studied by integrating cautious control principles with the
causal model considering the uncertainties of both model parameters and
intervention. Finally, the developed methodologies will be validated and
implemented in multistage forming processes through a GOALI effort with
industrial companies. Industrial companies will provide real data, cases, and
manufacturing process information for the research team. International
collaborative research and education efforts will be pursued throughout the
research project.&lt;br/&gt;The success of this project will advance the state
of the art in modeling and control of complex systems by contributing new
concepts, criteria, and algorithms to the information-processing capabilities
for quality improvement. The project creates enabling methodologies to bring a
transition from a traditional SPC to a proactive, real-time diagnostic and
predictive control paradigm in a data-rich environment. The developed causation-
based quality control methodologies will provide algorithms and associated
software tools to achieve (i) causation (rather than only correlation) based
process modeling and analysis; (ii) embedded diagnostic monitoring and root
cause identification (rather than only change detection); and (iii) on-line
quality inference and intervention for defect prevention (rather than off-line
simulation and quality inspection). The developed methodology addresses critical
issues in a data rich environment, which is a problem challenging all industry
sectors. The implementation of the resulting methodologies is expected to
generate broad economic impacts.