* 0927397
* GOALI: Toward Super-Robust Geometric Computation for Complex Component Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Yong Chen, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Paul Collopy
* 06/30/2013
* USD 232,000.00

The research objective of this GOALI award is to develop theoretical
foundations, algorithmic infrastructure, and computational framework for robust
geometric computation required by complex component design. The new approach is
based on a point representation, layer-depth normal image, by converting a
continuous surface into a set of points. Layer-based additive manufacturing will
be the primary target fabrication approach for the processed geometric forms in
this project. Key research activities will include: (1) investigating a point-
based geometric computation theory and related techniques for improving its
robustness; (2) developing a set of point-based geometric operations and related
computational approaches that are effective and efficient; (3) investigating a
parallel computing strategy and related algorithms for point-based geometric
operations; and (4) verifying the developed prototype software by using
aerospace and biomedical test cases. By working closely with an industrial
partner, the research will result in prototype software for designing complex
product components and a library of geometric operations and test cases that
will be publicly available from a project website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, the results of this research will provide an opportunity to create a
component design with dramatically more complex shapes for achieving better
performance such as multi-functionality and the minimum usage of material and
energy. Example applications include bioengineering, aerospace, and tooling.
Such complex shape design could also bring about a transformational breakthrough
to the applications of direct digital manufacturing, which can be a disruptive
manufacturing technology. This work will also enhance the infrastructure for
research and education by building software systems, teaching materials, lab
projects, and case studies. Graduate and undergraduate engineering students and
mid-career professionals will benefit through classroom instruction and
involvement in the research. Outreach programs to high school students will be
utilized to increase minority participation. The designed hands-on learning
experience and exposure to real world applications will increase domestic
students' interest in science and engineering and, therefore, strengthen our
competitiveness in the global workforce.