* 0927064
* Collaborative Research: U.S. GEOTRACES North Atlantic Section: Analysis of 230Th, 232Th and 231Pa
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2015
* Robert Anderson, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 03/31/2015
* USD 655,702.00

In this project four collaborating labs -- Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution,
University of Rhode Island, University of Minnesota and Lamont-Doherty -- will
undertake measurements on the US GEOTRACES North Atlantic section of the
dissolved and particulate concentrations of 230Th and 231Pa, two isotopes
designated as "key" or critical to the success of the GEOTRACES program. In
addition, they will measure 232Th concentrations and provide supporting analyses
of particle composition. The proposed work fulfills scientific objectives
defined in the U.S. GEOTRACES North Atlantic Implementation
Plan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These new 231Pa, 230Th and 232Th data are expected to
lead to improved models of material exchange between the boundaries and interior
Atlantic on a basin-wide scale. This project will permit the research team and
the marine radiogeochemical community to test hypotheses regarding the relative
importance of regional variations in circulation, particle composition, and
particle flux that influence the redistribution of particle-associated elements,
including carbon, trace metals and contaminants, between the continental
shelf/slope regions and interior basins in the Atlantic. Furthermore, obtaining
new water column 231Pa and 230Th data will allow testing of a key hypothesis:
that 230Th is largely removed within the North Atlantic, whereas nearly half of
the 231Pa produced in-situ is exported with North Atlantic Deep Water.
Sedimentary 231Pa/230Th ratios have become the principal proxy used to evaluate
past changes in Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation (AMOC). Completing
the proposed work will characterize the importance of particle composition for
231Pa/230Th fractionation, and thereby constrain the potential bias in using
231Pa/230Th as a kinematic proxy for AMOC. These results, in turn, will lead to
a more reliable assessment of the role of AMOC variability in past climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts The hypotheses and objectives
outlined in this proposal are central to the International GEOTRACES program,
whose focus is on the global-ocean distribution of trace elements and isotopes
in seawater. 231Pa and 230Th are designated key parameters in the GEOTRACES
Science Plan as their measurement on all sections is deemed to be critical to
the success of this international ocean science program. The proposed research
will provide new opportunities for graduate student (LDEO) and post doc (UMinn)
research experience, enhance ocean science interactions between several US
institutions (LDEO, URI, UMinn, WHOI), foster collaboration with international
GEOTRACES colleagues, and contribute to existing science education programs
designed for teachers and the public.