* 0927088
* Highly Organized Two and Three Dimensional Singlewalled Carbon Nanotubes- Polymer Hybrid Structures for Diverse Flexible Devices and Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Yung Joon Jung, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2013
* USD 208,090.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of this NSF project is
to develop new class of hybrid composite structures based on highly organized
singlewalled carbon nanotube (SWNT) architectures and polymer materials, for
high performance functional flexible systems. Template guided fluidic assembly
and chemical vapor deposition of SWNTs that produce two and three dimensional
SWNT network architectures in macro/micro/nano scale will be developed. This
will be followed by a transfer of organized nanotube structures into selected
polymer matrices to create SWNT based flexible functional devices and systems.
The fundamental assembly and transfer mechanisms will be investigated to develop
a better understanding of the forces required to precisely control the assembly
and transfer of SWNTs in a large scale. Also a methodology to tailor the
electronic property of individual and bundles of SWNT will be investigated by
understanding their fundamental growth and assembly mechanisms. These multi-
dimensional networks of novel nanotubes-polymer hybrid structures will allow
access to tailor electrical transport properties and their functionalities.
These structures and properties have immense implications for the development of
SWNT based functional flexible systems such as sensors, smart composite and high
density logic gates etc. The research also emphasizes the participation,
education, and training of undergraduate and underrepresented minority students.
Students at all level will participate actively in frontline research projects
that will culminate in peer-reviewed journals and conference presentations. This
would provide a tremendous boost to the motivation and confidence in their field
of study and also development of their academic careers toward science and
technology.&lt;br/&gt;