* 0927105
* Geometric Skeletons for Topologically Evolving Domains
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Horea Ilies, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Paul Collopy
* 07/31/2013
* USD 319,933.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The objective of this award is to develop a fundamentally
new approach to construct families of geometric skeletons for 2- and
3-dimensional geometric shapes that can be either rigid or undergoing drastic
topological deformations. Our approach relies on computing constructive
representations of shapes with R-functions that operate on real-valued half-
spaces as logic operations, can generate novel, more stable skeletons, and
intrinsically supports localized and parallel skeleton computations for domains
with rigid or evolving boundaries. The goals of the research program are to
develop new theoretical foundations for geometric skeletons as geometric and
topological descriptors of shape, as well as a computational framework capable
of efficiently computing local changes to the skeleton induced by local changes
to the boundary of the domain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this research
will lead to powerful generic algorithms for computing families of geometric
skeletons for complex spatial environments. This, in turn, could transform all
geometrically intensive areas of science, including almost all engineering
disciplines, by providing access to new and potent descriptors of shape.
Applications that would benefit from the new approach include geometric modeling
of engineering artifacts, fully automated mesh generation for engineering
analysis, feature recognition and defeaturing of engineering models, and real-
time trajectory planning of autonomous vehicles and machine tools with adaptive
geometric constraints. Furthermore, this new framework will stimulate critical
new avenues of interdisciplinary research involving engineering, biology,
computer science, and human-computer interaction. This program will perform
targeted outreach to K-12 students, teachers and local school district serving
groups that have traditionally been underrepresented in the engineering
disciplines via several University of Connecticut outreach programs. The
integration of geometric reasoning and algorithmic design into the engineering
curriculum will help develop a new generation of engineers that will be able to
exploit the capabilities of modern geometric algorithms in conjunction with
traditional mechanical engineering knowledge.