* 0927410
* GOALI/Collaborative Research:  Engineered Surface Microstructures by Machining
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,02/28/2013
* M Ravi Shankar, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Zhijian Pei
* 02/28/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this Grant
Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) Collaborative Research
award is to develop capabilities for engineering surfaces with specific micro-
scale and ultrafine grained structures, and enhanced mechanical properties,
directly by machining. It brings together the complementary strengths of Purdue,
the University of California Santa Barbara, University of Pittsburgh, M4
Sciences, Cummins and Seco Tools (Sweden) in a collaboration building on early
observations that machining offers a controlled method of severe plastic
deformation and that this severe plastic deformation can be exploited to effect
microstructure refinement. The research approach will be based on modeling of
the severe plastic deformation at different length scales, including
microstructure and texture development arising from interactive effects of
strain rate, strain and temperature in the deformation zone. The models will
incorporate crystal plasticity. Model predictions will be compared with direct
measurement of the deformation parameters made using advanced optical
techniques, and characterization of microstructure by transmission electron
microscopy, nano-indentation and electron back scatter diffraction.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the broader impact of the results will be enhanced
scientific understanding of severe plastic deformation and microstructure
development in machining, and its practical utilization in the discrete products
sector to engineer component surfaces with improved properties and performance.
The results will be applicable also to a broad class of deformation processes
and wear phenomena. Complementing the research is an education and training
program that includes short-term student visits to industrial partners and
exposure to international research participation; summer undergraduate research
internships; and a short-course on deformation-microstructure phenomena for
practitioners.