* 0927586
* Enrichment : Testing the Concept of a Virtual Alliance for Deaf and Hard of Hearing STEM Students at the Postsecondary Level
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2009,02/29/2012
* Peter Lalley, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 02/29/2012
* USD 199,585.00

The Testing the Concept of a Virtual Alliance for Deaf and Hard of Hearing STEM
Students at the Postsecondary Level is an enrichment project that will advance
the knowledge of how students who are Deaf and hard-of-hearing access a cyber-
enabled social and support network in STEM education. This enrichment project
will establish a comprehensive baseline profile of current and recently
graduated mainstreamed Deaf and hard-of-hearing STEM students and then formulate
specific plans for enriching the academic performance of these students through
a virtual Alliance for Students with Disabilities in STEM. There is a specific
project goal to establish a baseline profile of deaf and hard-of-hearing
students in STEM education from four or five postsecondary programs selected to
participate in the expected Alliance. A baseline profile will be created to
provide sufficient information to accurately describe the education, background,
STEM interest area, and support requirements of the expected first group of
students to participate in the eventual Alliance. The structure of the baseline
data will permit the eventual establishment of a student tracking system in the
projected alliance. The profile will be sufficiently detailed to provide
reporting on the demographics of the students served, their preferences
regarding provision of support services and anticipated benefits of
participating in the alliance. Profile data will be consistent with proposed
Research in Disabilities Education Project Data Management
System.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will specifically address the
following:&lt;br/&gt;1. Examine national databases and reports for information
regarding deaf and hard-of-hearing students in STEM programs across the
USA.&lt;br/&gt;2. Analyze programs listed in the College and University Programs
for Deaf and Hard of Hearing Students (2007) to determine STEM programs that
self-reported as having deaf or hard-of-hearing students enrolled.&lt;br/&gt;3.
Conduct four on-line focus groups with key members and leadership of the four
Postsecondary Education Programs Network (PEPNet) regions regarding key
attributes related to academic success of current and recently graduated deaf
and hard-of-hearing STEM students. The PEPNet network has been funded by the US
Department of Education for the last 12 years and is partnering on this proposed
project.&lt;br/&gt;4. Identify four or five postsecondary institutions to
partner for a future Alliance for Students with Disabilities in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;5. Identify elements of successful support services for STEM
students, utilizing as a baseline the results of the national Summit on
Cyberinfrastructure held at NTID/RIT in June 2008. &lt;br/&gt;6. Identify the
features of successful Alliances that can be implemented virtually for deaf and
hard-of-hearing students.&lt;br/&gt;7. Develop and pilot a rudimentary,
prototype, cyberinfrastructure system that can support the features of a virtual
Alliance for Students with Disabilities in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr.
Barbara McKee, a recognized regional expert in project evaluation, will serve as
the external evaluator for this project. The project information and findings
will be disseminated to the public via PEPNet, professional journal
publications, and to other RDE-funded projects.&lt;br/&gt;