* 0927619
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Holocene Climate and Environmental History of Laguna Saladilla, Dominican Republic
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2011
* Sally Horn, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2011
* USD 12,000.00

Lacustrine sediment records provide powerful tools for reconstructing past
environments and revealing how the natural environment may respond to human-
related climate change in the future. In comparison to the higher latitudes of
North America and Europe, relatively few Holocene paleoenvironmental records
exist in the Caribbean region, largely because of a paucity of lakes and the
vulnerability of many lakes to dessication during droughts or alteration or
destruction by humans. Laguna Saladilla is a large (2.2 square kilometers in
area) lake on the island of Hispaniola, located approximately 5.3 km from the
north coast of the Dominican Republic near the border with Haiti. Sheltered from
the northeast trade winds by the Cordillera Septentrional and from sea breezes
from the south by the Cordillera Central, Laguna Saladilla is ideally positioned
to record changes in the frequency of polar outbreaks that periodically move
into the region during the winter. Movement of the western extension of the
Septentrional fault zone over time complicates the sediment record, however.
This doctoral dissertation research project will examine the impacts of tectonic
and climatic processes on the sediments of the Laguna Saladilla basin using a
combination of ground-penetrating radar (GPR) and the study of environmental
proxies in a 10.4 meter-long sediment core recovered in 2001. The doctoral
student will perform both spatial and temporal characterizations of lake
sediments using GPR to quantify where and when changes in the lake sediments
have occurred. These data will be used in conjunction with analyses of diatoms,
pollen, and microscopic charcoal in the sediment core to determine whether
changes in lacustrine sediments are driven by tectonics, climate, or both. The
student also will collect water samples and limnological data along transects
across the lake to characterize the present-day diatom community and provide a
firmer basis for interpreting changes in diatom taxa in the past.

This research at Laguna Saladilla will produce a detailed record of Caribbean
climate change over the past 8,000 years. Results will be valuable for assessing
how the vegetation, fire ecology, and hydrological resources of Hispaniola have
responded to changes in climate in the past. The reconstructions will provide
information useful in assessing the potential ecological impacts of future
human-related climate change. The GPR field study will examine possible
tectonically induced shifts in sediment supply that often are overlooked in
interpretations of paleoenvironmental proxies. GPR is not yet widely used in
studies of lake sediments, and most previous research has been conducted at high
latitudes. This project therefore will help establish a role for GPR in studies
of tropical lake sediments. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement
award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising student to
establish a strong independent research career.

