* 0927850
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: A Visual Time Geographic Approach to Crime Mapping
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2009,05/31/2011
* Philip Steinberg, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 05/31/2011
* USD 11,801.00

The use of digital mapping for exploring and analyzing the spaces of crime has
grown considerably in recent years, jointly with the growth of computing
technologies. Uncovering hotspots, criminal networks, flows, and investigative
leads have become common goals in the application of crime mapping by both
researchers and practitioners. While some crimes have proven easily represented
by conventional methods of mapping, other crimes have proven quite difficult to
represent with this kind of mapping. For some types of crime (e.g. mugging while
on the subway or identity theft), the mobility of both offenders and victims
moving in and out of the spaces of crime challenges the usability of a simple
map as a mode of representation. Because of the itinerant way in which these
crime events occur across space and time, they defy representation by the
location of a single point of offender-victim interaction. These types of crime
events require a novel approach to mapping crime spaces. Therefore, this
doctoral research investigates the usability of an approach to mapping crime
that combines space and time for a visual account of both victim and offender
mobility under event-related constraints (e.g. accessibility to a crime scene).
The three key objectives of this research are: 1) to depict three different
kinds of crime event scenarios and analyze their space-time context; 2) to
create space-time crime maps based on the three crime scenarios; and 3) to
assess the usability of these crime maps for practical and research
purposes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The use of geographic information systems and
related mapping technologies facilitates law enforcement practice and research
in understanding, analyzing, and addressing the spatial aspects of crime. For
law enforcement practitioners the ability to visualize space-time data related
to their cases should prove valuable. As these practitioners are better able to
utilize innovative investigative tools, society will benefit by having more
effective law enforcement systems. This research also contributes to pressing
scientific questions as researchers struggle with various methods of
representing geographic phenomena as real events that occur across time and
space, rather than at single locations. To meet these challenges, this project
examines the operational aspects of a space-time approach to mapping in the
context of crime mapping. Finally, as a Doctoral Dissertation Research
Improvement award, this award reinforces the beginning academic career of a
strong independent researcher.