* 0927496
* 'Smart Rocks' for Debris-Flow Landslide Research
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Pedro de Alba, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/2013
* USD 257,689.00

&lt;br/&gt;Debris flows are a particularly destructive class of landslide, in
that large volumes of wet soil and rock can move as liquefied masses at very
high velocity, and with little warning. Debris flows may be triggered by
earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, or rising groundwater. Because of their rapid
motion, they can result in a large number of fatalities; an extreme example is
the destruction of San Salvador?s suburb of Santa Tecla by an earthquake-
triggered debris flow in 2001, resulting in over 700 deaths. The US has not
experienced such a devastating event, but flow slides triggered by rainfall or
earthquakes have caused significant material damage, and a number of fatalities,
particularly in densely-populated areas of California. Both human and material
losses are expected to rise with climate change, and as urbanization of
landslide-prone areas continues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Debris flows have the
particular feature of being able to run out for long distances over very flat
slopes. In order to define high-hazard zones and plan possible defensive
measures, it is necessary to calculate potential slide velocities and run-out
lengths. Modeling these slides is difficult; when the slide is triggered, the
sliding material is observed to liquefy, i.e. high internal water pressures
force the soil grains apart, and the mass behaves as a heavy viscous fluid.
However, as the slide moves down-slope, it segregates into a drained ?snout? of
coarser material which could be expected to brake the flow, and a still-
liquefied interior, where the finer portion of the soil mass pushes the slide
forward. How these two zones interact, so that the overall mass maintains a high
?efficiency? which allow it to travel long distances even on flat slopes, is not
well understood, although it is obviously related to the slides? capacity to
maintain high internal fluid pressures over a long runout. In many cases this
seems surprising, since the grain size distribution of even the interior,
liquefied, sliding material would suggest a relatively rapid dissipation of the
water pressures required to maintain the soil in a liquefied condition.
Sophisticated numerical models for debris flow motion have been developed, but a
fundamental problem is that they require, as input, a prediction of the internal
water pressures during sliding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to clarify this
basic problem, this project will develop two sizes of instrumented ?smart rocks?
using recently-developed MEMS instrumentation: a ?smart pebble? of golf-ball
size to measure how the interior particles vibrate, and how water pressure
develop and dissipate in the liquefied interior of the sliding mass; and a
?smart cobble? of soft-ball size, more heavily instrumented, so as to also be
capable of tracking how coarser particles move towards the landslide snout
during sliding. Both will be ovoid in shape, to simulate natural rocks, and have
metal casings to make them easier to find at the end of the slide, using a metal
detector. The first two years of the project will be spent in design and
extensive laboratory testing of the smart rocks, by a team which will include
graduate students from mechanical and civil engineering as well as civil,
mechanical and electrical engineering undergraduates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
the third year, the smart rocks will be deployed in large-scale artificial flow
slides at the USGS experimental landslide flume in the Willamette National
Forest, Oregon; the research team which operates the flume is highly supportive
of this project. Results from these tests will be used by the project team to
calibrate and refine existing models of debris flows in a way which has not been
possible to date. Further, a well-established partnership program with local
middle and high schools will seek to involve students and teachers as observers
and participants in designing the smart rocks and interpreting the results.
&lt;br/&gt;