* 0927891
* Monoatomically Thin Films: Nonlinear Mechanical Response and Mechanical-Electrical Coupling
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* James Hone, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Robert Carter
* 07/31/2012
* USD 350,292.00

This proposal describes a plan for combined experimental and theoretical efforts
to expand the understanding of mechanical properties and electronic structure of
graphene and other two-dimensional materials under ultrahigh strain. This
proposal builds upon recent work published in Science by two of the PIs, in
which unprecedentedly large elastic strains of approximately 25% were obtained
prior to failure. The proposed work includes three experimental thrusts that
build on these results. First, the directionally-dependent nonlinear mechanical
properties of graphene will be measured up to ultrahigh strains by performing
nanoindentation tests of graphene nanoribbons with known lattice orientation.
Second, these techniques will be carried over to other two-dimensional
materials. Third, the electronic properties of these materials will be studied
under ultrahigh strain. A crosscutting theoretical thrust will explore the
ability of ab-initio theory to predict these results, and the ab-initio results
will be used to parameterize a continuum model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultrahigh
strain strain states are both a scientific and technological frontier. Given the
many potential applications for which graphene is being studied, ranging from
space elevators to electronic circuits, the results from this study will likely
have widespread applications. Furthermore, the simplicity of these two-
dimensional materials makes them a prime testbed for multi-scale modeling,
ranging from the atomic level to the continuum. This work will sponsor two
graduate students, who will learn a broad range of skills, including
nanofabrication, nanomaterials synthesis, nanomechanical testing, and theory. In
addition, the work is highly accessible to undergraduate and high school
students: the PIs will support two undergraduates during the period of the
grant, and at least one high school student. Finally, the PIs will develop
simulations and animations to build a teaching module on the NanoEd resource
portal maintained by the National Center for Learning and Teaching in Nanoscale
Science and Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;