* 0927297
* BRIGE: Towards the in-situ analysis of the assembly of structural proteins by multi-photon optical image guided spectroscopy
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2014
* Julia Lyubovitsky, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 09/30/2014
* USD 174,999.00

0927297&lt;br/&gt;Lyubovitsky&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this NSF BRIGE
project is to initiate an integrated research and educational program to
understand the mechanisms of fibrous protein assembly and disassembly reactions
in-situ during composite biomaterial development. The research objective is the
development of a new multi-photon optical microscopy method (MPM) that combines
nonlinear optical phenomena of second harmonic generation (SHG) and two-photon
fluorescence (TPF) signals integrated with Raman spectroscopy. Such a capability
can have a transformative impact on biological research - specifically the
understanding of protein assembly for biomanufacturing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT. Understanding the mechanisms of
protein assembly is of fundamental interest and practical importance in diverse
biomedical applications. The complex process of protein assembly involves
formation of structural elements that range from Angstroms to microns and higher
dimensions. Structures on a small scale such as molecular dimensions are best
studied with techniques that utilize wavelengths comparable to the size of those
structures, such as X-rays and electrons. Proteins composed of fibrils that form
higher order assemblies can be effectively investigated using optical microscopy
methods that use spectroscopy as a source of contrast. &lt;br/&gt;Protein
assembly knowledge already exists in chemical and biological fields. In these
disciplines, however, it is limited to understanding the molecular phenomena.
Non-linear optical and spectroscopic methods combined with non-destructive
microscopy are ideally suited to quantitatively follow in situ assembly and
disassembly of proteins in three dimensions, with high spatial resolution and
contrast in real time. The usefulness of these techniques is limited by
deficient comprehension of the molecular sources of the optical signals and
their sensitivities.&lt;br/&gt;The PI is developing a new multi-photon optical
microscopy method (MPM) that combines nonlinear optical phenomena of second
harmonic generation (SHG) and two-photon fluorescence (TPF) signals integrated
with Raman spectroscopy to study protein self-assembly. TPF is generated by
UV/VIS absorbing moieties in proteins such as amino acids and cross-links.
Second harmonic generation signals (SHG) are produced by structures without a
center of symmetry, such as fibrous protein collagen. Integration of Raman
spectroscopy provides additional information about properties relevant to self-
assembly of protein-based materials, such as chemical composition,
crystallinity, conformation, density, monomer content, degradation and stress-
strain distribution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS. Performance outcomes
of this research and educational program will include design and implementation
of the multi-modality optical microscopy and image guided spectroscopy platform
as a tool to non-invasively monitor and understand the structure, composition
and function of protein-derived biological materials and adhesives in real time,
in-situ. The experimental methods developed and the knowledge obtained can be
incorporated as part of a feedback system to establish scientific principles for
the design, construction, modification, growth, and maintenance of living
engineered tissues, implants and novel adhesives. The project will therefore
benefit tissue engineering, biomaterial, and biomedical engineering communities.
&lt;br/&gt; The NSF BRIGE Award will enable the PI to integrate a number of
education and outreach activities with the research. She will provide laboratory
research opportunities to selected K-12 students and teachers, as well as
undergraduates and graduates. She will develop new courses for graduate students
and advanced undergraduates that require students' in-depth understanding of
subject matters related to optical technologies and their biological
applications. Students of various ages and the general public will gain a
greater appreciation of how diverse fields interact to produce high impact
engineering research on the assembly mechanisms of protein-based materials.
Additionally, the PI will expand preliminary efforts to reach out to young women
and show how they can pursue non-traditional science and technology careers, and
balance demanding work and family needs, to live successfully and make important
contributions to public well-being.