* 0927967
* GOALI: Novel Low-Polluting Collagen-Alkali Silicate
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Robert Voigt, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 07/31/2012
* USD 337,673.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The research objective of this Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with
Industry (GOALI) award is to devise a low volatile organic carbon (VOC) core
binder that is comprised of a collagen-alkali silicate hybrid. The use of these
binders can save energy and money in foundry processes, while diminishing their
petroleum dependence. We aim to replace conventional petroleum-based binders,
which cause significant volatile organic carbon pollution. Collagen is the
triple-helical protein structure that comprises animal tendons and hides; and
collagen has the tensile strength of steel. Collagen releases 15-25% as much VOC
pollution as do phenolic urethanes in a foundry setting; and silicates release
negligible amounts of VOCs. Together, collagen-alkali silicate hybrids favorably
offer the promise of good thermal integrity, high tensile strength, good casting
quality, and good shake-out, as discerned from preliminary results. To
accomplish the research objectives, we will prepare collagen-alkali silicate
bindered cores with an array of collagen-to-silicate proportions, mixing
protocols, and curing processes. Per foundry criteria, we will appraise these
relative to their resistance against molten iron erosion; and their tensile
strength, hardness, shakeout propensity, and thermal integrity. Also, per
fundamentals, we will characterize bonding by infrared analysis, nuclear
magnetic resonance, and electron microscopy. These fundamental characterizations
will steer the collagen-alkali silicate chemistry and processing protocol, so as
to select the most favorable binder system.

The expected benefits of this research will be to initiate a transformative
rewriting of adhesives chemistry based on new metrics. The new metrics are to
pursue US petrochemical independence with environmentally benign manufacturing,
while devising sustainable products from bio-resources. This research will also
expand fundamentals of adhesives and nitrogen chemistry; thermal effects on
collagen and alkali silicates; curing kinetics; waterproofing; and environmental
and industrial engineering. In addition to these important impacts this GOALI
project team will conduct full-scale demonstrations of these collagen-alkali
silicate binders at the HMAC-Lawrenceville, PA foundry, providing tremendous
industrial value for the community.