* 0927031
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: A Multi-Level Study of Symbolic Boundaries towards Muslims, 2001-2007
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Michele Lamont, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2011
* USD 9,455.00

SES-0927031 Michele Lamont Christopher Bail Harvard University

What makes the symbolic boundaries groups use to distinguish "us" from "them"
rigid or permeable? This dissertation explains the evolution of symbolic
boundaries towards Muslims between 2000 and 2007 as the product of shifting
relationships between political elites, social movements, and ordinary people
that enable "symbolic boundary entrepreneurship." A multi-level "process" model
is constructed to map changing relationships between actors at different levels
of analysis including, 1) comparative analysis of the policy process in the
United States and United Kingdom based on archival analysis and in-depth
interviews with policy makers; 2) network analysis of press-releases about
Muslims made by American social movements; and 3) longitudinal interviews with
ordinary Americans.

The intellectual contribution of this dissertation is to synthesize research on
symbolic boundaries that has been compartmentalized by level of analysis. While
a rich comparative literature asks how citizenship policy shape symbolic
boundaries at the macro level, for example, it is scarcely connected with micro-
level studies that reveal how official distinctions are adapted to the
requirements of everyday life. Neither macro nor micro level studies of symbolic
boundaries have been synchronized with meso-level research on social movements,
who routinely challenge the symbolic boundaries promoted by states as well as
those used in everyday interaction. As a result, shifting relationships between
actors at different levels of analysis that create opportunities for symbolic
boundary change remain hidden from scholarly view.

Broader Impact

In recent years, Muslims shifted from an ?invisible minority? to the center of
major policy debates. The broader impacts of the study therefore include a
better understanding of the role of collective identity in the policy process
and new insight about the mechanisms of prejudice and discrimination. By
uncovering the relationship between these two issues, this dissertation builds
bridges between cultural sociology and political science that will hopeful be
used by academics and policy makers alike.