* 0927474
* The Role of Heuristics in Creative and Innovative Robust Designs: Understanding Both Individual and Team-Based Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Panos Papalambros, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Paul Collopy
* 06/30/2013
* USD 449,960.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The research objective of this award is to develop methods
for innovation in science and engineering. The research investigates how
designers use heuristics, or cognitive strategies, to identify specific
solutions in the creative process, and how team collaboration may use multiple
heuristics across team members as a means to generate robust designs---designs
that meet user needs despite variability in consumer preferences over different
consumers and changes in consumer preferences/needs over time. The goal of this
research program is to understand the cognitive heuristics that support
creative, innovative, and robust designs. A combination of laboratory
experiments and field studies will be used to maximize control and improve
generalization to real world settings. Deliverables include a new methodology
for studying and identifying cognitive heuristics in design teams, software to
teach and facilitate the creation of optimal and robust product designs, and
tested recommendations for effective innovation in the context of
multidisciplinary design teams.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results
of this research will lead to a new methodology for the creation of novel and
quality designs in engineering, science and industry. By identifying the
heuristics used by experts, and facilitating the use of successful cognitive
heuristics by novices, we will increase creativity and innovation in design as
seen in science and engineering. This will have direct consequences for industry
in the development of new products. Another direct application of these research
findings is improved instructional techniques in engineering design that foster
creativity and innovation. These pedagogical techniques can transfer to other
types of professional training (e.g., social sciences, humanities), industry and
educational settings such as K-12 and higher education, thus providing new
approaches to encouraging and instilling creativity and innovation in design
across an array of instructional settings.