* 0927849
* GOALI: Monotonic and Cyclic Response of Plastically Graded Surfaces Subject to Rolling Contact Fatigue
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Nagaraj Arakere, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 08/31/2013
* USD 321,163.00

The research objective is to determine the monotonic and cyclic stress-strain
properties of plastically graded surfaces (PGSs) relevant to rolling contact
fatigue (RCF) in high-performance ball bearings. During RCF, the surface layer
experiences cyclic micro plasticity, buildup of residual stress, and contact
fatigue damage, eventually leading to fatigue spallation. We propose a
coordinated experimental and modeling approach that judiciously combines micro-
and macro-indentation investigations with 3D elastic-plastic finite element
analysis to determine the constitutive response of PGSs. By performing
controlled RCF testing under realistic conditions and probing the localized
plastic zones, we extract the cyclic constitutive response as a function of RCF
cycles, thereby providing a means for quantitative evaluation of localized
material damage evolution. The above approach is applicable to any engineering
material irrespective of the nature of gradients in the plastic properties.

The challenging requirements of advanced military and space propulsion systems
have led to the development of hybrid bearings with plastically graded case
carburized surfaces. However, reliability of bearing systems continues to be a
major concern because the current methods used in bearing fatigue life
estimation are largely based on probabilistic approaches that are empirical in
nature, and do not directly consider the constitutive behavior of materials
under RCF loading. The proposed approach allows for development of robust life-
estimation methodology by bringing together many cross-disciplinary ideas from
manufacturing, materials science, tribology, fatigue, solid mechanics, and
experimental mechanics. This approach will facilitate surface engineering of
graded layers as well as development of a quantitative description of RCF life
in rolling element bearings leading to improved performance, durability and
reliability. The project will also contribute to the education and training of
the manufacturing research workforce in the US and lead to increased
participation by under-represented groups.

