* 0927090
* Is overfishing triggerng the die-off of New England salt marshes?
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Mark Bertness, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2013
* USD 490,984.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Overfishing is emerging as one of the greatest threats to the integrity of
marine ecosystems and the societal services they provide. Though the
consequences of predator depletion are increasingly appreciated for a few well-
studied coastal habitats including kelp forests and coral reefs, the risks of
overfishing to other valuable marine ecosystems including salt marshes remain
uncertain and controversial. For over two decades, die-offs of salt marsh
vegetation have been spreading across the Western Atlantic, threatening the
critical nursery ground, nutrient filtering and storm barrier ecosystem services
that marshes provide coastal environments. This project is based on the premise
that recently described salt marsh die-offs on Cape Cod, Massachusetts are being
driven by the native herbivorous crab, Sesarma reticulatum, and that these die-
offs are an extensive and actively expanding threat to the near shore marine
ecosystems throughout the surrounding region. The investigators outline a
research program to examine the general hypothesis that overfishing of pelagic
marine predators is releasing Sesarma populations from predator control and
triggering herbivore-driven die-off and the degradation of Northeastern US salt
marshes by exploring the following questions: 1) Is regional depletion of
predators causing the die-off of Northeastern US salt marshes by releasing
herbivorous Sesarma populations from predator control? Large-scale, regional
surveys of crab and predator abundance and marsh die-off and experimental assays
of predation pressure and crab herbivory will be conducted. 2) Is local fishing
pressure triggering and intensifying salt marsh die-off? Impacts of predation
and herbivory in heavily fished and nearby marine conservation areas will be
quantified to explore preliminary data suggesting a strong causal relationship
between local fishing pressure, crab herbivore pressure and creek bank die-off.
3) How are creek bank die-offs influencing the structure of Northeastern US salt
marshes and their ability to provide ecosystem services? The investigators will
map and follow the fate of die-offs throughout the region to develop a
predictive understanding of the ontogeny and trajectory of crab-driven die-offs
and their effect on the ecosystem services provided by salt marshes.

This work has conservation implications since it links the management of
predators (commercially and recreationally harvested crabs and fish) that may
control marsh plant consumers with the health and long-term persistence of
coastal wetlands, and will provide a mechanistic understanding of these systems
necessary for their management and continued provision of ecosystem services.
The research will be complemented by a strong undergraduate and graduate
educational focus and a community outreach component.