* 0927829
* Collaborative Research: A Matter of Life or Death? Assessing the physiological roles of PCD-related genes to stress adaptation in diatoms
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Kay Bidle, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2012
* USD 707,949.00

Diatoms are a class of unicellular phytoplankton that account for ~40% of total
marine primary productivity in the modern ocean. Since downward fluxes of
biogenic silica and organic matter in the modern ocean derive largely from
diatom productivity, there is increased interest in the mechanistic processes
that regulate their fate. Indeed, the physiological state and life history of
diatom assemblages dictate whether diatom Si and its associated organic C are
either recycled in the euphotic zone, or exported to depth, placing mechanistic
importance on cellular processes mediating bloom to post-bloom transition in
response to nutrient stress. Programmed cell death (PCD) triggered by specific
environmental stresses (e.g., Fe starvation, viral infection, high light,
oxidative stress, and UV exposure) has now been documented in a variety of
prokaryotic and eukaryotic unicellular phytoplankton, including diatoms. It
provides a mechanistic framework to help explain lysis rates independent of
grazing. The expression and activation of metacaspases, putative death
proteases, in stressed diatoms, suggest PCD is an integral pathway in these
organisms. Currently, the ecological role(s) of PCD-related genes in unicellular
phytoplankton and the evolutionary drivers selecting for their retention remain
unknown. Their preservation would seem to provide a negative selection pressure,
yet their retention and maintenance suggests some sort of ancient, selective
advantage. Metacaspases (and other PCD-related genes) may have co-evolved with
other metabolic pathways whereby retention and low-level expression served
housekeeping or regulatory functions. Elucidation of the ecological role(s) of
PCD-related genes, like metacaspases, in diatom field populations requires an
understanding of cellular function(s) and induction under relevant stressors.
The premise of this proposal is that a subset of putative, PCD-related genes
plays heretofore-unappreciated roles in stress adaptation in marine diatoms. The
PIs will investigate whether Fe and N availability differentially regulate their
expression and activity in T. pseudonana and in coastal diatoms from the
California coast. The researchers will elucidate whether distinct PCD-related
genes confer increased fitness under Fe or under N-limitation. This research
follows from the investigators previous results that a subset of PCD-related
genes is differentially expressed in T. pseudonana cells in response to Fe
stress. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific hypotheses are: (1) Expression and
activity of PCD-related genes are controlled by Fe or N availability; (2)
Overexpression of putative PCD-related genes confers increased fitness under
nutrient limitation; (3) Diverse T. psuedonana metacaspases share functional
epitope similarities; and (4) PCD-related genes in coastal diatoms display
differential responses to steady-state Fe and N limitation. This work integrates
physiology, biochemistry, genetics, ultra-trace metal clean techniques and
field-based sampling in order to elucidate the ecological function of
metacaspases in diatoms and to identify their roles and regulation in natural
diatom populations under Fe versus N limitation. This novel interdisciplinary
approach is particularly suited to address the roles of these fascinating
enzymes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will allow for continued professional
development of two young PIs and provide an opportunity for a female,
postdoctoral associate to get first time PI experience. The proposed project
provides a forum for researchers with different educational backgrounds
(undergraduate students, graduate students, technician, post-docs, and faculty)
to interact and develop. This project provides excellent hands-on training for
development of both graduate and undergraduate students and will strongly
broaden the participation of women. Proposed research will also foster new
national collaborations. Research activities will interface with the Mid-
Atlantic Center for Ocean Science Education Excellence (MA-COSEE) and ongoing
outreach programs that introduce urban, largely minority, children and families
to marine science. The PIs will participate in an ongoing public lecture series
at New Jersey's Liberty Science Center entitled "Pulse of the Planet" combined
with 2-hour professional development workshop for K-12 teachers. Specific goals
are to stimulate awareness of the immense diversity and large-scale importance
of marine microbes to ocean function.