* 0927567
* Collaborative Research: Prochlorococcus and its contribution to new production in the Sargasso Sea
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2009,01/31/2013
* Michael Lomas, Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences (BIOS), Inc.
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 01/31/2013
* USD 507,538.00

The cyanobacterium Prochlorococcus marinus is ubiquitous in the oligotrophic
subtropical and tropical oceans and can contribute up to 82% of the primary
productivity in certain regions. In contrast to most other phytoplankton,
cultured Prochlorococcus isolates cannot assimilate NO3-. However, Lomas' group
has used flow cytometry and stable isotope tracers to demonstrate direct NO3-
assimilation by Prochlorococcus in the Sargasso Sea. In support of these
findings, Martiny and colleagues have shown that Prochlorococcus cells residing
in the mixed layer carry genes for NO2- and NO3- assimilation, and that these
genes are functional and expressed in field populations. The combined results
suggest that uncultured lineages of Prochlorococcus are capable of NO3-
assimilation and can contribute to new production in many oceanic regions - but
the overall significance is yet unknown.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching
hypothesis of this project is that cell-specific NO3- assimilation rate is a
function of both the ambient nutrient concentrations and the metabolic potential
of the cell (i.e. presence of genes encoding for NO2- and NO3- assimilation).
The specific research questions of this project are:&lt;br/&gt;1) Is NO3- a
quantitatively important nutrient source for Prochlorococcus and does
Prochlorococcus contribute to new production?&lt;br/&gt;2) What is the influence
of seasonal and vertical variation in nitrogen substrates (NH4+, urea, NO2-,
andNO3-) on the genome content of Prochlorococcus and oxidized nitrogen uptake
rates?&lt;br/&gt;To answer these questions, PIs will use the combination of
high-sensitivity nutrient measurements, a flow cytometric assay developed by
Lomas to quantify nitrogen assimilation in specific taxonomic groups, and
metagenomics and a qPCR assay to determine the occurrence of nitrite (nirA) and
nitrate reductase (narB) genes associated with Prochlorococcus. Using these
tools, they will quantify NO3- assimilation and the distribution of NO3-
assimilation genes in Prochlorococcus through three full seasonal cycles and
over the entire euphotic zone. In addition, these direct measurements will be
augmented by manipulative mesocosm experiments (reciprocal transplant and
nutrient addition experiments) to explicitly test aspects of their hypotheses.
The PIs hope to achieve a mechanistic understanding of direct (variations in the
concentration of nitrogen species) and indirect controls (genomic adaptation in
Prochlorococcus) on NO3- assimilation rates. One of the most exciting outcomes
from this project will be a more complete understanding of the nutritional
ecology of Prochlorococcus in field assemblages. The PIs have selected to
conduct this study in the Sargasso Sea, because of the wealth of necessary
supporting data and logistical infrastructure that this site provides, and
because they have already shown that Prochlorococcus is capable of nitrate
assimilation in this region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project
will have broader impacts on many levels. First, the potential for previously
unrecognized widespread productivity by Prochlorococcus fueled byNO2- and NO3-
assimilation has significant implications for the understanding of the
biogeography of Prochlorococcus and its role in oceanic carbon and nitrogen
cycles. Secondly, it will exemplify how genome evolution, cell physiology, and
environmental variables interact to shape the biogeochemical role of bacteria in
the ocean. The PIs will present their results in a manner that can be easily
incorporated in biogeochemical and ecosystem models, including those related to
changes in regional and global biological processes in response to climate-
driven variability. This project will provide research opportunities for
graduate (one at UCI) and undergraduate students. This project will also
establish an internationally linked education outreach program to provide high
school teachers and students in California and Bermuda with hands-on experience
in marine microbial ecology and its relationship to global ocean processes and
biogeochemistry.