* 0927938
* Characterization of Environment-Assisted Subcritical Debond of Bonded Repairs/Strengthening of Aging Infrastructure
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Kenneth Fridley, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Bank
* 07/31/2014
* USD 255,757.00

The major objective of this research effort is to develop a transformative
approach to understand the degradation mechanism and assess the long-term
durability of the FRP-to-concrete interface. This approach consists of a)
quantitatively characterizing the kinetics of environment-assisted subcritical
debond growth along the FRP-to-concrete interface, and b) development of a
mechanism-based degradation model for the FRP-to-concrete interface in
aggressive environments. The proposed subcritical debond testing closely
simulates the failure occurring during the service-life of the FRP-to-concrete
interface, allows interaction with environmental species during testing, and
reduces ambiguity associated with fracture energy due to competitive effects of
concrete curing, long-term concrete strength gaining, epoxy creep, and epoxy
curing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will have immediate effects on
research and applications of FRP materials in concrete infrastructure by
providing a new avenue to study and account for the long-term durability of FRP
strengthened structures. The PIs propose an aggressive educational plan designed
to be complementary to the research activities with focus on recruiting a
diverse group of traditionally underrepresented (female, rural, minority and/or
socio-economically disadvantaged) students to participate in the proposed
activities. A series of teaching modules will be developed based on the proposed
research endeavor and blended into the curriculum of the PI's department. A
workshop based on this study will be held for minority high school students from
economically stagnant areas in Alabama through the Engineering Academy program.
Underrepresented high school students and undergraduate students will have
opportunities to participate in this project. Seminars based on this study will
be given to science and engineering faculty from historically black colleges and
universities. &lt;br/&gt;