* 0927900
* PRISM: Building Undergraduate Innovations in Lower Divisions in STEM
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Paramasivam Sivapatham, Savannah State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 08/31/2015
* USD 1,499,990.00

Project Abstract Project Title: PRISM - Building Undergraduate Innovations in
Lower Divisions in STEM (BUILD-STEM) Science, Technology. Engineering and
Mathematics Savannah State University (Dr. Mulatu Lemma, PI)

The Project, "PRISM-Building Undergraduate Innovations in Lower Divisions in
STEM (BUILD-STEM)" under the NSF's PRISM Program, aims to improve the interest
and experience of freshmen and sophomores in mathematics and other science and
technology courses in order to better prepare them as STEM majors and thus to
increase the number of well-prepared undergraduate majors and minors in the
mathematical sciences and other sciences or engineering disciplines. The project
will involve collaboration between Savannah State faculty faculty in
mathematics, engineering and environmental science. It will also be in
collaboration with Georgia Tech and regional industries. This project will, in
addition to providing scholarships to 30 students per year, incorporate major
activities such as recruitment/retention, interdisciplinary curriculum
enhancement (mathematics, environmental science and engineering), mentoring,
research, and discovery learning. This project will demonstrate the importance
of mathematics and its critical and fundamental interrelatedness to other STEM
disciplines.

This project will impact student success by engaging lower division students in
a broad spectrum of new and innovative hands-on and interactive teaching,
discovery learning and mentoring practices. The project will directly support
best practices in learning, teaching and training. As a HBCU, SSU is committed
to increase the number of underrepresented students who enter the STEM
professional workforce and advance to STEM graduate programs. This project will
contribute to meet the present and future STEM professional needs of industry,
business, and government and teaching institutions in the country.