* 0927992
* Preparation and Distribution of DOC Consensus Reference Materials
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Dennis Hansell, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2012
* USD 447,484.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, investigators at the
University of Miami will continue producing and distributing a consensus
reference material (CRM) program that was first developed in 1999 in support of
consistent, high quality measurements of dissolved organic carbon in seawater by
the international ocean chemistry community. With continued strong international
efforts to investigate the marine carbon cycle, the existing CRM program will
continue to provide a critically important benchmark for globally comparable
marine dissolved organic carbon (DOC) measurements. Marine DOC measurements are
currently made at more than 50 laboratories in the United States and at a
greater number of laboratories in the rest of the world. Until this CRM program
began distribution of reference materials, analyses made in these many
laboratories were not linked by a common reference material and were, therefore,
not comparable. Because there had not been an independent and common standard
available against which calibrations of individual analyses could be checked
there was little agreement amongst the majority of the laboratories making the
measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since its inception, the program has
generated ca. 80,000 ampoules of deep seawater and ca. 60,000 ampoules of low
carbon water ampoules. So far, these ampoules have been distributed to 230 US
and international laboratories in 30 nations. In recent years the Miami group
has been shipping ca. 17,500 ampoules per year. With renewal of the reference
material program for a fourth 3-year period of support, deep ocean water
containing approximately 40 ìmol C/kg of biologically refractory dissolved
organic carbon and low carbon reference water will continue to be available to
the marine DOC community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Broader Impacts: With renewal of
support for this work the US and international ocean carbon research communities
will continue to produce high-quality measurements of a major marine carbon
reservoir, thereby advancing society's ability to assess changes in the marine
carbon cycle and its involvement in global climate change.