* 0927469
* Near-N Internal Waves and Transition-Layer Mixing
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Jennifer MacKinnon, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2013
* USD 761,224.00

The oceanic mixed layer is crucial to air-sea exchange. The enhanced
stratification at the base of the mixed layer (or 'transition layer') is also
crucially important, as it affects the rate of mixed-layer deepening and
mediates vertical exchanges between the mixed-layer and deeper ocean.
Understanding the processes that control turbulent mixing of momentum and
tracers in this transition layer is an outstanding problem in upper ocean
physics. Based on new modeling results, we hypothesize that turbulent structures
in an active mixed layer combined with inertial shear across the upper
pycnocline can generate energetic Near-N Internal Waves (NNIW). These NNIW are
confined to the region of elevated buoyancy frequency in the uppermost
pycnocline, where they must eventually break and contribute their energy to
turbulent dissipation and mixing. Two likely candidates for this kind of NNIW
generation are Langmuir Cells and buoyancy-driven convection, both of which may
generate waves by impinging on the stratified mixed-layer base. At the same
time, the turbulence makes the eddy-viscosity in the surface layer large, which
would damp these short internal waves. The project will look at the three-way
interactions between the surface mixed layer, inertial shear, and high-frequency
internal waves, and to examine the resulting effects on upper pycnocline
mixing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our approach combines numerical simulations (LES)
that resolve both turbulent structures in the Mixed Layer (ML) and the NNIW
generated in the upper pycnocline, along with detailed comparisons with suitable
data collected over the past 2 decades. These data sets generally include
estimates of length and time scales of the mixed layer motion, directional
surface wave spectra, strain fields associated with NNIW, density profiles and
overturns, velocity profiles over the upper few hundred meters, heat-flux
estimates, and vector wind stress.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central questions
are: How do high-frequency internal waves interact with mixed layer motions? and
Do they affect entrainment and mixing in the upper pycnocline? An integral
component is Large-Eddy Simulation (LES) modeling of the upper ocean, including
wind and wave forced mixed layer motions, inertial shear, and the resulting NNIW
in the stratified layer just below. The ultimate objective is to make in-depth
data/model comparisons, more than on model development per se. However, some
further model development is needed before comparisons with data can be
realistic. The model-data comparison strategy involves data analogous re-
sampling of model output and statistical comparisons. The anticipated results
include improved understanding of upper ocean and surface layer mixing and
dynamics, and hence improved models on all
scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit. The project focuses on a link
in the air/ocean system that is vitally important yet incompletely understood:
net mixing through the uppermost layers of the sea. The mixed layer and
uppermost pycnocline together form a crucial barrier between the atmosphere and
deepocean, controlling the net fluxes of heat, momentum, nutrients, and
greenhouse gases. This uppermost layer is also vital to marine life, setting the
scene where light and nutrients meet, and where pollutants and contaminants are
dispersed. Appropriate scaling of these fluxes has been shown to be important to
global air-sea coupled simulations, which can be sensitive to both the degree of
surface mixing and to the ML depth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. The
results will help improve air-sea exchange estimates, and hence both
environmental and climate effects, thereby helping improve the information by
which long-term policy decisions are made. The results and interpretations will
be disseminated broadly to enhance scientific understanding and facilitate both
decision making and further scientific work. The activity will provide training
and scientific opportunities for a graduate student and a post-doc. Partnerships
and collaborations across institutions will be actively developed. As an
economic stimulus, salaries and supplies are spent locally and steadily;
scientific equipment is by necessity selected for the highest quality with
sustainable support and availability.