* 0927767
* US - Chile Planning Visit:  Geochemical Tracing of Metal Contaminants; Rio Loa Basin, Chile
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Jerry Miller, Western Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 08/31/2010
* USD 11,106.00

This U.S - Chile Planning Visit proposal will support one junior and two senior
researchers from the U.S., under the direction of Dr. Jerry Miller of Western
Carolina University, for a visit to the Rio Loa valley. The Rio Loa, one of the
most important rivers in northern Chile, heads on the western flank of the Andes
and flows downstream across the extremely arid Atacama Desert to the Pacific
Ocean. Previously collected data show that water and sediments within the Rio
Loa are contaminated by toxic trace metals and metalloids including arsenic,
copper, lithium, and lead, among others. Arsenic is thought to be particularly
problematic because of its well known human health effects and its extremely
high concentrations in river waters (which locally exceed drinking water
guidelines proposed by the World Health Organization). The objective of this
visit is for the U.S. research team to develop an integrated, multidisciplinary
investigation with Chilean researchers that (1) effectively tracks the movement
of trace metals from source areas through the Rio Loa basin using novel
geochemical fingerprinting methods, and (2) determines the relative
contributions of toxic trace metals to the river from specific contaminant
sources (including several mine sites) using modified and improved statistical
modeling methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The need to develop new, more effective
methods of determining the source and quantity of contaminant influx to rivers
where multiple sources exist has become increasingly recognized in recent years.
The project to be developed from this visit will address this important problem
by taking advantage of the Rio Loa's unique physiochemical environment where
multiple metal sources exhibit distinct chemistries that are contributed to
specific reaches of the river. The project will be developed and carried out
using an interdisciplinary approach that combines the geochemical expertise of
Drs. Nelson Guerra and Leonardo Romero at the Universidad Cat√≥lica del Norte,
Antofagasta, Chile with the geomorphologic, geochemical, and statistical
modeling expertise of U.S. scientists from Western Carolina University, the
Nevada Bureau of Mines and Geology, and Northern Kentucky University. The
program to be developed also will include a training and educational initiative
focused on research experiences for undergraduate and graduate (M.S.) students
and the development of a multi-institutional student and faculty exchange
program.