* 0927142
* GOALI: Fundamental Material and Processing Studies on Hot-Melt Extrusion-A Novel Pharmaceutical Manufacturing Process
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,02/28/2013
* Costas Gogos, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mary M. Toney
* 02/28/2013
* USD 348,684.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The research objective of this Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with
Industry (GOALI) award is to develop a general and novel drug manufacturing
technology based on Hot-Melt Extrusion (HME), a process that holds the potential
of improving the bioavailabilty of poorly soluble drugs. HME will be treated as
a multidisciplinary field, requiring fundamental knowledge and expertise from
pharmaceutical and polymer science, and polymer processing. The research will
address two fundamental, practically important, questions: 1) How to select or
design appropriate polymeric excipients to mix with drugs that have poor water
solubility so that the drugs can have accelerated release rate and/or improved
solubility in water? 2) How do the Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients (API) and
the polymeric excipients get mixed inside the extruder? A series of excipients,
including polymer- nanoclay combinations, will be selected, and tested with
model drugs to investigate their miscibilities and interactions. The extrusion
process will be studied using on-line and off-line tools. The deliverables
include a catalog of basic mixing mechanisms, analysis and modeling of
stability/miscibility and processing results, and engineering student education
at both academic and industry laboratories.

If successful, the results of this research will bring significant, potentially
transformative, impact on the pharmaceutical industry. The results will help to
commercialize numerous drugs that never went to the market place due to their
solubility-caused poor bioavailability, and change the delivery route of some
drugs from injection to oral. Both changes will assist the pharmaceutical
industry by dramatically cutting costs and increasing the new drug pipeline. The
fundamental understanding of the drug-excipient miscibility and the extrusion
process will impact other industries as well, such as the medical device and
food industries, since the same mixing and extrusion processes can also be
applied. Graduate and undergraduate students will benefit from the hands-on
research experience at NJIT/PPI and Wyeth laboratories, and also from the new
pharmaceutical engineering courses to be developed.