* 0927687
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: A Multi-Scale Analysis of Disturbance, Dynamics, and Climate-Growth Relationships in Mountain Longleaf Pine Forests, USA
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,05/31/2011
* Arvind Bhuta, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 05/31/2011
* USD 8,297.00

This research integrates geospatial and ecological approaches to examine the
roles of climate, competition, disturbance, and human activities in regulating
the composition and structure of old-growth and second-growth mountain longleaf
pine forests of the southeastern United States. Mountain longleaf pine forests
are relatively understudied components of the imperiled and highly diverse
longleaf pine ecosystems that historically dominated the Coastal Plains and
parts of the Piedmont, Ridge and Valley, and Southwestern Appalachians. These
mountain forests are at the northern latitudinal and altitudinal range margin
for longleaf pine ecosystems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Doctoral student Arvind
Bhuta, under the supervision of Dr. Lisa Kennedy at Virginia Tech will produce a
high-resolution (temporal and spatial) reconstruction of competition and
disturbance at multiple mountain longleaf pine sites. Randomly placed study
plots in mountain longleaf pine forest sites will be surveyed for forest
structure and composition. All canopy trees within the plots will be identified,
measured, referenced with a global positioning system, and cored. Analysis of
forest metrics in a geographic information system will document forest processes
and patterns at multiple spatial scales ranging from individual tree species and
communities to the broader ecosystem. Annual rings from each tree will be
measured, standardized, and statistically analyzed. Tree rings provide an
annual-resolution record of tree growth, forest composition and structure, and
proxy records of climate, disturbance, and competition through time. Historical
tree growth will be linked with current forest metrics, land-use history, and
climate records to provide detailed information on long-term forest dynamics and
the drivers of change in this ecosystem. The investigation of the relationship
between climate and longleaf pine radial growth will allow for comparisons to be
made between sites at the range margin and others throughout its range to better
understand the geographic variation in the climate response of this species.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mountain longleaf pine forests are economically and
biologically valuable. They are high in biodiversity and rich with endemic
herbaceous and vertebrate species some of which are now rare and endangered due
to intense land-use patterns, fragmentation, and the disruption of the natural
fire regime. Long-term records of forest dynamics across multiple sites will
provide context for sound decisions on the restoration and management of these
forests and its vulnerable species, such as the red-cockaded woodpecker and the
Cumberland azalea. This research will fill a critical gap in the knowledge of
mountain longleaf pine forests by providing new information on the ecological
drivers of ecosystem and community processes and patterns which could be
influenced by climate change. Land managers of mountain longleaf pine forests
have based management and restoration practices on studies that focused on
individual stands and short time scales, many at lowland sites that may differ
in ecological function. In contrast, this research will account for pattern and
processes over large temporal and spatial scales.&lt;br/&gt;