* 0927108
* Development of Methods for Direct Determinations of Carbonate Ion Concentrations in Seawater
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Robert Byrne, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 07/31/2013
* USD 457,059.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rising atmospheric carbon dioxide
concentrations over the past two centuries have led to increasing carbon dioxide
uptake by the oceans. This process, which is decreasing the pH of the upper
ocean, is reducing oceanic carbonate ion concentrations and thus the level of
saturation of calcium carbonate. If the trend continues, it will have a
seriously negative impact on key marine organisms such as corals and some
plankton. In view of the importance of carbonate ion concentrations to the
oceans' rapidly evolving carbonate system, it is then highly desirable to move
from the rank of derived carbon dioxide system variables to the list of primary
measured variables. As such, a scientist from the University of South Florida
will develop a new method to directly determine the carbonate ion concentrations
in the laboratory, shipboard, or in-situ. The method would obtain carbonate ion
concentrations with ultraviolet spectroscopic observations of Pb(II) absorbance
spectra as the relative concentrations of lead carbonate and an ensemble of lead
chloride complexes change in response to varying concentrations of dissolved
carbonate. In addition, the scientist plans to refine and improve the accuracy
of spectrophotometric carbonate ion measurements via shipboard analyses wherein
carbonate ion concentrations are calculated using UV absorbance spectroscopy in
addition to conventional state of the art measurements of total dissolved
inorganic carbon, carbon dioxide fugacity, and pH.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As
regards broader impacts, the method will provide the ocean science community
with another, perhaps easier and more accurate means of determining seawater
saturation states (which influence both calcification rates and carbonate
dissolution rates). One postdoc and one graduate student would be supported and
trained as part of this project.