* 0927017
* Atmospheric Forcing of Marginal-Sea Overflows
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Jiayan Yang, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2013
* USD 597,179.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The atmospheric forcing of marginal-sea
overflows will be investigated. The main motivation is the need to develop
better parameterizations of marginal sea outflows of all scales and also from
observations of the Nordic Seas overflows showing considerable interannual
variability of transport and water temperature, possibly linked to the North
Atlantic Oscillation (NAO). The observed variations would be difficult to
explain using standard hydraulics models alone, but could be captured in models
that combine atmospheric forcing, hydraulic processes and a consideration of the
circulation in the marginal sea. As a first step, a new analytic model for a
marginal sea outflow that includes atmospheric forcing and time dependence will
be developed. The model will predict the lower layer outflow properties of the
two-layer exchange given the forcing and the upper layer inflow temperature and
salinity. It should be applicable to marginal seas and straits of scales varying
from the Med/Gibraltar systems to the Nordic Seas and should be superior to
existing parameterizations used in some general circulation models. A hierarchy
numerical modeling simulations using both idealized and realistic bathymetry
will be conducted to examine the impacts of atmospheric forcing, such as NAO, on
the overflow, and to identify mechanisms responsible for the timing and
amplitude of observed changes of the overflow. The numerical modeling component
will be focused on the Nordic overflows. The hypothesis that the atmospheric
forcing over the Nordic Seas is the primary cause for interannual Nordic Seas
overflow variability will tested. Alternative ways of monitoring the deep
overflows will also be investigated. The ultimate goal is to understand how the
overflow and the Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation (AMOC) respond to a
changing climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;This study
will advance our understanding of the Nordic Seas overflow and its responses to
climate forcing, provide a climate-responsive marginal-sea boundary condition
(MSBC) that is more advanced than the Price-Yang version used in several climate
models, help understand AMOC variability in model simulations, and help improve
the predictability of AMOC's responses to a changing
climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The Nordic Seas region
is an important player in the global ocean climate puzzle. A better
understanding of the response of the deep outflows to changing forcing will
ultimately help predict the global effects of warming, glacier melt, and other
environmental changes in the Nordic regions.&lt;br/&gt;In terms of outreach
activities, investigator Pratt has given presentations to high school students
at a local school (Cape Cod Academy). The subject material of this project
(marginal seas, overflows, and the abyssal circulation) should be fascinating to
students of that age and we plan to go back into the classroom and talk about
it. Plans are coordinated through Cathy Cetta, assistant headmaster and teacher
at CCA. Investigator Pratt also plans to build on the educational impact of his
text book by developing online aids such as additional homework exercises and
movies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a contribution to the Atlantic
Meridional Overturning Circulation research theme under the U.S. CLIVAR (CLImate
VARiability and predictability) Program.