* 0927340
* BRIGE: Study of Colloidal Electrohydrodynamics for Dielectrophoresis-Directed Fluidic Assembly of Nanostructures
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Dong Liu, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 07/31/2012
* USD 175,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this BRIGE
award is to study the colloidal electrohydrodynamics in dielectrophoresis
(DEP)-directed fluidic assembly involving many (hundreds of) nanoscale entities.
The nanoentity motion and the flow field driven by DEP will be experimentally
investigated using fluorescent microscopy and digital particle image
velocimetry. The final patterns of the assembled nano- and microstructures will
be measured with scanning electron microscopy. An advanced numerical model will
be developed using the distributed Lagrange-multiplier based fictitious-domain
method to explore the collective electrohydrodynamic behavior of numerous
nanoscale entities. The model prediction will be validated through comparison to
the experimental data. This work will elucidate the coupling between
electromechanics and fluid mechanics in solid-liquid two-phase flow at the nano-
and microscale. The experimental and numerical methods developed will also
benefit the general study of particulate flow in colloidal systems.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research will advance the
understanding of the electrohydrodynamic transport in nanoscale colloids. Such
understanding is crucial to the development of effective and robust fluidic
assembly techniques for large-scale parallel manufacturing of nanostructures for
nano- and microelectronic applications. The technical aspects of the BRIGE
project will be integrated with its education and outreach programs that aim at
increasing the number of underrepresented students from diverse racial/ethnic
groups who are interested in pursuing careers in engineering through active
recruitment and involvement of graduate/undergraduate/high school students in
scientific research and training.