* 0927089
* Understanding paleo-climate tools: Effects of carbonic anhydrase  and Mg on oxygen isotopes in dissolved and solid carbonate
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Richard Zeebe, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 07/31/2013
* USD 248,760.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

The use of stable isotopes in biogenic calcium carbonate shells is a standard
tool in paleoclimate studies. However, there are still outstanding issues that
need to be addressed before this tool can be utilized to its full potential.
Researchers at the University of Hawaii will study (1) the effects of carbonic
anhydrase (CA) on the rate of oxygen (O) isotope equilibration between the
dissolved inorganic carbon (DIC) species and water and (2) the effects of
magnesium ions on the O isotope equilibrium between DIC-species and water. The
effects of these processes will be determined using quantitative (rapid) and
slow inorganic carbonate precipitation experiments.

The two potential effects on oxygen isotopes that will be studied in this
project are important to discern because they represent fundamental biological
or chemical processes or occurrences within the marine setting. The possible
influence of carbonic anhydrase is important because it plays an important role
in a variety of essential processes whereas the influence of magnesium ions
represents an important parameter in characterizing ocean water chemistry and
its influence on chemical equilibrium.

Broader Impacts: This study will contribute to the improved understanding of a
tool commonly employed in paleo-climatology - oxygen isotopes in carbonate
microfossils. The anticipated outcome will be an improved separation of past
climate signals from undesirable biases. This separation would effectively lead
to a better understanding of Earth's climate history. An additional goal of the
project is to foster education of students at different levels. This study was
designed in part by a graduate student who also assisted in the preparation of
the project proposal.