* 0927173
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Wildlife Conservation and the Role of Inter-Household Exchange in Social-Ecological Resilience
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,02/28/2011
* Paul Leslie, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2011
* USD 12,000.00

Despite their intended roles as sanctuaries of biodiversity, parks and protected
areas represent perturbations in landscapes and have stimulated significant
social, economic, and environmental change in much of Africa. Overwhelmingly,
social scientists have been critical of parks and protected areas, pointing out
many cases in which parks have evicted local residents, catalyzed rural poverty,
reconfigured livelihoods, shifted power dynamics, upended gendered
relationships, and stimulated misguided development projects. The processes
through which parks influence the links between social and ecological systems
and correspondingly environmental health and social well-being remain unclear,
however, with relatively little attention given to interactions among households
as potential links between social and ecological processes. This doctoral
dissertation research project will examine the effect of Tarangire National Park
in northern Tanzania on inter-household exchanges of goods and labor in villages
close to the park. Such exchanges are traditionally a salient feature of many
African societies and have been crucial to the persistence and well-being of
Maasai herders in the study area. The doctoral student will seek answers to the
following questions: (1) How has Tarangire National Park influenced the economic
opportunities and constraints that local households face? (2) How have household
responses to these evolving constraints and opportunities affected inter-
household exchanges of goods and labor? (3) How have shifting inter-household
dynamics influenced demographic patterns and income inequality at the community
level? A quantitative survey of households and semi-structured group and
stakeholder interviews will provide data on the shifting structure of the
economic environment for local villagers and the changing patterns of inter-
household relationships. The findings will clarify how households have adapted
to the park and conservation policy, and explore the implications of these
adaptations for the larger social-ecological system. Likely responses and
consequences include households shifting from community-oriented economic
activities towards more individualistic practices; increasing income inequality
in the region; and increasing social and economic interactions with groups in
distant regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The last three decades have seen a five-
fold increase worldwide in lands designated for nature conservation. This
project will explore how the global process of conservation affects a group of
rural communities. It will examine the nature of social change, the scope of
change, the implications of change for communities, and potential consequences
for wildlife and conservation. The project will assess the effect of
conservation policy on linked social-ecological systems as well as the effects
of conservation-related initiatives like NGOs and other organizations drawn to
parks. By focusing on the relationships among households, this research will
investigate how household responses to conservation shape community patterns of
land use, demography, and the persistence of cultural traits. This research has
potential implications for rural policies regarding conservation planning and
biodiversity, land-use and land-cover change, development projects, family
planning, and household demography, and labor markets. It also will contribute
to understanding the resilience of social-ecological systems and the social
consequences of conservation, topics of current concern in geography,
anthropology, economics, and ecology. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research
Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising
student to establish a strong independent research career. This award is jointly
supported by the NSF Geography and Spatial Sciences Program and the NSF Office
of International Science and Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;