* 0927247
* High and Low-Latitude Controls on the Mean Position of the Atlantic ITCZ  (0-150 ka BP)
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Peter DeMenocal, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 09/30/2013
* USD 366,010.00

The ITCZ (Intertropical Convergence Zone) is a geographic band with ascendant
air circulation and heavy rain, sometimes referred to as the ?thermal equator?.
This zone is a dominant atmospheric and oceanic feature of global climate, and
its variability dominates the climate of the tropics and subtropics where most
of the global population lives. Over the oceans, where it the ITCZ is narrowest
and best developed, the position of the ITCZ moves seasonally between 5°S and
5°N following the maximum summer season radiation. These migrations are
responsible for well-known climate phenomenon such as monsoons and seasonal
droughts. Recent paleoceanographic and paleoclimate data have documented large
excursions of the ITCZ in the past. Over the last 30,000 years the ITCZ has
shifted rapidly (within decades to centuries) and dramatically away from its
historical mean position. Past ITCZ excursions over these timescales may have
been as large as ±10-15° latitude, and the climate changes in the (sub)tropics
were very large indeed. The emergence of the modern day Saharan desert roughly
5,000 years age from what was previously a well-watered, lake-filled terrain is
one such example. This drying of North African led to the depopulation of North
Africa, and the rise of urban, stratified civilizations along the Nile Valley
and the emergence of Phaeronic culture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of
this work is to determine the relative sensitivity of the ITCZ position to known
changes in high-latitude global ice volume and low-latitude orbital radiation
forcing. Understanding sensitivity of ITCZ to known, natural climate changes is
necessary to estimate possible future climate changes in a warming world.
Funding of this project will support a post-doctoral researcher and
undergraduate research assistants from underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;