* 0927745
* Collaborative Research: Quantifying Creativity in Automated Design through a Multiagent Coordination Framework
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,10/31/2009
* Robert Stone, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Christina L. Bloebaum
* 10/31/2009
* USD 151,107.00

Last Modified Date: 06/13/09 Last Modified By: Christina L. Bloebaum &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Abstract &lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this award is to assess
how creative a particular design concept is, and, more specifically, to
determine what attributes lead to a more (or less) creative design concept. To
achieve this objective, the research uses credit assignment approaches derived
for multiagent coordination to evaluate the impact of various attributes on the
creativity of the full design concept. In particular, the research will provide
clear guidance on what the criteria should be to evaluate the creativity of
design concept variants generated in an automated design environment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research will help
identify the most creative design concepts early in the design process. The
intellectual merit of this award is in its blending state of the art automated
concept generation techniques with new agent coordination strategies to allow
the emergence of creativity as a combination of attributes (e.g., agents).
Quantifying the impact of specific attributes (local impact) on the creativity
of a concept (global impact) is a key contribution. The broader impact includes
far-reaching effects on engineering product design. A method that generally
captures the creative potential of a design, a-priori to market introduction,
could revolutionize how industry designs and develops new products, and provide
an advantage to United States industry. This research will engage both the
multiagent and engineering design communities. Workshops will be held at the
flagship conferences in each field. In addition, the PIs will leverage an NSF
funded effort that created an Engineering Virtual Organization to both enter and
receive data to assess concepts. Furthermore, the impact of methods that enhance
and bring forward the creativity of students will be tested through an automated
design competition at the end of the project to engage the students. Finally,
students in the introductory and senior design courses will be engaged to
experiment with the new method. &lt;br/&gt;