* 0927743
* RUI: Pervious Concrete Piles: An Innovative Ground Improvement Alternative
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Anne Raich, Lafayette College
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/2013
* USD 279,275.00

&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act
of 2009&lt;br/&gt;(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Permeable granular
piles (i.e., sand compaction piles, stone columns and rammed aggregate piers)
are commonly used to support structures and highway facilities constructed on
soft or loose soils subjected to static and seismic loading. Although the use of
permeable granular piles increases the time rate of consolidation, reduces
liquefaction potential, improves bearing capacity and stability, and reduces
settlement of poor soils, these piles have a low stiffness and strength that
depend on the properties of surrounding soil. Therefore, granular piles have
limited use in very soft clays and silts, and in organic and peat soils. This
research focuses on developing a new ground improvement alternative using
pervious concrete piles to provide high permeability coupled with high stiffness
and strength that are independent of surrounding soil
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When compared to the properties of granular
piles, pervious concrete materials provide comparable permeability, more than
ten times the strength, and an increase of two orders of magnitude in modulus.
The higher elastic modulus and strength of pervious concrete improves the load
transfer and load-carrying capacity of the piles without compromising the
benefits of high permeability. Using pervious concrete material will ultimately
result in reducing the required area replacement ratio, which will significantly
reduce construction time and cost. Pervious concrete piles, which have strength
and stiffness properties that do not depend on confinement provided by
surrounding soil, will provide an effective ground improvement method for very
soft clays and silts, and in organic and peat soils. In addition, pervious
concrete piles can be reinforced with longitudinal corrosion-resistant steel
rebars to improve their ductility and performance when subjected to seismic
loading.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objectives focus on developing
pervious concrete mixtures for ground improvement applications and on
experimentally characterizing the effects of several construction procedures on
soil and pile properties and on soil-pile interaction. Small-scale laboratory
experiments using instrumentation and advanced sensors are designed to
understand the effects of installation procedures on the behavior of single
pervious concrete piles and groups of pervious concrete piles subjected to
vertical, uplift, lateral,&lt;br/&gt;and embankment loading conditions. The
analytical work focuses on developing computational models that accurately
predict the behavior of pervious concrete pile systems through three stages:
pile installation, consolidation, and in-service loading. The analytical models
will be calibrated using the results of the laboratory material and pile load
tests and both sophisticated analytical methodologies for use by researchers and
simplified analytical tools recommended for practicing engineers will be
developed. The Soil-Structure Interaction Facility at Lafayette College, which
was recently funded by the National Science Foundation?s Major Research
Instrumentation Program, will be used to conduct the experimental and analytical
studies. The research will benefit significantly from the collaboration of the
Geopier Foundation Company in the design and conduction of the experimental
program.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research project team consists of faculty and
students from Lafayette College, which is an undergraduate non-Ph.D. granting
institution, and engineers from Geopier Foundation Company. Two undergraduate
students will be funded by the project each year. Two additional students will
be funded through Lafayette College?s EXCEL Scholars Program, which supports
collaborative research between high-performing students and faculty. The
research team will also collaborate with the Pennsylvania STEM Initiative and an
enrichment/gifted support specialist and teacher from the Easton Area School
District, PA, in several outreach programs. The partnerships formed through
these activities support the Pennsylvania?s STEM Initiative to dramatically
increasing the number of P-20 students (especially females, minorities and the
underrepresented) in Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics careers.
The project team, in collaboration with the Northeast Regional Network of PA
STEM, will work with students and teachers in several area K-12 schools (total
~4000 students). Specifically, participating in yearly workshops and ?Project
Lead the Way? that engage students in high school pre-engineering programs and
the YWCA?s ?Tech Gyrl? program that empowers middle school girls by developing
computing skills will expose students and their teachers to the challenges
associated with designing structures supported on poor soils. Through
professional committee work and service, conference presentations, journal
papers, and participating in the CMMI annual meeting; the PIs and students will
disseminate the data, methods, and tools produced by this research effort
nationally and internationally.&lt;br/&gt;