* 0927824
* Investigation and Damage Mitigation of Low-lying Coastal Bridges under Hurricane-induced Wind and Wave Actions
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Steve C.S. Cai, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 08/31/2015
* USD 179,952.00

Hurricane wind, surge, and wave induced loads on low lying bridges in coastal
areas are not well understood. Several coastal bridges were damaged in
Hurricanes Ivan and Katrina. The objective of this study is to characterize the
wind, surge, and wave loads on bridge decks, and to develop mitigation
countermeasures for coastal bridges. The specific activities include (1)
developing an experimental method to simulate wind, surge, and wave loading
effects on bridge decks; (2) establishing a numerical simulation methodology to
predict the bridge performance for the defined wind, surge, and wave loads; and
(3) investigating effective and economical hazard mitigation countermeasures to
reduce the impact of hurricanes on coastal bridge structures. This study will
focus on short and medium span low lying costal bridge structures that are
vulnerable to wind, surge, and wave actions. The mitigation strategies include
both aerodynamic streamlining of bridge decks and mechanical strengthening of
the connections between the bridge superstructure and substructure, considering
a balanced performance between the superstructure and substructure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the research will lead to better definition
of design load and improved understanding about the performance of coastal
bridges, and provide essential technical data for the design of these structures
and analytical tools and methodologies for safety assessments of coastal bridges
in a hurricane environment. This is expected to lead to better bridge designs
with reduced damage during a hurricane induced extreme wind environment. The
attractive demonstrations and education tools will be prepared for outreach
activities and to increase the public awareness of hurricane structural
engineering. The design tools incorporating the results of this research will be
developed for practitioners to design safer and more economical coastal bridge
structures. The project will also train graduate students through their
involvement in the project research activities. &lt;br/&gt;