* 0927973
* Math Infusion into Science Project (MiSP) Phase II
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* David Burghardt, Hofstra University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth VanderPutten
* 08/31/2013
* USD 2,097,819.00

This project is a partnership among Hofstra University with the New York State
Education Department (NYSED), and eight high-need school districts in New York
(Amityville Union Free School District, Freeport Central School District,
Hempstead Union Free School District, Longwood Central School District,
Roosevelt Union Free School District, Uniondale Union Free School District,
William Floyd Central School District, and Wyandanch Union Free School
District). Research and evaluation activities are being conducted by the Center
for Advanced Study in Education (CASE) at the City University of New York (CUNY)
Graduate Center. Approximately 6,000 students, 46 middle school mathematics and
science teachers, eight principals, and five higher education STEM disciplinary
faculty participate in the Project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary mission of
MiSP is to improve middle school student achievement in mathematics. The Project
is rigorously developing, implementing, and researching an innovative and
potentially transformative model that infuses mathematics into eighth-grade
science education. Employing mathematical methods in science instruction would
have great benefits both for mathematics and science. For mathematics, it would
ensure that students see the mathematics they study actually being used, and
would enhance their learning. The infused mathematics would also help transform
the primarily descriptive instruction currently used in middle school science
into more inferential and analytical instruction, and would therefore inform
science understanding. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the project are to:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Enhance student learning by deepening the mathematics-
into-science infusion model.&lt;br/&gt;2. Enhance the operational features of
the infusion model by applying Project criteria to the development of
prototypical lessons and to associated professional development.&lt;br/&gt;3.
Implement MiSP in authentic middle school science settings in eight low-
performing schools.&lt;br/&gt;4. Conduct an experimental study of the infusion
model that (a) collects evidence of the feasibility of implementing MiSP; (b)
assesses Project impact on teacher knowledge, instructional behaviors, and
attitudes; (c) assesses Project impact on student attitudes and academic
achievement; (d) refines the conceptual and operational features of MiSP; and
(e) in general, develops new knowledge regarding contextualizing mathematics in
"real world problems."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Project model, prototypical
curricula, and research results, as well as a primer for retooling existing
science curricula to include mathematics, will be widely disseminated by NYSED
and Pearson/Prentice Hall, Inc., a highly regarded commercial publisher with a
national STEM presence. Learning opportunities will be sustained by partner
districts and NYSED.