* 0927555
* International: US-China Undergraduate Research Experience in Biomedical Engineering
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Paul Benkeser, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* W. Y. B. Chang
* 08/31/2012
* USD 148,281.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is an International Research
Experience for Students (IRES) award to U.S. P.I. Paul Benkeser, Georgia
Institute of Technology. This award will enable 8 U.S. undergraduate students
from the Biomedical Engineering Partnership Program to gain research experience
at Peking University in this field. The Biomedical Engineering Partnership
Program was formed by the Georgia Institute of Technology, Emory University, and
Peking University to combine their expertise to solve difficult problems in
biomedical engineering. This is a year-long program, with the students engaged
in research in the U.S. laboratories during the spring and fall semester and in
Peking University?s biomedical engineering laboratories during the summer
term.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit. The Georgia Institute of
Technology, Emory University, and Peking University combine their expertise to
solve difficult problems in biomedical engineering. This proposed opportunity
will allow a diverse group of undergraduate students to develop their research
skills with scientists and engineers whose perspectives include global
scientific and technological interactions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact.
This program will provide the participating U.S. undergraduate students with an
international research experience that will give them a global perspective on
research challenges and opportunities in biomedical engineering. The proposed
activity has focused specific attention on recruitment and retention of under-
represented minorities and women to ensure these groups are well represented in
this program.