* 0928533
* Predictive Energy Management in Smart Vehicles: Exploiting Traffic and Terrain Preview for Fuel Savings
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Ardalan Vahidi, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* George Chiu
* 07/31/2013
* USD 260,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The research effort supported by this award is aimed at
formulating algorithms that use preview information of terrain, traffic signal
timing, and traffic flow for saving fuel and reducing emissions of modern
vehicles with conventional or hybrid powertrains. Terrain and traffic
information is now available through various providers and can be integrated
into the vehicle navigation system or into its add-on accessories. However
systematic methods for utilizing this rich and dynamic information do not exist.
The focus of this proposal is on solutions that plan over time the best vehicle
velocity profile (or battery utilization for hybrid vehicles) that reduces fuel
consumption and emissions without increasing trip time. The problem will be
formulated in a dynamic constrained optimization framework with partial future
information. Standard numerical solution via dynamic programming is viable but
requires full information of future events. To complement the partial future
information, we create predictive traffic models that use streaming traffic data
to forecast evolving traffic patterns down the road. Receding finite-horizon
optimization will be also explored as a mean to tackle missing information and
the computational cost of dynamic programming. This also helps finding
appropriate preview lengths and preview quality that result in meaningful fuel
savings and/or emission reduction. Via multi-vehicle simulations the impact a
few equipped vehicles can have on the flow of mixed traffic will be
investigated. These results will be verified experimentally in collaboration
with BMW's Information Technology Research Center in South Carolina.

If successful, this research can transform the way we drive our vehicles. The
proposed solutions enable fuel saving and reduction of emissions relying mostly
on software and information and with minimal hardware investments. This impacts
not only the high-tech vehicle of the future but the current fleet when equipped
with add-on accessories. In one scenario, a downloadable code can suggest the
eco-friendly speed to the driver based on future state of terrain, traffic, and
traffic signal. Future vehicles can automatically switch to the eco-friendly
speed when in adaptive cruise control mode. With increased penetration of such
solutions, there can be dramatic reduction in CO2 emissions and total national
fuel use with direct societal and economical impacts. The interdisciplinary
nature of this research will build a new bridge between mechanical engineering,
electrical engineering and computer science, traffic engineering, and
information technology disciplines, and creates novel educational opportunities.