* 0928612
* U.S. GEOTRACES North Atlantic Section: CFC and SF6 Measurements
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2009,11/30/2012
* William Smethie, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 11/30/2012
* USD 260,190.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The objectives of the GEOTRACES program are: 1) to determine the global
distributions of selected trace elements and isotopes and evaluate the sources,
sinks and internal cycling of these species to better understand the physical,
chemical and biological processes regulating their distributions, 2) to develop
an understanding of the processes involved in oceanic trace element cycles
sufficiently well that the response of these cycles to global change can be
predicted and their impact on the carbon cycle and climate understood, and 3) to
understand the processes that control the concentrations of geochemical species
used for proxies of the past environment, both in the water column and in the
substrates that reflect the water column.

Understanding how the physical processes of advection, mixing, and water mass
formation affect the distributions of trace elements and isotopes is critical to
meeting these objectives. The evolving CFC and SF6 distributions in the ocean
provide strong constraints on these processes. CFCs have been measured
extensively in the global ocean for the past two and a half decades as part of
several large scale oceanographic programs (e.g. SAVE, WOCE, CLIVAR) as well as
many smaller programs and SF6 has become a standard measurement on the CLIVAR
cruises. Measurement of CFCs and SF6 on the GEOTRACES program places the
GEOTRACES data in the context of large scale ventilation patterns established by
CFC/SF6 measurements on these cruises.

In this project, researchers at the Lamont-Dougherty Earth Observatory of
Columbia University will measure the CFC-11, CFC-12 and SF6 distributions along
the US GEOTRACES North Atlantic cruise track. They will use these data to
identify the most recently ventilated cores of the North Atlantic water masses,
to estimate transit times of these water masses from their source regions, and
to estimate oxygen consumption rates and rates of production or decomposition of
selected trace elements measured on this program using the transit time
information.

Broader Impacts: In addition to providing information on ventilation and transit
times for the GEOTRACES project, the CFC and SF6 data collected on this cruise
will also expand the transient tracer data base for the North Atlantic Ocean.
The data will be disseminated widely to the research community following NSF
guidelines. Several CLIVAR cruises to the North Atlantic are planned for the
2010 - 2012 time period, and the GEOTRACES cruise will increase the coverage for
CFCs and SF6. This database of the temporally evolving CFC and SF6
concentrations in the North Atlantic Ocean is used in studies of the earth's
climate and the ocean's role in the earth's climate and the global CO2 cycle. It
is used to validate models of ocean circulation and to quantify the uptake and
storage of anthropogenic CO2 in the ocean.