* 0928320
* Stochastic Multiscale Computational Design Methodology
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Wing Liu, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Collopy
* 08/31/2013
* USD 380,000.00

The objective of this research is to develop a stochastic multiscale
computational design methodology to enable design of robust and reliable
multiscale ?engineered? systems following the paradigm of simulation-based
design using multiscale analysis. The research will provide a mathematically
rigorous and methodologically viable approach for designing hierarchical
materials and product systems across diverse application domains such as those
associated with material, energy, and medicine. Unlike most existing work that
only considers parametric uncertainty, this research will provide a unified
probabilistic approach to quantify and propagate other critical sources of
uncertainties across both the material and product design domains. This will be
accomplished by effectively integrating information from both multiscale
simulations and physical experiments at multiple scales. By exploiting the
hierarchical scale decomposition structure in multiscale analysis, a set of high
performance design algorithms that are uniquely suited for multiscale design
will be developed, thereby extending the state-of-art research developments in
uncertainty quantification, statistical sensitivity analysis, metamodeling, and
multidisciplinary design optimization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the
proposed research will provide a generic methodology for designing hierarchical
materials and product systems; the broader application is likely to benefit the
military and a wide range of domestic industries in the medical, energy,
consumer electronics, and automotive businesses. With the joint effort from a
multidisciplinary research team, the project will reveal the complex integration
issues between multiscale simulations, experiments, and design. The fruition of
this research will forge new boundaries between mechanical science, materials
science, and engineering design. A broad audience will be reached through
comprehensive dissemination of computer codes and research findings, as well as
through classroom teaching. The newly established graduate interdisciplinary
cluster program in "Predictive Science and Engineering Design" at Northwestern
University, the NSF Summer Institute on "Nanomechanics, Nanomaterials, and
Micro/Nano-Manufacturing," and the active participation of underrepresented
groups are all means to disseminate our research findings.&lt;br/&gt;