* 0928046
* Collaborative Research: Efficient Experimentation for Product and Process Reliability Improvement
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Steven Rigdon, Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville
* Standard Grant
* Edwin Romeijn
* 09/30/2013
* USD 89,260.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant provides funding for
developing experimental design theories and techniques for product and process
reliability responses that will fill the gap that currently exists in design for
reliability. Direct application of traditional design of experiment (DOE) tools
on reliability experiments is inappropriate. This project will attack the
fundamental problems of reliability experiments, including non-normal response
distribution, nonlinear model and parameter dependency problems, which have
prevented the efficient use of DOE for product and process reliability
improvement. Preliminary studies indicate that the proposed methodology will
result in designs superior to those encountered in practice. This project is
innovative and transformative in terms of creating and testing a group of new
DOE tools that will greatly expand the capability and applicability of
statistical experimental design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the
theoretical results foreseen in the proposal will impact a number of scientific
communities, including engineering design, material design, biomedicine and
clinical trails. By "designing-in" reliability, companies will be able to reduce
the number of experimental runs needed throughout the product design,
development, and delivery. A comprehensive website devoted to experimental
design and reliability will be developed to disseminate the results of this
research. The proposed research activities are a natural venue for training
graduate and undergraduate students to develop theoretical models and
applications of experimental design and reliability analysis. This project will
boost the interdisciplinary research (Industrial Engineering and Mathematical
Statistics) at two universities (Arizona State University and Southern Illinois
University Edwardsville), and improve both theoretical and application types of
education for engineering and mathematical science
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;