* 0928517
* Nanoscale Characterization of Nanostructured Thin Film with Ultrahigh Strength and Ductility
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Scott Mao, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 08/31/2014
* USD 340,000.00

New outstanding chemical, mechanical and physical properties are potentially
exhibited in nanostructured materials. The nanostructured thin film with
extremely high strength/ductility as well as fracture toughness can be very
attractive for MEMS components and thin film coatings. Although mechanical
behavior of bulk nanostructured materials has been investigated, there is lack
of understanding on source of strength?Cductility and fracture as well as their
fundamental relationships in nanostructured thin films. In order to design and
process better thin film with ultrahigh strength, ductility and fracture
resistance, novel nanostructured thin film processing and understanding on the
source of strength and ductility in the films are important. Therefore, the
research project is aimed at (1) developing a new fabrication technique to
achieve better mechanical behavior (high strength and toughness) in
nanostructured thin films for MEMS and coating application, and (2)
understanding strengthening mechanism and fracture process in the thin films so
as to identify a ?gproper?h microstructure for best mechanical performance. The
nanoscale characterization on the nanostructured thin film is expected to
contribute to the advancement in nanostructured thin film and
nanocharacterization. &lt;br/&gt;The project will integrate research and
education by (i) providing training for graduate and undergraduate students,
(ii) course development on nanostructured thin films, (iii) increased
participation of underrepresented groups into the research through current
Minority Engineering Mentoring Program in University of Pittsburgh, and (iv)
outreach to elementary school and exposure of young students to nanoscale
science &amp; technology through Internet explorers and Pittsburgh Carnegie
Science Museum. &lt;br/&gt;