* 0928664
* Development of Ultra-Dense Plasmonic Sensors Arrays Using Epitaxial Periodically-Perforated Silver Films
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Gennady Shvets, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2012
* USD 458,333.00

The objective of this research effort is to develop plasmonic mid-infrared
sensors based on epitaxially deposited silver films. The approach is to utilize
the extraordinary optical transmission through arrays of sub-wavelength holes in
a metal. Surface plasmon polaritons supported by such hole arrays are
responsible for the extraordinary Optical transmission, and are highly sensitive
to the refractive index of the surrounding medium or analyte. A recently
discovered phenomenon of the omni-directional photonic bandgap will be utilized.
To enhance the effect, atomically smooth metal films will be grown on various
substrates. The omni-directional nature of the gap enables focusing light on an
ultra-small (one wavelength across) sensor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful,
the benefits of this research will include the development of novel tools for
analyzing ultra-small amounts of multiple analytes for disease detection using
mid-infrared sensing. The mid-infrared part of the spectrum is critically
important for sensing applications because chemical composition of large and
complex molecules can be revealed through their mid-infrared optical
"fingerprints". These sensing techniques could potentially revolutionize label-
free detection of biological and chemical substances. Future optical sensing
devices should also be capable of processing minute amounts of analyte, and do
so in a very dense format of small closely spaced sensors. The project will
include significant outreach to high school, undergraduate, and graduate
Hispanic students in Texas. High school students from local schools will conduct
summer research in PI's laboratories, collaborate with graduate students, and
receive mentorship from the recently established Mentorship Networks among
minority students in the San Antonio/Austin area aimed at enhancing the interest
and awareness of nanoscale science among minority students.&lt;br/&gt;