* 0928852
* CSU-LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate at California State University, Northridge (Cohort 7)
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Juanita Barrena, University Enterprises, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* A.  Hicks
* 07/31/2011
* USD 987,000.00

California State University (CSU) Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority
Participation (CSU-LSAMP) Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) Program is a
collaborative effort between the National Science Foundation and California
State University institutions to increase the quality and quantity of
underrepresented minorities matriculating to completion of the doctoral degree
in science, technology, engineering and mathematics fields (STEM) fields. The
program at California State University, Northridge prepares students to meet the
challenges of completing doctoral programs of study and for academic careers in
higher education. In addition, the program develops leadership skills necessary
for success in the STEM workforce nationally and
internationally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Integrating research and education, the BD
fellows will be nurtured over two years as a cohort community that will benefit
from a program of academic and personal development activities as well as social
support to sustain their commitment and success to the terminal Ph.D. STEM
degree. Program activities include linkages with Graduate Education in the
Professoriate (AGEP) institutions and other graduate education programs to
advance students in Ph.D. programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Twelve students from
underrepresented minority populations in STEM fields will participate in the
program at California State University, Northridge during the 2009-2011 academic
years. Results from this support will broaden the participation of African-
Americans, Hispanics, Native Americans, and Pacific-Islanders in the STEM
pipeline globally. Results from rigorous evaluation of the project will add to
the body of literature in the recruitment and retention of underrepresented
minority students in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project anticipates
that at least 95% of the new participants will complete Master?s degrees, and
that at least 90% of these students will earn STEM doctorate degrees. This
project not only targets a student population that might not otherwise pursue
doctoral level training, but also makes a special effort to target STEM
disciplines that have relatively low overall doctorate degree production and the
lowest shares of URM students. In these disciplines (specifically, geological
sciences, physics and astronomy, mathematics, engineering, and computer
science), small increases in the number of doctorates awarded to URM students
will have a significant impact on discipline
demographics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BD project activities include a variety of
valued ?best practices? for supporting and advancing LSAMP students.
Specifically, the project provides the following: &lt;br/&gt;? rigorous
Master?s-level course-work &lt;br/&gt;? a two-year research experience with the
guidance of a faculty mentor;&lt;br/&gt;? professional development workshops and
activities, including participation in scientific conferences; &lt;br/&gt;?
monthly meetings to monitor student progress, &lt;br/&gt;? networking with other
BD Fellows in doctoral programs, and &lt;br/&gt;? provide assistance with
graduate school and fellowship applications. &lt;br/&gt;