* 0928630
* Image Guided Tracking of Tumor Motion for Conformal Radiation Therapy
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Tarunraj Singh, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* George Chiu
* 08/31/2013
* USD 299,688.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The main research objective of this award is the development
of a framework for accurate estimation of tumor target dynamics which enables
safe and effective ?Adaptive Conformal Radiation Therapy? for cancer treatment.
Two specific aims of this research are 1) construction of models correlating
body surface motion to the motion of the tumor and 2) development of algorithms
for state uncertainty characterization and propagation for timely acquisition of
tumor motion data. The research approach progresses from the development of a
simple rigid body point mass representation of the tumor, followed by a finite
dimensional rigid body model and concluding with a model which accounts for the
flexible modes of the tumor dynamics. In close collaboration with our project
members from Roswell Park Cancer Institute (RPCI), comprehensive experiments
will be performed in a clinical scenario to validate the developed framework.
Deliverables include a suite of tumor motion models validated via lab
experiments, algorithms for characterizing and propagating state uncertainty in
tumor motion models, documentation of research results and undergraduate and
graduate student education.

If successful, this research has the potential to significantly improve the
effectiveness of the conventional radiation therapy. This research will
facilitate rational design of even more potent radiation treatment while
minimizing: 1) exposure of healthy tissues to toxic radiations, 2) exposure to
X-ray imaging doses and most importantly, 3) probability of relapse of tumor.
This award facilitates collaboration between researchers in engineering and
biomedical sciences. Through this kind of collaboration between two fields,
expansion of the fundamental knowledge in both fields is expected. The goals of
the broader impact portion of this award will be met in part by incorporating
various aspects of the research program into educational activities as well.