* 0928231
* Optimized Scheduling of Complex Resource Allocation Systems through Approximate Dynamic Programming
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Spiridon Reveliotis, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Edwin Romeijn
* 08/31/2013
* USD 341,062.00

This grant provides funding for the development of a novel framework for
managing the complex resource allocation that takes place in contemporary
production and service systems. A defining characteristic of this framework is
the decomposition of the overall resource allocation problem encountered in the
aforementioned environments into two major sub-problems: The first of these sub-
problems is known as the Logical or Behavioral Control problem for the target
environments, and it seeks to prevent the development of problematic or
undesirable patterns in the system behavior. The methodological base for
addressing this sub-problem is a body of results provided by Qualitative
Discrete Event Systems (DES) theory. The second sub-problem is known as the
Performance Control or Scheduling problem, and it seeks to optimize some chosen
performance indices within the behavioral latitude provided by the logical
controller that is returned by the first sub-problem. The methodological base
for this second sub-problem is provided by the theory of Markov Decision
Processes (MDP) and some more recent developments in it, collectively known as
Approximate Dynamic Programming (ADP). In the proposed investigations, special
emphasis is placed on the very high computational complexity that typically
underlies the aforementioned problems, and the pursued solutions will seek to
provide explicit levers that will enable the system designers to systematically
trade-off computational and operational efficiencies. Finally, the proposed
theoretical developments will be concretized by applying them to the problems of
throughput maximization of (i) flexibly automated production cells and (ii)
industrial Automated Guided Vehicle (AGV) systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, the results of this research will bring closer the existing
developments in scheduling theory to the field practice, since they will help to
deal more effectively with the underlying complexities. In this way, they will
enable and promote the concurrency and the operational flexibilities that have
been frequently envisioned for many contemporary applications, but have been
limited in practice by the current inability to master the operational
complexity that stems from these concepts. At a more analytical level, the
proposed research will further promote the burgeoning area of ADP and it will
identify and pursue new interesting synergies between this area and Qualitative
DES theory. Finally, on the educational side, the proposed program will promote
and strengthen the presence of the DES and ADP theories in the graduate
engineering curriculum, and it will give the opportunity to a number of graduate
students to experience the potential of these theories and their results,
through active participation in the pursued research.&lt;br/&gt;