* 0928364
* In Situ Form Metrology in Manufacturing by Combining Engineered Optical Scattering and Photogrammetry
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Edward Morse, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Zhijian Pei
* 07/31/2013
* USD 476,062.00

The research objective of this award is to apply mapping sciences from the
disciplines of photogrammetry and remote sensing to realize a new dimensional
measurement capability in manufacturing engineering that is inexpensive, non-
contact, remote, and applicable to in situ measurements. The approach is to use
a laser beam or a beam pattern generated with a diffractive optical element and
scatter this beam(s) either from the part being manufactured itself, or from
engineered structures placed into the manufacturing environment. Photogrammetry
will be used to determine absolute coordinates of reflected spots in the
environment and this information will be mapped back to the desired dimensional
information. Effectively, the part measurement is moved out away from the part
by using photogrammetry to measure the optical scattering from the part.

If successful, this method will open a new field of metrology research. Success
will mean demonstrating dimensional measurements with uncertainty of 1 part in
100,000 in two important manufacturing applications, representing a significant
technical and economic advance: (1) on machine metrology of free-form diamond
machined surfaces and (2) in situ and dynamic metrology of large continuous
polishing platens used for high precision optic polishing. The research
necessitates graduate education experience in optics, precision metrology, and
mechanical engineering. The visibly appealing features of the measurement will
be exploited and learning tools developed for both students and the general
public. This will include modules for undergraduate and graduate advanced optics
lab courses, a demo module for the general public for use by local student
chapters in optics and engineering societies, and a module for use at
advertisement and recruitment booths at professional society meetings.