* 0928776
* DynSyst_Special_Topics: A formal approach to the control of stochastic dynamic systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Calin Belta, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* George Chiu
* 08/31/2013
* USD 250,000.00

The research objective of this award is to establish a theoretical framework for
stochastic, complex systems such that given a specification, we can analyze the
system to determine the probability that the specification will be achieved and
automatically find an input law to maximize this probability. The research
approach progresses from the adaptation of existing probabilistic specification
languages into a form suitable for a general class of hybrid systems, to the
creation of tools for the automatic synthesis of control strategies to satisfy a
given probabilistic specification, and finally to an implementation of those
tools for the automatic deployment of mobile robots.

In formal analysis, finite models of computer programs or digital circuits are
checked against temporal logic properties such as safety (i.e., something bad
never happens), liveness (i.e., something good eventually happens), or richer
specifications. In recent years, there has been a growing interest in the dual
problem of formal synthesis, where the focus is to construct a control for a
continuous system that is safe and correct by design. These efforts have
centered on non-stochastic systems. Real-world systems, however, invariably
evolve under stochastic inputs and all sensors are subject to noise.

If successful, the results of this research will result in general-use
computational tools for the analysis and control of stochastic systems with
continuous dynamics. Applications of such techniques are wide-spread, ranging
from engineered systems such as power grids, autonomous robots for personal and
military use, and biomedical devices, to natural systems such as genetic
networks up to entire eco-systems. The research is closely coupled to an
educational and outreach plan, including curriculum development at the
undergraduate level, involvement of both undergraduate and high school students
in the research, and participation of the PIs in outreach events such as the
Upward Bound program at Boston University.