* 0928297
* Collaborative Research: Deciphering the Reliability of Nano Ceramic Films on Polymer Substrates: A Mechanistic Study
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Jun Lou, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 07/31/2013
* USD 195,001.00

Abstract The objective of this collaborative research is to explore the fracture
and fatigue mechanisms of nano ceramic films on polymer substrates under
monotonic and cyclic loadings. Functional nano ceramic films on polymer
substrates are emerging as key building blocks to enable promising technologies,
such as flexible electronics and next generation bioactive implants. The huge
mechanical mismatch and large mechanical loads lead to complex and rich fracture
behaviors of thin ceramic films on polymer substrates, which are far from well
understood. In particular, recent experiments showed fatigue damage of indium
tin oxide films on polymer substrates under cyclic loads, a phenomenon that
cannot be explained by conventional fatigue mechanisms. The future success of
abovementioned promising technologies is contingent to the mechanistic
understanding of the fracture and fatigue of nano ceramic films on polymer
substrates. In this project, a collaborative research framework (from analytic
modeling, simulations to in situ experiments) will be built to investigate the
yet-unexplored mechanisms that govern the mechanical reliability of nano ceramic
films on polymer substrates. The potential consequence of failure in functional
nano ceramic films on polymer substrates is significant in flexible electronics
and bioactive implants. The proposed research will offer fundamental insights
into the yet-unexplored mechanisms that govern the reliability of flexible
devices and bioactive implants, and enable more robust nanomanufacturing
strategies of these emerging technologies. By leveraging cyberinfrastructure,
the new knowledge from the project will be disseminated to reach much broader
audience, and a new generation of students will be equipped with
interdisciplinary perspectives.