* 0928762
* GOALI: Predicting Acoustic Wave Dynamics in Solid and Hybrid Rocket Motors
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Joseph Majdalani, University of Tennessee Space Institute
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 07/31/2013
* USD 361,167.00

This GOALI project aims at advancing the fundamental understanding of vortico-
acoustic wave coupling with hydrodynamic instability and thermal waves, along
with the nonlinear processes leading to wave steepening and limit cycle
oscillations in solid and hybrid rocket motors. The analysis involves physical
modeling, perturbation methods, and concepts derived from the biglobal
instability theory and Liao?s homotopy approach for the treatment of
nonlinearities. The work will lead to multidimensional solutions of compressible
core flow models in simulated combustors that take into account flow
directionality. An immediate example includes the multidirectional sweeping
motion of the gases and the non-uniformity of the flow above and across the
propellant surface. As organized, this program builds on the existing strengths
of the PI and an industrial sponsor who is presently focused on the development
of state-of-the-art hybrid motors. Given that no universally accepted acoustic
stability model exists for hybrids, the basic research activities proposed under
this grant will enhance the efforts taken by the industrial investigator to
promote the commercialization potential of clean hybrid technology.
&lt;br/&gt;Advancing a rigorous acoustic stability theory for propulsive systems
will aid in promoting the deep scientific insight needed to improve existing
diagnostic and design capabilities. The projected enhancements can have a
substantial bearing on the future development of rocket and turbine based
systems. The direct impact of a unifying stability framework on the mobility
industry can thus be significant in both aerospace and power generation
categories. For example, understanding and suppressing instability can
critically aid in demonstrating the viability of hybrid technology and its use
as a safe and clean propulsion alternative in both space and land applications.
On the educational side, the principal investigators will combine their unique
strengths in solid and hybrid flow field modeling to coordinate the training and
mentoring of various researchers and participants. Their efforts will have a
direct impact on society by exposing high school, college, and graduate students
to vital research prospects in rocketry, acoustic noise control, and hybrid
propulsion through strategically planned courses, colloquia, workshops, and
capstone design activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;