* 0928654
* Collaborative Research: Initial Wave Characteristics from Deformable Submarine Landslides
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2009,11/30/2011
* Robert Weiss, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 11/30/2011
* USD 132,922.00

&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the entire range of coastal hazards is becoming
increasingly necessary as populations shift towards nearshore areas. Coastal
hazards typically cause flooding and predicting the maximum penetration of the
water inland is important in efforts to reduce the coastal destruction and save
lives. Flooding from tsunamis generated from earthquakes is far better
understood than tsunamis that are generated by submarine ground movements that
resemble underwater avalanches. While there have been some attempts to estimate
the initial waves caused by submarine slides, predictions vary over a wide range
for the same slide conditions, and it is very difficult to meaningfully
evaluating the hazard.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims at the derivation
of empirical formulae that more reliably allow for prediction of initial waves
from submarine mass movements. We will use the state-of-the-art hydrocode iSALE
which incorporates most essential physical processes to jointly simulate the
movement of the slide masses and the generation of the surface waves. The
sliding mass is represented as a deformable material and moves freely under the
influence of gravity. No external forcing is needed. In this way, not only we
can simulate slides that were studied in laboratory experiments, but also able
to investigate slides on realistic scales employing realistic geo- materials. We
will also develop a graphic tool to allow easy visualization of the landslide
motion and the ocean or lake waves that are generated.&lt;br/&gt;