* 0928547
* Robustness of Steel Buildings Under Extreme Seismic Events: Study of Building Systems Collapse Through Multi-scale Computational Methods
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2013
* Alexandros Taflanidis, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 12/31/2013
* USD 262,000.00

Fundamental understanding of structural systems behavior under extreme
earthquakes (EQs) is important for designing robust and resilient systems. Such
extreme EQs can impose severe demands on structural systems and may result in
components failure or complete building collapse. The research objective of this
award is to mitigate socio-economic losses due to collapse of steel building
systems when subjected to extreme earthquake events. This goal will be achieved
through development of multi-scale computational simulation models that will
provide a virtual platform for realistic simulation of collapse response of
steel building systems. These models will incorporate micro-scale to structural
scale physics including fracture, inelasticity, global and local buckling of
structural members, and contact and impact between failed members. These novel
physics-based multi-scale models will be used to characterize collapse behavior
of building systems subjected to extreme seismic events including understanding
of the characteristics of the seismic excitation that contribute to collapse
vulnerability. The research results will be utilized to mitigate risk of
collapse by developing fundamental knowledge of collapse behavior leading to
development of robust and resilient building systems. Research results will also
assist in determining key system features that are critical to the stability and
functioning of the entire system, and in development of next generation of
performance based design guidelines. Collaborations between researchers and end
users will be fostered to provide guidance to the project and to spearhead
technology transfer of the results, advancing the state-of-the-practice. A
community education program will also be developed as a part of this project to
increase the understanding of impacts and consequences of building systems
collapse and to enable movement from short term community awareness to long term
community resiliency. Educational component of this project aims to produce
future generations of leaders in multidisciplinary sciences and engineering
through involvement of undergraduates in research and through K-12 classroom
activities.