* 0928001
* GOALI: Process Analysis and Variation Control in Micro-stamping
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Damon Brink, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 08/31/2013
* USD 300,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this Grant
Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) award is to explore the
scientific bases and technologies for fabricating precision metal micro-features
through the micro-stamping process. This research is motivated by increasing
demand for low-cost, high-precision metallic components to satisfy the
requirements of efficiency, strength, temperature and/or corrosion resistance in
the areas of electronics, medical devices, energy generation and heat
exchangers, etc.. To accomplish this goal, four research tasks are planned: (1)
Mechanical characterization of thin metal sheets to accurately model the
nonlinear kinematic hardening behavior; (2) Experimental and numerical analysis
of springback in thin sheets; (3) Friction characterization in micro-stamping;
and (4) Exploratory study of process control in micro-stamping to minimize
variations in micro-stamping. Thin metal sheets less than 300 µm in thickness
with feature sizes less than 500 µm are of interest to this
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research will
enhance the fabrication capability of thin precision metallic parts; thus,
establishing new opportunities for less energy consumption due to part
miniaturization and efficient energy generation. For example, a 70% reduction in
hard disk size leads to a 75% reduction in energy consumption; micro-channel
heat exchangers (with a characteristic length of 100 µm) have demonstrated heat
fluxes 3 to 5 times higher than conventional heat exchangers; sub-millimeter
needles increase patient comfort during insertion, etc.. The research is a
collaboration between Northwestern University, Intri-Plex, Inc., and an
international partner from the Nagoya Institute of Technology in Japan. This
team provides a nurturing environment for the training of the next generation of
post-doctoral fellows, graduate, undergraduate students and junior high students
through advising, short courses, early exposure to industry, and opportunities
for international collaborations.