* 0928427
* PRISM: UCI Interdisciplinary computational and applied mathematics program
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Sarah Frey, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 08/31/2015
* USD 1,950,568.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigators (PIs)
propose a research experience program in computational and applied mathematics
for lower-division undergraduate students at UC Irvine (UCI). Through this
experience, the PIs seek to stimulate student interest in mathematics and
computer science, and provide positive mentoring to students early in their
college education. The intellectual merit is in developing an integrated
teaching and research program at the interface of mathematics and computer
science for freshman and sophomore students at UCI. The projects in the program
are extracted from current research in information sciences and machine learning
with applications in signal processing, internet search, collaborative filtering
and game theory. The program involves mentoring of postdoctoral fellows and
graduate students who actively participate in teaching and advising of
undergraduate students. Undergraduate students shall develop creative thinking
and programming skills which prepare them well for success in upper division
classes and pursuit of advanced degrees. The program is based on on-line
resources and its curriculum is portable. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Early
stimulation and nurturing of mathematical interest of undergraduate students is
a key step in improving the overall quality of undergraduate education, and
strengthening the nation's output of talented young generations in science,
technology, engineering and mathematics. The computing based mathematics
learning and research in early stage of college education lays the solid
foundation of creative mathematical thinking for students in the context of
their modern daily life. This will stimulate their interest in learning advanced
topics of mathematics, science and engineering in junior and senior years, and
transition to innovative scientists and engineers in the future. The proposed
program aims to generate broad impact in advancing discovery and understanding
while promoting postdoctoral fellow and graduate student career training,
undergraduate student learning and research. The program strives for student
diversity and shall actively recruit minority students from local high schools
and existing minority student programs at UCI. The project results will be
disseminated at national conferences and on-line to a broad range of audience in
public. The early computing based learning of mathematics will bring out a new
generation of creative and well-prepared scientists for our society to benefit
for years to come.