* 0928890
* Implementation of Fluidic-Scanning Near Field Ultrasound Holography with Integrated Electronic Detection for Nano-Bio-Mechanics
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Vinayak Dravid, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Robert Carter
* 08/31/2012
* USD 311,386.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A large number of modern physical and
biological structures and phenomena require tools to ?see? below the surfaces
but non-destructively and with nanoscale resolution. This need is particularly
critical in soft/frqgile cellular/sub-cellular process; which requires
innovative approaches for spatially resolved imaging and quantitative analysis
under fluidic and physiologically viable conditions. The project concerns with
development and implementation ?Fluidic-Scanning Near-Field Ultrasound
Holography (Fluidic-SNFUH)? integrated with all-electronic detection for nano-
bio-mechanics, at nanoscale resolution with sensitivity to the 3rd (Z)
dimension. The research objectives revolve around combination of all-electronic
feedback to maintain the cantilever at resonance, yet compatibility with fluidic
imaging. This would enable truly non-invasive approach for biological and soft
structures. By quantitative phase extraction coupled with ultrasound modeling,
the project will develop the necessary hardware/software interface, enabling
turn-key nanoscale 3-D tomography, essential for imaging environmental
pollutants and pathogens; as well as their spatio-temporal entry into living
systems.&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the research activities will advance not only
SNFUH imaging but many SPM-based techniques to new territory. It will provide
scientists and engineers with an entirely new imaging paradigm with the
requisite resolution and non-destructive character, essential in many diverse
fields, particularly for monitoring cellular pathway of undesirable
environmental pollutants and pathogens; as well as desirable mitigating
functional nanostructures. The project embodies an integrated educational plan
focused on development of teaching modules in nano-bio-mechanics, hand-on-
laboratories and classroom tutorials. It will include UG and RET (research
experience for teachers) project modules correlated with research goals. The
educational and outreach objectives will be achieved by hand-on, team experience
to promote active and collaborative learning; with focus on recruiting (and
retaining) traditionally under-represented students though MIN (Minority
Internships in Nanotechnology) program. Successful realization of project goals
has important implications for generating intellectual property (IP) of value
for entrepreneurship and licensing opportunity; thereby helping create/retain
high-technology jobs in the upper mid-western region of the US.