* 0928936
* Multi-objective Robust Stochastic Planning and Scheduling of Healthcare Service Providers
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Debra DaRosa, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Diwakar Gupta
* 08/31/2014
* USD 460,977.00

This grant provides funding for developing novel models and methods for
planning, scheduling, staffing, and assignment (PSSA) problems that have
multiple objectives and are unpredictable because of future uncertainty. Such
problems arise frequently in the healthcare industry, which would be the focus
application area. Examples of multiple, often competing, objectives are: patient
safety and satisfaction, cost of service, continuity of care, educational goals
of the residents, and staff satisfaction. Examples of uncertainty are patient
workload and service times. Realistic mathematical models will be developed for
such problems for healthcare professionals incorporating the unique features of
this setting. A particular focus will be on medical resident scheduling.
Computational methods will be developed for solving these models. In particular,
heuristic methods will be developed for quickly identifying good candidate
solutions for such problems. These methods will be tested on realistic data from
the healthcare setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this
research will enable healthcare providers to improve work flow and to make
utilize the skills of the provider's medical staff. Improved training schedules
of medical school residents would be possible, while meeting their residency
requirements. Patient satisfaction will improve as continuity of care is
enhanced. The computational methods developed for solving problems arising in
healthcare will also be useful for stochastic multi-objective integer
programming models arising in a wide variety of application areas including
production planning, supply chain management and vehicle.