* 0928315
* Laser Machined Vascular Wall Engineering for Blood Vessel Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* John Lannutti, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 08/31/2014
* USD 379,834.00

The objective of this research award is to investigate "vascular wall
engineering" (VWE) using a highly synergistic combination of electrospinning,
ultrafast femtosecond laser machining and biological integration. These unique,
multi-scalar grafts meet the structural and biological requirements normally
supplied by human vascular tissues. By studying the fundamental phenomena
inherent to each distinct, contributing process, the resulting grafts will be
tailorable and can modulate cell adhesion and, ultimately, the clotting response
that normally prevents long-term function of synthetic vascular grafts.

VWE that integrates synthetic materials with living cells within biomechanically
capable, 3D-structured vascular grafts is desperately needed. The inherent
compositional, manufacturing and multiscalar flexibility of this process
ultimately allows widespread, rapid reproduction of natural structures.
Successful VWE will provide broad treatments for patients having a variety of
serious clinical disorders. By studying and integrating two distinct forms of
material processing with biomedical engineering, the opportunity exists to
create a highly capable platform technology for future manufacturing. This
research will support two PhD-level graduate students whose training is
essential to the future competitiveness of the US in the domain of biomedical
innovation. It also provides a research context continuing the involvement of
under-represented minorities at both the high school and undergraduate levels. A
presentation entitled ?Tissue Engineering the Human Body? will be developed for
use in the Center of Science and Industry?s COSI Academy, a program for aspiring
14 to 18 year-old scientists and engineers.