* 0928406
* BEACON: BErmuda ocean Acidification and COral reef iNvestigation
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Nicholas Bates, Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences (BIOS), Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 09/30/2013
* USD 851,025.00

Ocean acidification owing to anthropogenic emission of CO2 is a significant and
imminent threat to marine calcifying organisms and ecosystems such as corals and
coral reefs. As a result of future ocean acidification, i.e., increasing
seawater CO2, and decreasing pH, carbonate ion concentration [CO3], and
carbonate saturation state, it is likely that marine calcifiers will have
difficulty growing their shells and skeletons of calcium carbonate (CaCO3) at
their present rates. Dissolution of carbonate sediments and structures are also
likely to increase, and could ultimately exceed calcification and CaCO3
production, leading to a transition from net accumulation to a net loss in
carbonate material of individual coral colonies, coral communities and coral
reef ecosystems. Because of Bermuda's relatively high-latitude location (32Â° N),
the annual average surface seawater [CO3] is lower in Bermuda than regions
closer to the tropics. As a consequence, the Bermuda coral reef is likely to
experience critical [CO3] values and net dissolution before its tropical
counterparts as a result of continued ocean acidification. Furthermore, a
natural gradient in [CO3] exists along the Bermuda reef with environmental
parameters such as, light, temperature, and nutrients being near identical. This
gradient allows for unique cross-comparisons of calcification of individual
calcifiers and calcifying communities under different [CO3] in a natural
environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this study, researchers at the Bermuda
Institute of Ocean Science (BIOS) will launch the BEACON project to further our
understanding of the consequences of ocean acidification to the process of
calcification and CaCO3 production at three different spatial scales including
(1) individual coral colonies, (2) local reef communities, and (3) regional
coral reef ecosystems. They will conduct (1) in situ and in vitro experiments to
assess growth and evaluate net calcification of individual coral colonies of
three different species common to Bermuda and the Caribbean exposed to different
[CO3] under both natural and controlled experimental conditions; (2) diel and
quasi-lagrangian calcification experiments to evaluate net calcification of
local reef communities and in moving water masses along the natural [CO3]
gradient existent on the Bermuda platform; and (3) time series data collected
across the Bermuda platform and offshore, to evaluate net calcification and
CaCO3 production of the Bermuda coral reef ecosystem and platform over seasonal
and annual cycles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts : This project will
provide fundamental data on the consequences of ocean acidification to coral
reefs on different temporal and spatial scales. Combined, knowledge at each of
the scales will contribute to an improved understanding of this problem in a
broader context, i.e., the effect on coral reefs as a global entity and role in
the global carbon cycle during past, present and future seawater chemical
conditions. As the meaning implies, the research team envisions BEACON to serve
as a guiding light to assist researchers and policymakers in framing future
strategies and making decisions regarding the management of coral reefs and CO2
emission policies in order to establish CO2 stabilization targets. Scientific
understanding and research products from the project will be specifically used
in the BIOS explorer program, CoE POGO ocean acidification module, and the coral
reef ecology class taught at BIOS. It will also contribute to developing the
research and technical skills of one graduate student and one research
technician at BIOS, and will include the involvement of interns and NSF REU
fellowship students each year of the project.