* 0928665
* Greater Birmingham Mathematics Partnership Phase II Research
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Rachel Cochran, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 08/31/2013
* USD 2,099,967.00

The Greater Birmingham Mathematics Partnership: Phase II (GBMP-2) project is a
Partnership among the University of Alabama at Birmingham, as the lead
institution, Birmingham-Southern College, and seven core Partner school systems:
Fairfield City Schools, Homewood City Schools, Hoover City Schools, Jefferson
County Schools, Shelby County Schools, Tarrant City Schools, and Trussville City
Schools. The Mathematics Education Collaborative serves as a supporting Partner.
This Phase II effort builds upon successes and lessons learned in the Phase I
GBMP targeted work. The focus of GBMP-2 is on bringing to scale the
implementation of inquiry-based instruction to produce significant improvement
in student achievement. Teachers participate in professional development that
deepens mathematics content and pedagogical knowledge and improves mathematical
dispositions. GBMP-2's intent is to demonstrate that the gains in student
achievement shown in Phase I in high implementing grade levels can be brought to
scale in participating schools in grades 6-8. The end result of this Phase II
work is statistically significant improved student achievement in classrooms of
teachers of mathematics who create an inquiry-based learning environment that
supports learning challenging mathematics.

GBMP-2 seeks to establish "replicability and generalizability" in relation to
research questions associated with student achievement and with bringing
implementation to scale. The research design investigates the following
questions: How does the achievement of students in classrooms with a high level
of implementation of inquiry-based instruction compare with the achievement of
students in classrooms with a moderate or low level of implementation of
inquiry-based instruction? To what degree does exposure to a high level of
implementation of inquiry-based instruction reduce discrepancies in
disaggregated student achievement data? To what degree does active participation
in professional learning communities that focus on the implementation of
inquiry-based pedagogy and aligned assessment affect instruction and assessment
in the classroom? To what degree does a support structure that includes an
inquiry-based curriculum and the support of administrators, colleagues, and
parents affect the extent and depth of implementation of inquiry-based
instruction within a middle school? What conditions are necessary to bring
implementation of inquiry-based instruction to scale across middle schools with
diverse demographic variables?

The GBMP-2 model for bringing the inquiry-based teaching and learning to scale
engages teachers, principals, superintendents, parents, and university STEM and
education faculty all in support of middle grades learners. Teachers of middle
grades mathematics in participating schools take two, nine-day summer courses in
mathematics in addition to those taken in Phase I, from a list of seven
challenging, inquiry-based mathematics content courses. They actively
participate in school-based professional learning communities focused on
implementing inquiry-based pedagogy and aligned assessment. Principals of
participating schools attend administrator sessions in support of creating
instructional environments that foster learning rigorous mathematics by all
students. Partner district superintendents provide inquiry-based curriculum and
access to student achievement data. Parents are involved in Community
Mathematics Nights to promote understanding and support of their learners
through five audience-participation sessions. Mathematicians and mathematics
educators participate in the courses as students and as instructors and revise
university mathematics courses to employ the GBMP definition of challenging
courses and curriculum, which is a focus on: big mathematical ideas; inquiry and
reflection; oral and written communication; and developing productive
disposition.