* 0928923
* GOALI: Defect Detection Microscopy: Microstructure Design for Formability of Wrought Magnesium Alloys
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Raja Mishra, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 07/31/2013
* USD 337,937.00

This research project will build a framework for the design and manufacture of
metal microstructures containing fewer damage-sensitive features, with
subsequent improved ductility and formability. An enabling technology, Defect
Detection Microscopy (DDM), will be developed in order to detect large numbers
of defect sites in deformed polycrystalline materials in reasonable experimental
times. Structure parameters (recovered via DDM) in the regions of critical
defects will be correlated with defect type to determine robust Failure
Initiation Parameters (FIPs). Once these correlations are known, an inverse
approach, already developed for microstructure sensitive design of defect
insensitive elastic and plastic properties, will be applied to the framework to
improve defect-sensitive properties. This work will be undertaken in
collaboration with General Motors Research Laboratory, and will focus on
improved ductility and formability of magnesium for the manufacture of
lightweight automotive structures. &lt;br/&gt;The introduction of lightweight
materials into the US auto industry is a key national objective that will
benefit significantly from this work. Current production methods for fabricating
magnesium autobody panels require high temperature processing, preventing the
use of magnesium as a viable lightweight alloy for high-volume automobile
production. If the aims of this project are met, DDM will not only open the way
for cost effective, low temperature, application of magnesium to improve vehicle
fuel efficiency in the auto industry, but will also serve as an enabling
technology in the study and development of a much broader range of damage-
sensitive material applications (such as toughness and fatigue) critical to US
industry in general. The proposed interdisciplinary activity also brings
together expertise from several traditional fields including mechanical
engineering, manufacturing science, engineering design, materials science, and
applied mathematics. This will have a significant impact on the development of
skilled human resources in emerging science and advanced technology
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;