* 0928741
* Collaborative Research: GEOTRACES N Atlantic Section, shipboard and shorebased determination of key trace elements
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2009,11/30/2012
* Christopher Measures, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Simone Metz
* 11/30/2012
* USD 200,286.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The international GEOTRACES program has been developed to produce a global
framework of key trace elements and isotopes that will describe the contemporary
distributions of these properties in the ocean. This information can then be
used to constrain models of the processes and fluxes of biogeochemically
important elements and key tracers that frame flux processes and
transformations. Scientists from the University of Hawaii and the University of
Miami Rosenstiel School of Marine and Atmospheric Science will participate in
the first GEOTRACES cruise to the North Atlantic and determine on board ship
dissolved iron, aluminum, manganese, and zinc concentrations using Flow
Injection Analysis. These on-board analyses would enable them to identify and
rectify any sampling equipment problems and/or adapt the sampling strategy for
unexpected features in the water column. In the laboratory, the samples would be
reanalyzed for these elements as well as Cd by inductively coupled plasma mass
spectrometry to calibrate the shipboard data sets, fill in gaps in the shipboard
analyses, and provide quality control on the accuracy/precision of the
measurements. Determining the concentrations of these elements should
significantly improve our knowledge of how global ocean biogeochemical cycles
operate, allow for a more accurate prediction of the role of the atmosphere in
providing biogeochemically important trace elements to the surface ocean, and
the mechanisms by which they are transferred to the interior of the ocean. This
research will also provide an understanding of the sensitivity of trace element
distributions to changing environmental conditions. One postdoc from the
University of Hawaii and one graduate student from Rosenstiel School of Marine
and Atmospheric Sciences would be supported and trained as part of this project.
It is anticipated the postdoc and the graduate student would participate in the
multi-institutional, multi-disciplinary GEOTRACES cruise in the North Atlantic.