* 0928821
* Targeted Infusion: Acquisition of a 90-MHz FT-NMR Spectrometer to Enhance Current Curriculum and Research in Order to Achieve ACS Accreditation in the Chemistry Program at AAMU
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Razi Hassan, Alabama A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2011
* USD 149,420.00

Alabama A&amp;M University seeks to acquire a 90-MHz Fourier Transform Nuclear
Magnetic Resonance (FT-NMR) Spectrometer for the program in Chemistry to develop
and enhance undergraduate student research, as well as develop and disseminate
NMR modules to enhance chemistry program curricula. The Chemistry program seeks
to gain approval from the American Chemical Society - Committee on Professional
Training. To gain ACS-CPT approval, university chemistry programs must have a
functioning NMR spectrometer that undergraduates use in instruction and
research. With this instrumentation, STEM students at Alabama A&amp;M will have
hands-on experience with a powerful research instrument and will be better
equipped to matriculate to graduate school or to enter the scientific and
technological workforce. This project seeks to increase the number of minority
Chemistry graduates and thus will be an asset to the surrounding scientific and
research communities in Huntsville and northern Alabama.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed activity will improve the undergraduate
research program, and offer course enhancements and laboratory experiments that
previously were not available. These efforts will result in contributions to
biodiesel analysis, and the structure and reactivity of ozonized unsaturated
fatty acids. Additionally, new teaching paradigms will be developed that can be
applied to all academic STEM programs.