* 0928352
* Global Ecosystem Response to Changing Light Environments and the Implications for Climate Feedbacks
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Andrew Oliphant, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2012
* USD 162,799.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Productivity of terrestrial ecosystems through photosynthesis represents the
largest single planetary annual carbon flux, accounting for about 120 gigatons
of carbon per year. Recent research into the role of light in ecosystem-scale
photosynthesis has revealed a significant enhancement of carbon uptake under
conditions of diffuse light, where light has been scattered by clouds and
aerosols. This enhanced diffuse-use efficiency (DUE) can make a significant
difference in annual gross primary production (GPP), and in the case of volcanic
aerosols has an observable global impact on atmospheric carbon dioxide
concentrations. It is not known how universal the DUE is, however, as well as
how it varies across ecosystem types, hydroclimates, and light regimes or how
large the global terrestrial GPP enhancement is due to diffuse light. As a
result, researchers are unsure what impact future changes in light conditions
might have on the global carbon budget and ultimately atmospheric concentrations
of carbon dioxide. The objectives of this project are to produce a ground-up
estimate of the net global DUE; to investigate the geographic variability in DUE
as a function of ecosystem characteristics, climate, and light regime; and to
estimate potential carbon feedbacks under scenarios of future changes to
regional light environments. This will be accomplished through analysis of a
dataset of more than 200 carbon dioxide flux tower sites around the world, each
providing multiple years of 30-minute carbon fluxes, radiation and
meteorological data. This new global dataset is the product of large
contributions by hundreds of researchers around the world and covers all major
ecoregions, most climate classes, a latitudinal range of 110 degrees, and all
the continents except Antarctica. Analysis will first involve a site-by-site
parameterization of the DUE primarily using carbon fluxes and solar radiation
data. These will be synthesized with a spatial ecoregion model to estimate the
magnitude of the global DUE and will be analyzed with ecosystem, climate, and
light attributes to help understand the geographic distribution and mechanisms
controlling DUE. A global spatial model of DUE parameterizations also will be
combined with scenarios of cloud and aerosol change to approximate the global
carbon budget impacts of future changes in light regimes.

This project will provide foundational parameterizations of an important carbon
budget control for use in ecosystem-climate models. This will improve basic
understanding of the mechanisms controlling DUE and the carbon budget
implications, including atmospheric concentrations of this important greenhouse
gas. This will lead to future accounting of this important feedback in global
climate models, which is critical for understanding ecosystem responses to
environmental change and for improved prediction of future climates. The project
will provide education and teaching opportunities for students from
traditionally underserved communities, and it will provide valuable information
and insights for environmental researchers and policy makers.