* 0928416
* Collaborative Research: Targeting Observations of Tropical Cyclones using Cooperative Control of Unmanned Aircraft
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Derek Paley, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 08/31/2013
* USD 275,001.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this project
is to construct an analytical framework to reduce uncertainty in forecasts of
hurricane intensity by optimally targeting a coordinated observing network of
unmanned aircraft using ensemble-based adaptive sampling and coordination of
sampling trajectories. An ensemble-based theory combined with serial adaptive
sampling and rapid assimilation updates will be employed for the first time to
yield probabilistic flow estimates and optimal sampling configurations. A new
theory in decentralized motion coordination will be developed to account for
spatially and temporally variable flow fields that exceed the platform speed
relative to the flow. The framework will be evaluated using a hierarchy of
hurricane models to assess improvements in probabilistic forecasts of the flow.
The proposed research will achieve theoretical advances broadly applicable to
environmental sampling, including ensemble-based assimilation of near-continuous
data, ensemble-based adaptive sampling, and decentralized coordination of
unmanned platforms in dynamic flow fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
significance of this research project lies in its potential to improve hurricane
forecasts by integrating next-generation weather prediction models with novel
strategies for adaptive motion coordination of multiple unmanned aircraft.
Better forecasts and reduced uncertainty in hurricane intensity prediction lead
to reduced loss of life and property via improved emergency management
decisions. Intensity forecasts are dependent on the assimilation of observations
of pressure, wind velocity, and temperature at altitudes lower than manned
aircraft can safely fly. Small, unmanned aircraft can fill this important gap in
observation data by flying at altitudes as low as one hundred meters. A
coordinated team of unmanned aircraft can further reduce the uncertainty in
intensity forecasts by collecting low-altitude observations in a prescribed
spatial distribution. The project will also provide undergraduate and graduate
students with a unique training opportunity at the intersection of atmospheric
science and dynamical control systems.