* 0928121
* Collaborative Research:  Laboratory and Theoretical Studies of Mineral Aerosol Heterogeneous Interactions with Mixtures of Atmospheric Gases at Relevant Temperatures and Humidities
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Courtney Hatch, Hendrix College
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 08/31/2013
* USD 168,700.00

The objective of this project is to determine the heterogeneous reactivity of
natural mineral aerosol components, representative of chemically-processed and
freshly-emitted mineral aerosol, with single atmospheric gases and with gaseous
mixtures over atmospherically relevant temperature and humidity ranges. A low-
pressure, low-temperature Diffuse Reflectance Infrared Fourier Transform
Spectrometer (DRIFTS) equipped reaction chamber will be used to carry out
laboratory studies. The chamber system allows for in situ, simultaneous gas- and
condensed-phase measurements of the heterogeneous uptake of reactive gases and
gaseous mixtures on thin films of mineral components representative of those
observed in the atmosphere. Heterogeneous uptake will be studied experimentally
as a function of temperature, relative humidity and reactive gas concentration.
Associated theoretical studies will (a) complement experiments by interpreting
infrared spectra and identifying intermediate and terminal adsorbed reaction
products, providing additional mechanistic detail, (b) model electronic
properties of the mineral dust components studied and determine the effects of
metal impurities on surface reactivity, and (c) determine how heterogeneous
reactions on mineral dust surfaces alter these electronic
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results of the studies will provide important
mechanistic, kinetic and thermodynamic details needed for incorporation into
current atmospheric chemistry models in order to more accurately model the
effects of heterogeneous reactivity (impacts on tropospheric chemistry), surface
composition (impacts on health, climate and further reactivity) and water
adsorption (impacts on visibility and climate) in the Earth's atmosphere. The
work will extend beyond previous studies of mineral dust aerosol heterogeneous
chemistry that were limited to heterogeneous uptake under dry conditions, room
temperature and in the presence of only a single reactive gas. The project will
foster a unique partnership between a large university and a small liberal arts
college. This relationship will cultivate experiential learning via active
educational research opportunities for undergraduate students and aid in the
recruitment of well-trained, science-oriented students at the undergraduate and
graduate levels. Beyond traditional dissemination, research results will be
incorporated into undergraduate teaching curricula at Hendrix College.
Additionally, hands-on workshops and laboratory experiments will be conducted at
Hendrix College using the DRIFTS system.