* 0928797
* Implementation Grant of Enhancement, Enrichment, and Excellence in Mathematics and Science (E3MaS)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2016
* Carl Johnson, Southern University New Orleans
* Continuing Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2016
* USD 1,824,903.00

ABSTRACT HRD 0929092&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Southern University at New Orleans
(SUNO) is strengthening undergraduate recruitment and retention activities in
the STEM disciplines. Their goals are being achieved through several
interrelated activities such as: (1) improving the quality of incoming high
school students through Summer Enrichment Program (SEP), Early Career Awareness,
Science Fair and Algebra tutorials, (2) developing high school mathematics and
science teachers through content enhancement workshops, Summer Enrichment
Program and software and technology training, (3) improving the quality of
undergraduates through scholarships, learning center support, research
mentoring, placement in summer internships, and GRE preparation, (4)
implementing an aggressive faculty development through peer mentoring, seed
grant award for research development, and sponsorship to HBCU research
consortium workshops, and (5) enhancing curriculum through infusion of algebra
to science learning, instituting Computer Aided Learning (CAI) software in
mathematics and science courses, and developing an environmental awareness
elective for all majors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The expected project outcomes
include: (1) increased STEM graduation; (2) increased faculty participation in
research, publications, and grants writing; (3) enhanced quality of
undergraduate research experiences; (4) strengthened partnerships with academic
institutions and research labs; (5) increased use of technology in teaching and
research in all STEM disciplines; and (6) increased numbers of STEM students
completing the path from high school through college to graduate school. This
proposal builds on the successes of the previous HBCU-UP grant, which resulted
in significantly increasing student research and summer internships, enrollment
in graduate schools, and graduation rate in STEM disciplines. The project team
anticipates that this project will enable SUNO to regain some of the ground lost
in STEM disciplines due to the impact of hurricane
Katrina.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project leadership includes Dr. Joe Omojola,
Professor of Mathematics and Physics, who was honored with the distinguished
2006 Presidential Award for Excellence in Science, Mathematics, and Engineering
Mentoring (PAESMEM), given in an award ceremony at the White House.&lt;br/&gt;