* 0928053
* PRISM:  Mathematics in Life Sciences
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2015
* George Smith, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 07/31/2015
* USD 2,266,432.00

Intellectual merit of the proposed activity: The overall goal of this PRISM-
funded project is two-fold: to recruit mathematically talented undergraduates
into science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) disciplines, and at
the same time to integrate mathematics more thoroughly into the introductory
STEM curriculum, especially in the life sciences. Our program takes advantage of
two key undergraduate programs that are already well-established at MU: the
Freshman Interest Groups (FIGs) that are centered in the Freshman residence
halls, and the Life Science Undergraduate Research Opportunity Program (LS-
UROP). A new Mathematics in Life Sciences (MLS) FIG with 20 entering freshman
(the MLS scholars) per year will be established in the Discovery residence hall;
the students will live together during their freshman year and take an
integrated curriculum of three courses developed by the MLS faculty in their
first semester. That curriculum, in conjunction with a weekly Proseminar and
other FIG activities and services, will create a learning community encompassing
both faculty and scholars, with salutary effects on student retention and level
of academic engagement. Building on that learning community, students will pair
with faculty (both MLS faculty and other professors) for mentored independent
undergraduate research projects that will start in the summer under the LS-UROP
(with grantfunded internship stipends) and continue through both semesters of
the Sophomore year. Admission to the MLS program will be in the form of a
scholarship, which will include automatic enrollment in the MLS FIG, the summer
stipend, and in some cases academic year funding for all four college years.
Although the MLS academic activities proper will end at the end of the scholars'
sophomore year, their subsequent progress will be followed closely in order to
assess critically the degree to which the program is successful in recruiting
students who go on to get a degree in a STEM discipline. The program includes a
vigorous effort to recruit students from underrepresented groups, exploiting for
this purpose collaborative relationships MU in general and the MLS faculty in
particular have establish with high-needs high schools over many
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts resulting from the proposed
activity: Mathematics is becoming increasingly integral to all STEM disciplines,
especially life sciences. If successful, the MLS program would demonstrate how
learning communities like MU's FIGs can be used to integrate mathematics more
thoroughly into the introductory STEM curriculum, and enable beginning students
to engage in a scientific enterprise in which mathematical facility is a core
skill. We are betting that programs like this will be outstandingly successful
not only in attracting able students who might otherwise choose non-STEM majors,
but also in encouraging those students to complete STEM degrees. The assessment
component of the MLS program will provide rigorous measures of the degree to
which this aspiration is realized in fact.