* 0928847
* Louisiana Math and Science Teacher Institute
* EHR,DRL
* 08/15/2009,09/30/2015
* Gary Byerly, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 09/30/2015
* USD 4,999,814.00

The Louisiana Math and Science Teacher Institute (LA-MSTI) is a Partnership that
includes the Louisiana State University &amp; Agricultural and Mechanical
College (LSU) as Lead Institution, the East Baton Rouge Parish School System and
the Iberville Parish School System as Core Partners, and the Louisiana
Department of Education and numerous other school districts in the Baton Rouge
area as Supporting Partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The LA-MSTI establishes a
special track for secondary-teachers within the Master's of Natural Sciences
(MNS) degree program in the LSU College of Basic Sciences. It is based on a new,
challenging and unique content-focused curriculum that develops science and
mathematics Teacher Leaders for grades 7 - 12. The Partnership also creates new
job categories and career paths for these Teacher Leaders, in which they work
among their teacher-colleagues and with local and state educational leaders to
improve student learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ninety-six Teacher Leaders are
supported by the Partnership as NSF Fellows. The Fellows are experienced
mathematics and science teachers who are sponsored by the districts that employ
them. Sponsorship entails creating new job assignments with significant
responsibilities in coaching, mentoring or other capacities that leverage the
disciplinary content knowledge, pedagogical content knowledge, and leadership
skills developed in the MNS. The sponsorship model offers an innovative formula
for district-university cooperation, resulting in enhancements to the teaching
profession and increased student achievement. It allows both organizations--the
district and the university--to focus their capabilities in complementary ways,
respecting the traditional roles of the institutions, avoiding overlapping
authority, and at the same time, promoting positive change in
both.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The academic program includes 30 semester-hours of
graduate credit and a master's thesis. The program is completed over a period of
26 months, requiring six weeks of coursework during each of three consecutive
summers. Frequent contact is maintained during the two intervening academic
years, but is scheduled to avoid interfering with teaching duties. Candidates
attend in cohorts that promote collegiality and they develop a genuine
professional community. The thesis includes scholarship in secondary mathematics
and/or science education and is publishable in scholarly journals in these
fields. The program develops Teacher Leaders who can teach Advanced Placement,
International Baccalaureate and dual enrollment courses and the courses that
lead up to them, to make challenging courses and curricula available to all
students. It also equips Teacher Leaders to assist other teachers in offering
these courses and expanding access and opportunity for all students. The
leadership component includes a 3-credit-hour graduate-level leadership seminar,
with academic year follow-up focusing on coaching, school improvement, and data
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research component of the project involves
LSU Department of Psychology faculty, who investigate the following questions:
1) How can the psychological theories of expert performance and deliberate
practice help to conceptualize the qualities of effective mathematics and
science teachers, understand how exemplary teaching practices are acquired and
inform the design of programs that promote them? 2) How is knowledge that
supports effective teaching produced, controlled and propagated in teacher
networks? The researchers seek findings that will inform the design of academic
programs for teachers and their work-assignments in schools. They aim to
initiate an independent, self-sustaining research program that will produce
knowledge about professional development using the methodology of cognitive
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An exceptionally strong evaluation component works
in cooperation with the researchers to support the development of fundamental
knowledge of the social and cognitive aspects of structure and change in school
organizations, yielding knowledge that is broadly applicable to improving the
quality of educational programs and institutions and providing access for all
students.