* 0928744
* Vehicle-Infrastructure Integration Enabled Plug-In Hybrid Electric Vehicles for Energy Management
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Mashrur Chowdhury, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Konstantinos Triantis
* 07/31/2013
* USD 470,363.00

The focus of this project is to create solutions to reduce US dependence on
fossil fuels via anticipated increases in the number of Plug-in Hybrid Electric
Vehicles (PHEVs) for integration with a Vehicle Infrastructure Integration (VII)
system. Such VII systems can act as probes, providing detailed traffic data of
any VII monitored highway, which can be utilized by infrastructure agents, in
addition to receiving data from other sources, to provide real-time trip
information to these vehicles. PHEV-VII vehicles utilize these data to predict
acceleration profiles in their driving path for use in developing an energy
management control strategy. The objective of this research is to derive a
simple and flexible energy management control strategy for PHEVs based on its
predicted trip information to optimize fuel consumption and the total energy
used, to minimize the total cost of a trip. The research team will create a
traffic rerouting strategy, through a weighted multi-objective cost function,
which allows utilizing maximum road capacity to minimize the daily total energy
requirements, travel times and the daily total cost for this new PHEV vehicle
fleet. The project pursues fundamental research to develop a sound mathematical,
computational, and technological strategy to create an energy management
framework of PHEVs using predicted trip information provided in real-time. The
project involves (i) developing a framework for a comprehensive integration of
PHEVs with VII that is part of a flexible in-vehicle energy management strategy,
which uses an instantaneous optimization method; (ii) providing a robust and
responsive performance of PHEVs through traffic rerouting strategies; and (iii)
creating an integrated modeling, simulation and evaluation framework of energy
management, traffic operations and data communications. This project also
involves determining the percentage of PHEVs needed to substantially reduce
daily fuel consumption as a function of average distance traveled, fuel and
electricity and costs.

This research is expected to potentially reduce US reliance on petroleum and
other greenhouse gas-producing fuels, reduce pollution, save energy, minimize
the long term cost-of-living expenses, and improve driving conditions. This
project provides an opportunity to validate and implement integrated energy
management of PHEVs with traffic data from VII monitored highways in a real-
world setting. It will also address the important challenges of cost
constraints, the application to a large number of systems (potentially millions
of vehicles), and the need to achieve a degree of robustness consistent with
today's consumer expectations. At the most fundamental level, the impact of this
research lies in the design of a PHEV system with simultaneous objectives
related to in-vehicle energy management and trip predictability. The
investigators submit that the significant fundamental knowledge developed
through this project will serve as a beginning of future work that will yield
results very close to implementable action plans, within years, not decades. The
project will involve both graduate students who will be co-advised by the PIs,
and undergraduate students via Clemson University's Creative Inquiry initiative,
a multisemester commitment to work in a peer group, mentored by a faculty member
or a group of faculty members. Students involved in this effort will learn
critical thinking skills as well as gain a deep understanding of the methods of
on-line roadway traffic management. They will also engage in automotive
engineering research with the aim of minimizing the usage of fossil fuel and
maximizing the use of alternative fuels, maximizing trip predictability and
integrating these disciplines to attain energy sustainability and trip
reliability goals.