* 0928784
* Collaborative Research: Outwelling of Dissolved Organic Carbon from Salt Marshes
* NONE,NONE
* 12/01/2009,11/30/2012
* Jennifer Cherrier, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 11/30/2012
* USD 257,306.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

A key, transformative, but often overlooked, variable to understanding the
coupled terrestrial and marine carbon cycles lies in the transfer of carbon from
land to ocean. The Gulf of Mexico is a major source of uncertainty in the North
American carbon budget, and is characterized by a significant land-ocean
boundary, coastal wetlands, intertidal salt marshes, shallow estuaries and
dynamic carbon exchange across short distances. Very little is known about the
magnitude and fate of organic matter that originates in intertidal marshes and
enters the coastal ocean due the complexity of the tidal creek-marsh system, the
dynamic nature of intertidal and freshwater-driven fluxes, and the limitation of
terrestrial organic matter tracers.

In a collaborative effort between the University of Massachusetts-Boston, the
University of Georgia, Louisiana State University, and Florida Agricultural and
Mechanical University scientists will utilize high spatial and temporal
resolution observations along with discrete biogeochemical sampling and
spatially explicit modeling to assess the role of salt marshes in the global
carbon cycle. This research will allow scientists to identify the transport and
transformation mechanisms behind the carbon outwelling, and by quantifying its
bioavailability, assess the relative impact of outwelled salt marsh dissolved
organic carbon on coastal and marine food webs.

The results from this research will provide a broad range of interdisciplinary
(hydrology, biogeochemistry, modeling) learning opportunities for both the
graduate and undergraduate students from all of the participating universities.
The PIs will also develop an educational outreach module for K-12 students
through the COSEE-Florida, COSEE New England, and Watershed-Integrated Sciences
Partnership programs.