* 0928414
* GEOTRACES Atlantic Section: Total Dissolved Cobalt and Cobalt Speciation in the North Atlantic
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2013
* Mak Saito, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 02/28/2013
* USD 355,478.00

The international GEOTRACES program has been developed to produce a global
framework of key trace elements and isotopes that will describe the contemporary
distributions of these properties in the ocean. This information can then be
used to constrain models of the processes and fluxes of biogeochemically
important elements and key tracers that frame flux processes and
transformations. A scientist from Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution plans to
participate in the 2010 GEOTRACES cruise to the North Atlantic and measure
cobalt (Co) and Co speciation in surface samples and throughout the water
column. Samples will be taken from all physical and biogeochemical processes
that influence trace metals and their isotopes, namely strong meridional
advection, boundary scavenging and sources, aeolian deposition, and input of
intermediate waters from the Mediterranean and Labrador Seas. The resultant
dataset should provide insight into the sources, sinks and chemical speciation
of this element. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will greatly contribute to
the small amount of data that exists on cobalt in the marine environment and
provide a greater understanding of cobalt biogeochemistry. In regard to
educational impacts, this research will provide support for a post-doctoral
researcher as well as a graduate student. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;