* 0928740
* Development of Effective Approaches to the Large-Scale Aerodynamic Testing of Low-Rise Buildings
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Arindam Chowdhury, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 08/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)

The objective of this project is to develop innovative methods for simple and
accurate large-scale aerodynamic testing of low-rise buildings. The research
will seek answers to fundamental bluff body aerodynamics issues of interest in
civil engineering applications by investigating flow features and effects not
reproducible in conventional facilities. These include: effects of important
non-dimensional fluid mechanics parameters (e.g., high Reynolds numbers); flow
behavior around typical building edges; high-frequency and controlled low-
frequency turbulence fluctuations; sudden internal pressure changes; non-
stationary gusts; and sharp wind direction changes. The research will result in
substantial improvements in the estimation of aerodynamic response and provide
the prerequisites for developing realistic standard provisions on wind loads.
The objectives will be pursued through controlled and repeatable experiments at
large geometric scales, in a new state-of-the-art Wall of Wind (WoW)testing
facility capable of producing flow speeds of up to 63 m/s (140 mph). Active and
passive controls aimed at producing flows similar to real wind flows will be
designed on the basis of detailed wind speed data collected in hurricanes and
extratropical storms.

The research will develop the scientific underpinnings of low-rise building
design, resulting in sustainable communities with enhanced human safety and
reductions of property loss and insurance costs. The project will advance
discovery by performing cutting-edge research while promoting learning through
collaborations from K-12 to undergraduate and graduate students and community
college teachers. The activities will involve female students through the Women
in Engineering Projects Teams program, African-American students from Florida
Memorial University, and Hispanic students from Miami Dade College. A trained
workforce will be developed to transfer technology from academia to
applications. Results will be disseminated through journals and conferences, WoW
workshops, and reports to policy makers and committees, to advance the state of
the art and improve current practices and standards.