* 0928735
* Focus on Mathematics, Phase II: Learning Cultures for High Student Achievement
* EHR,DRL
* 07/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Albert Cuoco, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* James Hamos
* 09/30/2013
* USD 2,099,999.00

Focus on Mathematics (FoM) has, since 2003, been a project of NSF's Math and
Science Partnership program that engaged Boston University, the Education
Development Center, Inc., the University of Massachusetts at Lowell, and an
array of Massachusetts public school districts. Since its inception, FoM has
sought to improve student achievement in mathematics through programs that
provide teachers with solid content-based professional development sustained by
'mathematical learning communities' in which mathematicians, mathematics
educators, K-12 administrators, and teachers work together to put mathematics at
the core of mathematics education in grades 5-12. FoM Phase II builds on past
success while developing and disseminating new knowledge through a focused
research study on the mathematical habits of mind teachers use in their
professional lives. FoM is deepening its impact from earlier efforts by focusing
on the partnership's two highest need districts: Lawrence and Chelsea. Building
on mathematical learning communities established in the earlier work, FoM Phase
II is strengthening a corps of teacher leaders who will lead mathematics-focused
professional development activities, including school-based study groups and
partnership-wide seminars and summer institutes. FoM is broadening its impact by
increasing participation in the current districts, and engaging additional high
need districts and a community college. FoM Phase II also anticipates inviting
new higher education partners to join the partnership as contributing members of
these mathematical learning communities.

Building on experience gained through the earlier work, FoM is creating pathways
for teachers that begin with the development of strong mathematical habits of
mind in immersion institutes, pass through learning communities in the schools,
and lead to measurable change in teachers' classrooms and student achievement.
FoM is generating knowledge by developing a research program to investigate the
effects of teacher interactions along these pathways, including effects on
teaching and student achievement. As a tool for this research, the project is
developing assessments to measure mathematical habits of mind for teaching, and
is testing and refining these assessments through inter-rater reliability checks
based on classroom videotape observations by mathematicians and educators. It is
anticipated that the piloted instruments may be used and further developed by
other programs with similar goals. To disseminate knowledge gained through Phase
II, FoM will hold a national conference in the spring of 2011.

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).