* 0928608
* Global Environmental Change and Local Ecosystems: A Kansas MSP-Start Project for P-20 Students
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Joy Ward, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* James Hamos
* 08/31/2012
* USD 322,074.00

This MSP-Start project on global environmental change and local ecosystems is
working to enhance science education through the use of the Kansas Area Research
and Education Site (KARES), which provides an outdoor learning forum for P-20
students in the Topeka Public school district. This project includes partners
from the University of Kansas, Kansas State University, USD 501 (Topeka public
schools), community leaders, and state policy-makers. The long-term goal of the
Start project is to develop a full MSP Targeted proposal for 2011. The short-
term goals of this MSP-Start grant are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. To analyze the
efficacy of a state-wide collaborative model for improving science education in
Kansas.&lt;br/&gt;2. To develop strong collaborative partnerships for meeting
the long-term goal of a strong MSP proposal &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Intellectual Merit of this MSP-Start grant is in promoting strong partnerships
between public school teachers, university researchers, and government and
community leaders and then using these partnerships to develop a world-class
education project for students in P-20 that focuses on global environmental
change and local ecosystems in Kansas. The leadership team believes it is
critical that these students develop an awareness of environmental changes that
are occurring on a global scale, as well as that they understand how these
changes may influence the local ecosystems in which they live. Such concepts can
most effectively be conveyed through inquiry-based learning methods, while
simultaneously being age appropriate and meeting the Kansas Science Education
Standards. The key school district, USD 501, is a minority-serving district,
which commits to work with the university and the state to enhance science
education in the state through the development and study of an outdoor learning
center where students can engage in inquiry-based learning methods.