* 0928356
* The At Ease Project
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2009,03/31/2012
* Kris Kozuch, Springfield Technical Community College
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 03/31/2012
* USD 201,050.00

The At Ease Project at Springfield Technical Community College (STCC) is
designed to recruit, retain, and support returning combat veterans with
disabilities in selected Engineering Technologies Certificate of Completion
(COC) programs, including Laser Electro-Optics Technologies, Clean Water
Technologies, Energy Systems Technologies, Electronic Systems Technologies, and
Computer Systems Technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of The
At Ease Project is to create and test a replicable model of a STEM college
success program for returning combat veterans with disabilities. The following
questions will guide the exploration of the overall impact of intervention
strategies on combat veterans' success:&lt;br/&gt;1) How does the creation of
alliances between veteran's organizations and community college disability,
admission, and instructional services impact the recruitment and retention of
veterans with disabilities?&lt;br/&gt;2) What is the impact of participation in
a designated learning community on veterans with disabilities?&lt;br/&gt;3) What
types of intervention best serve veterans with disabilities?&lt;br/&gt;4) Does
participation in college success services for veterans with disabilities
influence enrollment and retention in STEM career
areas?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The At Ease Project creates a model that utilizes
"wrap-around" interventions, surrounding veteran students with a welcoming
environment; supportive faculty; intensive pre-enrollment preparation; ongoing
academic support through tutoring, mentoring, and advising; and networking
opportunities with other veterans. By testing various approaches, STCC will be
able to design and disseminate a model for community colleges that drastically
increases the rates of veterans with disabilities enrolling in and graduating
from STEM certificate programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential participants will
be referred from local veteran outreach centers, the VA Medical Center, and One-
Stop Career Centers. After enrolling in the project, participants will then
complete an eight-week session of Math Boot Camp and College Success Skills.
These two noncredit courses will prepare veterans for the required math entrance
exam and to familiarize them with what to expect on campus. Concurrently,
participants will be paired with peer mentors and will be invited to join the
STCC Veterans Support Group. Participants will then attend informational
sessions about careers in Engineering Technologies and the COC programs
available at STCC. COC programs are usually completed within one year, enabling
veterans with disabilities to move into the work force as quickly as possible.
Further support for At Ease participants will be provided by faculty members in
the selected COC programs who have received Universal Design Learning training
prior to the veterans with disabilities entering their classrooms, and ongoing
support from the project team and the Office of Disability
Services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the second year of the project, STCC will
work with other local community colleges to form a plan for submitting a
proposal to the NSF to create an Alliance for Students with Disabilities in STEM
and to continue the work started in this enrichment
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's external evaluation will be led by
Dr. Mary Moriarty, an Assessment Researcher at Smith College, who has evaluated
numerous projects and directed multiple NSF-funded and Education Department-
funded projects focusing on the successful academic advancement of post-
secondary students with disabilities. The At Ease Project will disseminate a
"best practices document," will present at the AHEAD national conference and the
Veterans SUMMIT, and will submit journal articles for publication in the
Disability Compliance for Higher Education and Journal of Post Secondary
Education and Disability.