* 0928609
* GOALI: Collaborative Research:A Mode-based Simulation Enabling Model and Methodologies for Geometric Variation and Tolerance Control
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Wenzhen Huang, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Christiaan Paredis
* 08/31/2014
* USD 170,000.00

The research objective of this GOALI award is to establish methods for modeling
geometric dimensioning &amp; tolerancing (GD&amp;T) to enable effective GD&amp;T
design simulation, and to develop methods for probabilistic GD&amp;T tolerance
analysis and synthesis. The research will result in a tolerance modeling
methodology that is capable of simulating random variations and incorporating
them into product function models for probabilistic design in the face of
manufacturing uncertainties. The research approach progresses from the
development of tolerance modeling for a single complex part, to the creation of
models capable of analyzing tolerances for multiple part assembly. Deliverables
include a unified framework for geometric tolerance modeling, geometric
tolerance representation and models on the various one-dimensional and two
dimensional geometric features, statistical model parameter estimation, and
tolerance analysis and synthesis methodologies for assembly, new curriculum
model creation, and laboratory development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful,
the results of this research will fill the vacancies in the state of the art of
computer aided tolerancing (CAT) techniques, provide practical solutions for
GD&amp;T tolerance design and quality assurance, and shift the traditional
dimensional tolerancing and heuristic GD&amp;T design into a new tolerance
design paradigm with a rigorous model and methodological basis. The results of
this research are generally applicable to many industries for high quality
product design, e.g. aerospace, Micro-Electro-Mechanical Systems (MEMS),
alternative energy (e.g., fuel cells), optical, automotive, and shipbuilding,
among others. The results will strengthen students' research skills, and build
faculty and students' experience, and publications. Results will be incorporated
into new educational curricula and lab practicum, thus providing hands-on
training for students in mechanical and industrial engineering. The results will
be disseminated widely via professional academic and industrial collaborative
networks, an industrial case study, seminars, publications, and professional
conferences.