* 0928662
* Evaluation of Ground Motion Scaling Methods for Nonlinear Analysis of Structural Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,02/28/2013
* Yahya Kurama, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 02/28/2013
* USD 122,000.00

The broad research objective of this award is to assess and develop earthquake
ground motion selection and modification (i.e., scaling) methods for the
nonlinear response history analysis of building structures. To achieve this
objective, the research will: (1) conduct a large number of small-scale shake-
table experiments of re-configurable nonlinear multi-degree-of-freedom
structural models; (2) investigate how different site conditions, hazard levels,
and structure characteristics affect the accuracy and efficiency of the scaling
methods; and (3) use the experimental ?benchmark? results to develop seismic
design guidelines and procedures for structures with regular and irregular
configurations. The shake-table tests will form the first experimental study on
nonlinear dynamic response considering a wide range of building characteristics
and ground motions. These deliverables will not only provide the evidence needed
to develop consensus on how an appropriate suite of records should be selected
and scaled in seismic design, but also establish the minimum number of records
needed to retain accuracy in the median engineering demand estimates with
minimum dispersion.

If successful, the project will represent a major advancement on the design of
reliable earthquake-resistant buildings with ancillary contributions to
engineering seismology, thus providing direct service to society by mitigating
loss of life and property from future seismic events. Prominent practicing
engineers and relevant professional organizations will be engaged to ensure
rapid dissemination of the results. The workforce impact will include one Ph.D.
student and several undergraduates, strongly focusing on underrepresented
groups. The project team will include researchers from a predominately-
undergraduate institution (Cal State - Sacramento). The researchers will also
utilize the project to educate future engineers through K12 activities. To
further enhance the broader impacts from the project, a new experiential
learning module will be developed to demonstrate basic concepts in earthquake
engineering using smaller versions of the nonlinear model structures on a
portable shake-table.