* 0928339
* Human Control of Bicycle Dynamics with Experimental Validation and Implications for Bike Handling and Design
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Mont Hubbard, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* George Chiu
* 06/30/2013
* USD 300,000.00

The research objective of this award is to develop experimentally validated
dynamic models of bicycles controlled by human riders. These models will be
similar to those developed in the aerospace industry to understand pilot/vehicle
interactions for the purpose of designing aircraft with desired handling
qualities. The bicycle and human rider is distinct from aircraft and automobiles
because most of the mass is in the rider, rather than the vehicle. This
distinction presents unique challenges to developing guidelines for the design
of bicycles with desired handling qualities and addressing this issue will be at
the core of the research. Instrumented bicycles will be designed, built, and
tested to validate the analytic models developed. Deliverables include validated
dynamic models of the bicycle system under human rider control, software tools
that can be used to further study bicycle dynamics and control, documentation of
research results, and engineering student education.

If successful, the results of this research will improve the fundamental
understanding of how humans interact with bicycles and will help to pave the way
to the design of bicycles for a wider population audience and for a wider range
of tasks. Systematic design of bicycles with more utilitarian purposes (as
opposed to recreation) may be made possible, which in turn will lead to lower
cost, healthier, and more sustainable modes of personal transportation. Graduate
students will be directly involved in the research as well as in the
dissemination of the results through classroom instruction, scientific
publication, and outreach activities at the K-12 level and local science
centers. The familiarity of children with the bicycle makes it an ideal
candidate to spark their interest in future engineering careers.