* 0928777
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Coding Commons: F/OSS Collaboration and the Ubuntu Labor Process
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2009,01/31/2011
* Carolyn Cartier, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Ezekiel Kalipeni
* 01/31/2011
* USD 9,392.00

Understanding how software functions to structure social and economic
possibilities is a crucial challenge to general social science scholarship and
also to more specialized interests concerned with the digital context of
knowledge-based economies, digital media and the Internet. This project analyzes
the underdeveloped arena of software design and production through a study of
the labor processes and everyday lives of software workers who contribute to
Ubuntu Linux, a Free and Open Source Software (F/OSS) project. F/OSS is
different from proprietary software because it is distributed with the source
code as well as with the right for anyone to edit, reuse, repurpose, and
distribute the software as they see fit. This research project examines the
geography of Ubuntu production cycles, which rely upon the collaborative labor
of several hundred full-time paid contributors and tens of thousands of unpaid,
volunteer contributors, all working around the globe. Volunteer and paid
contributors regularly attribute their dedication to F/OSS and to Ubuntu in
particular to personal satisfaction with being involved with the project.
Creating and reproducing these conditions plays a central role in the
organization and reproduction of Ubuntu labor processes. To understand the
implications of F/OSS production and labor organization and to shed light on the
future of the Internet and economic productivity generally, this project
examines the practices and work experiences of paid and unpaid contributors and
the role of enjoyment they feel in the development of the labor processes
involved. At the local scale, ethnographic research using in-depth interviews
and participant observation at places of Ubuntu will generate data on the
experiences and rhythms of Ubuntu work. At the global scale, observing and
participating in international collaboration, meetings, and discussions will
generate data on the structures and norms in Ubuntu. This project will reveal
F/OSS production as a network of real places and people who contribute to
forming an alternative system of exchange. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This doctoral
dissertation project will develop a theoretical and empirical model of the
significance of software grounded in a committed engagement, using
interdisciplinary scholarship to understand the social and economic implications
of the production of this software. The vast majority of web pages and emails in
the world are served by F/OSS, and F/OSS runs the massive data centers and back
offices of firms such as Google and Amazon.com. Yet it remains relatively
unknown that much of the software upon which these companies and the Internet
depend relies heavily on the unpaid labor of volunteers for its production. The
results of this project will show how the production process of this kind of
software will contribute to understanding globalizing capitalism. In doing so,
it will meet the need to evaluate the promises of F/OSS as a solution to
problems of intellectual property rights that restrict access to software,
problems of dependency upon proprietary software, and problems in the
international arena generated by state-controlled media. This project's analysis
of place and labor processes makes a significant contribution to understanding
how software shapes, mediates, and transforms our social lives and economies. As
a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide
support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
career.