* 0928577
* Toward More Reliable Mobility: Improved Decision Support Tools for Transportation Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Yu Nie, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Konstantinos Triantis
* 08/31/2013
* USD 536,483.00

This project aims to integrate travel reliability into transportation network
analysis methods by developing a coherent theoretical and methodological
framework for representing travel reliability in network models, incorporating
it in network routing and assignment formulations, and devising associated
solution algorithms. Several fundamental issues in transportation system
analysis under uncertainty will be addressed. First, the research team will
apply the concept of stochastic dominance, a well-developed theory in economics
and finance, to model heterogeneous risk-taking behavior in route choice, which
promises to clarify the connections among different risk-modeling tools and to
establish a more unified approach to model risk-taking behavior in route choice.
Secondly, theoretically-justified and observationally-validated stochastic
performance models will be developed to describe and predict travel time
distributions. In particular, novel routing algorithms will be designed to
compute and rank travel time distributions on a priori routes. Thirdly, the
project will create novel network models capable of assessing travel reliability
and evaluating its impacts at multiple levels of decision-making. Finally, the
research will shed light on how the travel reliability information provision and
traffic dynamics can be incorporated in reliability-based network models. Case
studies constructed using real data will be conducted to assess how these new
models can be used to predict future system performance, thereby supporting
planning and operations decisions sensitive to travel reliability.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Urban transportation systems are affected by uncertainties
of various sorts, such as accidents, extreme weather, man-made disasters,
special events and random travel and activity behavior. Taken individually or in
combination, these factors could adversely affect and perturb the quality of
transportation services. In particular, travel behavior researchers have
established that unanticipated long delays on highways typically produce much
worse frustration among motorists than "predictable" ones. Integrating travel
reliability into transportation network analysis methods thus presents a
pressing challenge that has motivated this research. Modeling tools produced
under this project are able to account for unreliability of travel times, its
effect on how travelers make travel decisions (route, departure time, mode,
etc.), and the implications for overall performance and service quality of
transportation infrastructure. Ultimately, the research will contribute to
enhanced urban mobility and better quality of life, through better time use and
more efficient activity participation and scheduling. The results from this
research will be integrated into teaching through different forms (curriculum
development, teaching tools, case studies, etc.) and thereby contribute to the
training of future transportation workforce. Through this project, a web-based
application of reliable route guidance will be developed and made available to
other researchers and the general public. Potentially, this tool will benefit
numerous motorists and freight and increase the public awareness on travel
reliability issues.