* 0928232
* Collaborative Research: The Role of Regenerated Nitrogen for Rocky Shore Productivity
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Catherine Pfister, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2013
* USD 282,804.00

A fundamental and persistent question in a multitude of ecosystems is the extent
to which new versus regenerated nutrients support ecosystem productivity. In
coastal marine systems, nitrate derived from upwelling (= new nitrogen) and
ammonium regeneration in coastal waters and sediments (= regenerated nitrogen)
are major nitrogen sources that fuel coastal ocean productivity. Because
inorganic nitrogen availability clearly regulates production in a large number
of areas, understanding nitrogen supply is essential. In open coast regions away
from river mouths, nitrate inputs are determined by large-scale physical
processes promoting upwelling of deep, nutrient-rich water including wind
direction and intensity. In contrast, regenerated nitrogen (mainly ammonium) is
generally the result of local animal and microbial processes. Along marine rocky
shores, where upwelling is typically used as a proxy for productivity, we know
very little about the dynamics of regenerated nutrients and their potential
contribution to productivity at larger scales; only upwelling is typically used
as a proxy for productivity. Associations of the abundant California mussel,
Mytilus californianus, with water nutrients, algal productivity, stable isotope
signatures, and microbial genetics indicate potentially strong regeneration of
nitrogen by these animals and suggest an important secondary role of nitrifying
microbes affiliated with these animals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project,
the investigators will quantify the relative contribution of regenerated
nitrogen on rocky shores through censuses and experiments across a gradient of
mussel abundance. They will use stable nitrogen and oxygen isotopes of ammonium,
nitrite, and nitrate to disentangle the contribution of different biological
processes versus upwelling to the nitrogen supply and uptake of rocky shore
regions. This includes both natural abundance and tracer addition studies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. Regenerated nitrogen supply, as opposed
to new nitrogen via upwelling, is a local process dependent upon an intact
animal community. However, mussels and other nearshore animals may be
particularly vulnerable to a changing thermal environment, toxic algal blooms,
and ocean acidification. Given the dramatic changes to the coastal nitrogen
cycle in recent years, and potential changes to currents, upwelling, ocean
chemistry, and El Ni√±o frequencies portended by global changes to our climate,
we to know the relative effect of local versus larger scale oceanic events on
the nitrogen cycle. The proposed work links biological interactions in situ with
its implications for coastal productivity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to
expected publications in high quality journals, educational activities will
continue to focus on graduate and undergraduate education and mentoring. The
proposal will fund two graduate students and two undergraduates per year. The
PI's will work closely with government (Olympic Marine National Sanctuary) and
tribal (Makah Tribe) representatives to communicate this research. We will also
work with Makah Museum Board of Trustees and the Makah Higher Education
Committee to identify Makah students as research assistants. All three PI's
teach broadly across their respective campuses, instructing almost every type of
undergraduate major.