* 0928494
* Collaborative Research: Exploration of the Nonlinear Dynamics of NEMS Carbon Nanotube Resonators
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Mohammad Younis, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 08/31/2012
* USD 163,633.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective
of the proposed work is to provide fundamental understanding of the nonlinear
dynamics of electrostatically actuated doubly-clamped carbon nanotubes,
including the effect of slack, and explore in depth the consequences,
advantages, and disadvantages of operating these devices in the nonlinear
regime. A major obstacle in the development of carbon nanotubes CNTs has been
the lack of knowledge of their dynamical behavior. Because of the rich
nonlinearities in these devices due to slack, mid-pane stretching, and
electrostatic forces, there is ambiguity and unanswered equations of how to
realize reliable devices of CNTs. To address these issues, theoretical and
experimental works are planned to study the dynamics of CNTs when excited by
small and large electric loads composed of a DC electrostatic load superimposed
to an AC harmonic load. Local dynamics issues that are vital for CNTs
researchers, such as predicting the nonlinear resonance frequencies of CNTs,
softening and hardening behaviors, hysteresis, and primary and secondary
excitations will be investigated. Global dynamics issues affecting the stability
of CNTs resonators, such as dynamic pull-in, snap through of tubes with slacks,
and basin-of-attraction analysis will be conducted. Analytical and numerical
methods including perturbation techniques, reduced-order models, and shooting
techniques will be utilized. Experimentally, various optical and electrical
methods to detect the resonance frequencies, monitor the tubes deflections, and
capture the onset of pull-in are proposed to enable comparison and validation of
the theoretical work. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcome of the proposed research
will allow more aggressive utilization of CNTs in useful applications despite
their nonlinear behavior since it will present the proper knowledge of how to
deal with it. On the other hand, new research avenues can be opened to
deliberately utilize the nonlinear dynamics of CNTs to gain unique features and
advantages. Exciting possibilities for operating NEMS CNTs in the nonlinear
regimes will be revealed, which can lead to discovery of novel sensors and
actuators. Further, this research should bridge the gap between experimental
measurements and theoretical modeling, which leads to correct calibration of
devices and accurate estimation for the physical properties of CNTs. This
research will provide excellent training experience for the graduate students
from both institutes (SUNY and Cornell). Also, it will train undergraduate
minority students through the NSF-funded Binghamton Success Program. Further, a
partnership will be established with the NSF-funded Cornell Nanofabrication
Facility and the Kavli Institute to create a Nano Wiki that will collect and
condense information on nanoscale device fabrication and measurement for broad
on-line open access resource to the national and international scientific
community. Funds will also allow partnership with the Cornell Institute for
Physics Teachers to develop new modules on nanomechanics for dissemination to
New York State high school teachers. &lt;br/&gt;