* 0928331
* A new high pressure liquid chromatography system for in situ measurements in marine pore waters
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Martial Taillefert, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 09/30/2013
* USD 666,302.00

The PIs request funding to develop a new underwater instrument based on high
pressure liquid chromatographic and voltammetric techniques to measure the
concentrations of pore wateranions, cations, and redox species in situ in marine
sediments at any water depth.

The instrument developed during this project will be the first to adapt HPLC
methods for the in situ geochemical analysis of pore waters in marine sediments
and couple this HPLC system to existing in situ electrochemical analyzers. This
instrument will benefit from the recent developments in microbore technology to
limit consumption of effluents such that it will be deployable for long periods
of time. This instrument will complement a number of commercial instruments
already available for in situ measurements in marine sediments. More
importantly, this instrument will for the first time provide a mean to determine
the vertical distribution of anions, cations, and redox species involved in
early diagenetic processes. Chloride is a chemical tracer that has been used to
trace mixing processes in estuarine sediments and phase separation in
hydrothermal systems. Nitrogen species can provide information on
denitrification, dissimilatory reduction to ammonium (DNRA), and nitrification
processes in sediments. Sulfate reduction is a significant terminal electron
accepting process in coastal sediments and near cold seeps that can deplete
sulfate from pore waters. Finally, calcium and magnesium are tracers of natural
organic matter remineralization processes, carbonate dissolution and
precipitation processes, and mixing of freshwater with marine waters.

Broader Impacts:

The PI will actively involve both undergraduate and graduate students in his
work here, as he has done in past studies. He will also incorporate the
technology he uses in his research into an undergraduate field studies class as
he has done in the past. This is good for the education of the students and good
for the marine science community. Both PI's are involved in K12 outreach
efforts.