* 0928278
* Collaborative Research: Deciphering the Reliability of Nano Ceramic Films on Polymer Substrates: A Mechanistic Study
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Teng Li, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 07/31/2012
* USD 203,017.00

The objective of this collaborative research is to explore the fracture and
fatigue mechanisms of nano ceramic films on polymer substrates under monotonic
and cyclic loadings. Functional nano ceramic films on polymer substrates are
emerging as key building blocks to enable promising technologies, such as
flexible electronics and next generation bioactive implants. The huge mechanical
mismatch and large mechanical loads lead to complex and rich fracture behaviors
of thin ceramic films on polymer substrates, which are far from well understood.
In particular, recent experiments showed fatigue damage of indium tin oxide
films on polymer substrates under cyclic loads, a phenomenon that cannot be
explained by conventional fatigue mechanisms. The future success of
abovementioned promising technologies is contingent to the mechanistic
understanding of the fracture and fatigue of nano ceramic films on polymer
substrates. In this project, a collaborative research framework (from analytic
modeling, simulations to in situ experiments) will be built to investigate the
yet-unexplored mechanisms that govern the mechanical reliability of nano ceramic
films on polymer substrates. &lt;br/&gt;The potential consequence of failure in
functional nano ceramic films on polymer substrates is significant in flexible
electronics and bioactive implants. The proposed research will offer fundamental
insights into the yet-unexplored mechanisms that govern the reliability of
flexible devices and bioactive implants, and enable more robust
nanomanufacturing strategies of these emerging technologies. By leveraging
cyberinfrastructure, the new knowledge from the project will be disseminated to
reach much broader audience, and a new generation of students will be equipped
with interdisciplinary perspectives.&lt;br/&gt;