* 0928602
* Minimization of Force Model Uncertainty for CNC Milling Process Improvement
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Robert Jerard, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Zhijian Pei
* 07/31/2014
* USD 212,000.00

The objective of this research is to reduce the uncertainty of machining models
through the use of wireless sensors embedded in the cutting tool. The approach
is to investigate methods for in-situ model calibration, performed with
sufficient frequency, such that model accuracy is maintained within acceptable
error bounds. Methods based on cutting power, time domain force and torque
signals, and frequency domain signals will be explored. New sensor technology
using wireless Bluetooth transmission of tool mounted sensors will be
investigated to measure cutting torque and force. Linearity, signal to noise
ratios, and cross talk will be evaluated. Time synchronization of the wireless
sensor data with the machine process data will be necessary to perform accurate
model calibrations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this research will
greatly improve the reliability of machine tools by giving them a self-knowledge
of their process capabilities. Methods for decreasing model uncertainty will
improve the utility of physics based models for computer numerical control
process planning leading to greater part quality and higher machining
efficiency. Machining strategies and cutting conditions (spindle speeds and
feeds) can be chosen to appropriately reflect the current capabilities of the
machine tool. Wireless sensors will be developed which will be broadly used in
both industry and academic research. This project is consistent with the goals
of the Manufacturing Engineering Laboratory at the National Institute of
Standards and Technology and the Integrated Manufacturing Initiative, a
public/private consortium of industry, academic, and government partners
designed to strengthen the nation's manufacturing community.&lt;br/&gt;