* 0928711
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Climate Science, Insurance, and the Modeling of Coastal Risk
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2009,01/31/2012
* Michael Watts, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 01/31/2012
* USD 15,000.00

Human-related climate change brings with it the possibility of more severe
tropical cyclones and storm surges as well as the promise of higher sea levels
and increasingly vulnerable coastal populations. These prospects pose enormous
problems for insurers and reinsurers by increasing their exposure to sudden
catastrophic loss on the order of hundreds of billions of dollars. The situation
creates practical problems for insurers underwriting weather or property risks,
because actuarial tables based on historical event frequencies cannot project
risk forward in a changing climate system. For such risk projections, the
insurance and reinsurance industries have come to rely on the expertise of
climate scientists rather than actuaries. This doctoral dissertation research
project will examine how an organized science like climatology is reoriented to
serve the specific needs of the private sector, how scientists and universities
become involved in these projects, and what material and geographic consequences
may result for insured property and populations. The doctoral student will
address these questions using methods that include in-depth interviews with
hurricane scientists, risk modelers, insurers, and reinsurers; extensive
observation at scientific and industry conferences; and statistical analysis of
economic and demographic data. An additional component of this research will be
a case study of the economic and regulatory debates regarding how tropical
cyclone risk should be measured and managed in the state of
Florida.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will examine the roles of scientists
and insurers in the transformation of risk management as society faces an
increasingly uncertain future climate. The researchers expect to demonstrate the
importance of the property insurance sector in reorganizing the built
environment in response to climate change. The project also will investigate the
effects of new risk modeling and pricing practices on the geographic and
socioeconomic distribution of insurance coverage. It will assess the magnitude
and geography of the insurance affordability problem, which has thus far only
been roughly estimated and acknowledged amidst larger policy proposals for
market-based property insurance overhaul. The knowledge of how storm
vulnerabilities are differentially distributed among the population through
geography, class, and other social structures will better inform assessments of
climate change adaptation, loss mitigation projects, and post-storm rebuilding
and relief efforts. The project's results will have implications beyond the
immediate regional context of the American Southeast, as the global community
increasingly relies on the expert opinions of scientists and the entrepreneurial
endeavors of the private sector to guide its response to climate change. As a
Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide
support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;