* 0928159
* Soil Structure Interaction in Geothermal Foundations
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,12/31/2012
* John McCartney, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 12/31/2012
* USD 495,093.00

&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act
of 2009&lt;br/&gt;(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The U.S. is currently
pursuing technologies to improve the energy efficiency of buildings. One
approach, which is the focus of this research, involves embedding geothermal
heat exchange systems within deep foundations to gain improved energy efficiency
of building heat pumps. Despite the potential cost savings gained through the
combined use of equipment and construction materials for both the foundation
support and heating/cooling systems, this approach is not without risk. The
thermal interaction between the inhabited part of a building and its subsurface
structural components may lead to both geotechnical and building system
concerns. For example, drawing excessive amounts of heat from geothermal
foundations may lead to ground freezing and potential surface heave, cyclic
expansion and contraction of foundation materials due to rapid fluctuations in
heat pump temperatures may lead to changes in side friction, and non-sustainable
heat exchange patterns can lead to a reduction in heat exchange efficiency
between the building and ground over time. A research approach involving
numerical simulations of the thermal, hydraulic, and mechanical interaction
between geothermal foundations and surrounding soils is being used to better
characterize these risks. The parameters for these simulations are being
determined using novel true-triaxial tests with temperature and hydraulic
control, and the results from the simulations are being validated against a
series of centrifuge modeling experiments on geothermal foundations under
different temperature and loading conditions. The validated simulation tool will
be used to provide practical design guidance to engineers to aid in defining the
appropriate heat exchanger geometric configuration, foundation size and spacing,
and building heat pump control conditions to gain both optimal heat exchange and
foundation performance for a given soil profile. Interaction with industry
partners (ADSC) will aid in the transfer of research findings to practicing
engineers and foundation contractors. This study is being used to augment
education at the CU Boulder through integration of topics from soil mechanics,
building heating systems, physical modeling and constitutive modeling; which
will provide new opportunities for broad-based training to students entering
this new field. Under-represented students will be recruited through cooperation
with established diversity initiatives at CU Boulder, as these populations are
particularly missing from the foundation engineering community.