* 0928867
* Mathematically Connected Communities - Leadership Institute for Teachers
* EHR,DRL
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2014
* Elizabeth Marrufo, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* John Haddock
* 12/31/2014
* USD 4,983,564.00

The Mathematically-Connected Communities (MC2)-Leadership Institute For Teachers
(LIFT) project - a partnership between New Mexico State University (NMSU) and
southern New Mexico school systems - responds to the needs of partner districts
that have embarked on full scale implementation of new mathematics curriculum in
recent years, yet lack the leadership on school campuses or in their districts
to support full enactment of a quality curriculum. MC2 -LIFT was designed by
mathematicians, education faculty and school district leaders in order to
develop a cadre of 60 teacher leaders who will have a deep conceptual knowledge
of K-12 mathematics, as well as the knowledge, skills and dispositions to
facilitate growth in mathematics teaching and learning environments in schools
or districts. The goals of the project are to: 1) Increase Teacher Leaders'
Knowledge of K-12 Mathematics; 2) Expand and Enrich Pedagogical Practices; 3)
Develop Intellectual Leaders; 4) Implement Institute Learning in School
Environments; and 5) Sustain Partnerships between Mathematicians, Education
Faculty and Districts.

MC2 -LIFT provides participating teachers with a two-year cycle of professional
development involving intensive summer study as well as an academic year program
that includes application of their learning in school or district settings. Each
semester and during the summer, courses are designed and team taught by an NMSU
mathematician and an educator, blending mathematical concepts with knowledge and
skills in pedagogy and leadership. Teacher Leaders come from all K-12 levels and
gain a new lens for learning mathematics by studying how concepts are vertically
articulated within the K-12 continuum, connecting within and across grades.
Institute participants are developing a deeper understanding of mathematical
concepts by understanding these connections. Then, by developing a range of
models and strategies to represent mathematical ideas, Teacher Leaders are able
to help other mathematics teachers differentiate their instruction and meet the
needs of diverse learners. Principals also receive professional development in
MC2 -LIFT, gaining an understanding of how to foster a culture of professional
learning in mathematics education on their campuses. Principals and Teacher
Leaders are collaboratively developing a vision for the Teacher Leaders' roles,
communicating expectations for professional learning among school staff and
routinely engaging in reflection and evaluation of the progress that their
schools are making towards teacher and student learning goals. Through
involvement in the MC2 -LIFT project, the graduate program in mathematics
education at NMSU is undergoing institutional change to include integrated
coursework and application of learning in partner schools, with mathematics and
education faculty collaborating to improve coursework for pre-service
undergraduate teachers.

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).