* 0928319
* GOALI:  Characterization, Modeling, and Optimization of Magnetic Pulse Welding Processes
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Gregory Chini, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 08/31/2013
* USD 408,364.00

The research objective of this Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with
Industry (GOALI) award is to create a fundamental understanding of the Magnetic
Pulsed Welding (MPW) process through a collaboration with an industrial partner
Magneform and UNH faculty members from Mechanical Engineering, Physics, and
Materials Science. While MPW has been used as a process for decades, the process
is typically implemented based on experience and trial and error
experimentation. The tasks of the proposed research are to experimentally
investigate axisymmetric MPW joints including measurement of the deformation; to
conduct materials testing of both the interface of the weld and the mechanical
properties of the final joint; to model the process with respect to the
electromagnetics, thermomechanical effects (which will allow for phase
transformation), and wave formation at the interface of the weld; and to
optimize the process parameters based on the experimental and modeling efforts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research will benefit
society at large through reduced weight of structures as dissimilar metals will
be effectively welded and thus lower weight components will be located in non-
strength critical areas. In addition, this research will add significantly to
the modeling and materials characterization during high rate deformation and
impact conditions, such as electromagnetic forming, ballistic impact, etc.
Collaborating with Magneform offers several advantages including the broad
dissemination of the results to industry. Graduate students will benefit from
the interdisciplinary nature of the research and incorporation of results into
several courses. Finally, Research Experience for Teachers participants will be
involved in the research and will create modules for high school classrooms
based on the Physics and magnetism aspects of the project. This high rate
deformation process will capture the attention and imagination of high school
students and potentially attract individuals from underrepresented groups to the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Materials
Processing &amp; Manufacturing (MPM) Program, of the Civil, Mechanical, and
Manufacturing Innovation (CMMI) Division,the Thermal Transport Processes (TTP)
Program, of the Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems
(CBET) Division and, the Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry
(GOALI) Program, of the Industrical Innovation and Partnerships (IIP)Divison,
all within the Directorate for Engineering (ENG).