* 0928807
* The Use of Energy Piles for Sustainable Energy
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Guney Olgun, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 07/31/2013
* USD 260,268.00

As global energy demands continue to rise, along with the production of harmful
greenhouse gases, there is a critical need for research to advance innovative
renewable green energy technologies. Geothermal energy, for instance, is a
renewable energy source whose use in the US has been limited mainly to western
regions where high ground temperatures near the surface have been exploited for
residential heating and production of electricity. With the development of new
technologies, we can exploit geothermal energy much more efficiently and broaden
its applicability to almost any geologic and climatic condition, including areas
where there is no geothermal heat source. That is, there is tremendous potential
in simply utilizing the relatively constant temperature of the ground (i.e.,
"geothermal energy") in the upper 30 m of the soil profile, about 55F (13C) in
most areas, to help regulate the temperature of buildings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will investigate the use of Energy Piles, a
new geothermal energy concept designed to efficiently access the constant
temperature of the ground for heating and cooling of buildings. In this new
concept, the foundation piles that are already in place for support of the
building are used conjunctively as geothermal cooling/heating elements. The
piles, typically 20 to 30 m long, are installed with circulation tubes that act
as heat exchangers where heat energy is circulated through the tubing with water
or antifreeze. Heat energy from the building is fed into the ground for cooling
in the summer and withdrawn from the ground for heating in the winter. The fluid
circulation is performed via a heat pump similar to those used in conventional
residential and commercial applications. Cost savings for heating and cooling
could be as much as 80% for buildings outfitted with Energy Piles, especially in
extreme climate regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pilot tests and limited
applications for major buildings have been recently completed in Japan and
Europe, respectively, but the Energy Piles concept is largely unknown. No major
systems of this type are currently being used the US. This research will develop
the data and expertise needed for wide-scale and efficient implementation of
this promising new technology. The project will involve development of a full-
scale field test section, advanced numerical modeling and a detailed cost-
benefit feasibility analysis to study key aspect of Energy Pile systems, such as
what factors affect their conjunctive performance as heat exchangers and as load
bearing foundation elements, how their performance varies with differing ground
and climatic conditions, and how they can be installed and operated most cost-
effectively. The main intellectual merit is that the findings could lead to
wide-scale implementation of a new alternative energy technology that is
currently being underutilized. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of broader impact,
the study represents an important new step toward the sustainable design of
"green" buildings that use near-zero energy for heating and cooling. In addition
to being an alternative renewable energy resource that reduces greenhouse gas
emissions, Energy Piles offer the added advantage of being applicable in any
climate or region, including those where wind and/or solar power have limited
effectiveness. The findings of this study will be disseminated to a broad
audience via journals, the Internet, and incorporated into academic courses and
the PIs' frequent professional shortcourses for ASCE, FEMA, FERC, and USACE.
Finally, there will be a diverse research team, including an ethnic minority, a
disabled person, senior and junior faculty and an undergraduate student
researcher.