* 0928819
* Phytoplankton Traits, Functional Groups and Community Organization: A Synthesis
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Elena Litchman, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2015
* USD 560,441.00

Phytoplankton account for half of global primary productivity and their biomass
and community composition significantly impact global carbon and other
biogeochemical cycles and ecosystem functioning. Explaining patterns of global
distributions of phytoplankton groups and predicting how phytoplankton
communities will re-organize under anthropogenic environmental change requires
knowledge of diverse eco-physiological traits defining ecological niches of
phytoplankton species. In this project, the investigators will assemble a query-
based database of diverse phytoplankton traits such as cell/colony size, growth
rates, resource acquisition and predator avoidance traits, among others. Data
for all available species and strains will be included. They will use the
database to answer fundamental questions in phytoplankton ecology such as: 1)
what traits exhibit trade-offs (pairwise and beyond) and what shapes are they?
2) What traits scale allometrically with cell/body size? Can scaling exponents
from first principles be predicted? What are potential limits to allometric
scaling as a way of simplifying the complex trait space that characterizes real
organisms? 3) What are trait differences among major functional/taxonomic groups
of phytoplankton and how much does taxonomy/phylogeny constrain particular
functional traits? 4) Are there differences in trait distributions between
marine and freshwater groups?

The investigators will also use the database to parameterize novel models of
phytoplankton community organization and evolution based on adaptive dynamics
approaches. They will use the models to explore how community structure emerges
under different environmental scenarios, given physiological constraints and
ecological interactions. Changes in elemental stoichiometry, size structure and
functional group distributions at different spatial and temporal scales will
also be examined.

The broader impacts of the project will benefit the scientific community as well
as provide broad educational experiences. The investigators will produce a
database of a diverse set of phytoplankton traits that will be made available to
the wide scientific community. The database will be used to parameterize models
of phytoplankton functional groups and explore mechanisms of community
organization under different environmental conditions, including global change
scenarios. By applying general ecological principles and novel ecoinformatics
and modeling tools to answer fundamental questions about phytoplankton
communities and biological oceanography, this project will span the
interdisciplinary boundaries and should, therefore, advance our understanding of
aquatic ecosystem functioning. The project includes training opportunties for a
graduate student and a postdoc. In addition, teachers from local schools will be
invited to work with the investigators in the summer to develop inquiry-based
educational modules on phytoplankton ecology and global change that will include
findings from this project. The results of this project will be disseminated
through publications in a wide range of journals covering ecological,
oceanographic and biogeochemical fields.