* 0928556
* GOALI/Collaborative Research: Understanding Cracking and Defect Formation During AlN Crystal Growth
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Antoinette Maniatty, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Siegmund
* 08/31/2013
* USD 247,498.00

CMMI - 0928556 - GOALI/Collaborative Research: Understanding Cracking and Defect
Formation During AlN Crystal Growth

This proposal will be awarded using funds made available by the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5), and meets the
requirements established in Section 2 of the White House Memorandum entitled,
Ensuring Responsible Spending of Recovery Act Funds, dated March 20, 2009. I
also affirm, as the cognizant Program Officer, that the proposal does not
support projects described in Section 1604 of Division A of the Recovery Act.

The objectives of this research are to i) gain an understanding of and ii)
create a predictive methodology for crack initiation and overall crystal quality
evolution for Aluminum Nitride (AlN) single crystals during processing. AlN has
outstanding electrical and thermal properties making it particularly well-suited
for high power, high frequency, energy efficient electronic and photonic
devices, such as light emitting diodes (LEDs) and laser diodes, but the use of
AlN is currently limited by the high production cost. Crystal IS, the industrial
partner on this proposal, has developed a new technology for growing large AlN
crystals - up to 50 mm in diameter. However, these large crystals often crack
due to stresses that arise when the material is cooled from its growth
temperature as high as 2300C. In this project, a team of experts in the fields
of stress measurement and simulation of loaded materials from Cornell and
Rensselaer will study AlN as a "structural" material. High energy X-rays will be
used to "see" the crystal structure of the AlN deep inside a test specimen as it
is loaded. By matching simulations to the experimental results, key temperature-
dependent mechanical properties, related to strength, stiffness and fracture
resistance will be determined. This information will be used in a crystal growth
process model to predict crystal quality for given growth conditions.

This work will guide crystal growth process designers so that large, high
quality crystals can be produced. This work will be integrated into educational
programs at the participating institutions. The industrial collaboration will
provide excellent learning opportunities. Any experimental capabilities
developed will reside at the x-ray beamline and become available to other users.