* 0928472
* An intergrated physical and chemical model for silica transport and deposition in sub-seafloor magmatic-hydrothermal environments
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* James Rimstidt, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 08/31/2012
* USD 215,671.00

The Earth is a geologically active system in which new crust is continuously
being generated at mid-ocean ridge spreading centers. Cold seawater flows into
the sub-seafloor, is heated, and interacts with the basalt, altering the
composition of both the rocks and the seawater. As a result, hydrothermal
activity at oceanic spreading centers exerts a major influence on ocean
chemistry and significantly affects the composition of oceanic lithosphere that
is eventually recycled back into the mantle at subduction zones. These same mid-
ocean ridge hydrothermal systems are often associated with the formation of
valuable mineral deposits that are important sources of copper, zinc and silver.
Because the silica content of hydrothermal fluids being vented onto the seafloor
is often used to indicate the temperature and depth of the base of the
hydrothermal system, i.e., at the top of the magma chamber, this research
examines the role of immiscibility on silica transport and deposition in the
submarine hydrothermal environment through the development of modeling software
and computer simulations. Work involves incorporating thermodynamic data for
relevant dissolved aqueous species into a newly developed transport code called
FISHES which includes the effects of boiling (i.e., phase separation) and two
phase flow. The result should be a dramatic improvement of our ability to infer
sub-seafloor conditions based on vent fluid chemistry and to predict where
economic mineral occurrences.