* 0928587
* PRISM: Attracting Students to Mathematics, Physics, and Biology Through Interdisciplinary Research and Discovery
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2015
* Richard Porter, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Nandini Kannan
* 07/31/2015
* USD 1,985,888.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). Intellectual Merit: The proposed activities serve the dual
role to inspire passion in mathematics and the natural sciences and to create
leaders. Inspiration in all proposed activities will stem from the excitement of
discovering how mathematics provides both a common language and a powerful
toolkit to understand a broad range of interrelated complex phenomena in today?s
world that are at the forefront of research in STEM disciplines. We create this
excitement by bringing students, at the earliest stages in their undergraduate
years, the research expertise of the CO-PIs together with that of a
collaboration of outstanding researchers in Mathematics, Physics, and Biology.
By allowing the students to connect personally with these researchers and their
graduate students as well as to participate actively in their research
activities, first as PRISM participants and then as PRISM Fellows, we provide
students the unique opportunity to move towards assuming research leadership
that eventually shapes their own chosen fields and careers. Key new, integrated
initiatives in the proposal include: (a) Proactive Recruitment that exploits
successful STEM Advanced Placement (AP) outreach programs, (b) Summer Preview:
Exploring Mathematics for first-year students, (c) Interdisciplinary Research
Seminars (IDRS) for first- and second-year students during the Fall and Spring
semesters, (d) A 2-Day Invitational Workshop---An Introduction to Problem
Solving and Inquiry in Mathematics, Physics, and Biology for about 100
participants with teams of students from Northeastern and two-year and four-year
colleges in the Boston area, (e) Summer Discovery Experience---an intensive
four-week interdisciplinary program engaging students in problem solving and
open-ended inquiry, and (f) a Six-Month Research Co-op/Internship with faculty
or in positions offsite with organizations such as the US-USDA Center on Aging,
Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Microsoft, Fermi National Accelerator
Laboratory, or the Center for Biomedical Informatics at the Harvard Medical
Center being among the possibilities. Broader Impact: Through the 2-day
Workshop, PRISM activities will reach beyond Northeastern to high school
students in the STEM outreach programs described in section 1 below as well as
two and four year colleges in the area. Through the opportunity to participate
in the Summer Discovery Experience offsite, the reach for this piece of the
PRISM program has the potential to be at least national in scope as does the
dissemination of PRISM results described above. Through PRISM student
presentations at discipline-based meetings that invite student participation,
our students will have an impact on others as they work to include early
research opportunities for students on their campus. An important measure of
this impact will be our success to attract African-American, Hispanic, and low-
income students to mathematics and sciences through the unique seamless
integration of ongoing urban high-school outreach programs and the proposed
PRISM activities at Northeastern University. Overall, our PRISM program aims to
demonstrate the power of a community of students at all levels and faculty to
attract students to mathematics and science and provide.