* 0928395
* Collaborative Research: The Role of Basin Modes in Pacing Pacific Decadal Variability
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Francois Primeau, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2012
* USD 206,145.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate the
hypothesis that Rossby basin modes play a significant role in Pacific Decadal
Variability (PDV). Baroclinic Rossby basin modes are natural oscillations of the
ocean with very large spatial scales and periods of up to a decade or more,
making them of clear interest for understanding climate variability. The
proposed work will consist of three main tasks. The first task will be to
systematically determine the periods, decay-rates and spatial patterns of basin
modes in the presence of the combined effects of (i) basin geometry and bottom
topography, (ii) background circulation and stratification, and (iii) Rossby
wave instability. As part of this project the Rossby basin modes of a full
three-dimensional primitive equation model of the ocean will be computed for the
first time. The proposed work will thus push the frontier of how ocean general
circulation models are used to understand the climate system. The second task
will be to try to detect basin modes in a combination of available data sets
including observations, data-constrained model integrations, and unconstrained
model integrations. A novel projection technique will be used to detect modal
structures in noisy data. The third task will be to test the hypothesis that
basin modes play a significant role in PDV by studying the imprint of baroclinic
basin modes on the surface heat budget, sea surface temperature and thermocline
depth in the tropics , a place of strong coupling between the ocean and the
atmosphere, and so determine if the Pacific basin modes modulate the tropical
air-sea interaction and ENSO at decadal time scales.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The project aims to elevate the
concept of basin modes above its roots in Geophysical Fluid Dynamics, and to
bring its relevance for decadal climate variability to the test. A novel
projection technique will be used (and further developed) to detect dynamically-
consistent modal structures in noisy data. In addition, advanced numerical
analysis techniques will be applied to the most advanced and realistic ocean
models to date, hence pushing the limits of computational
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The project will enhance the
predictability of Pacific Decadal Variability by unequivocally identifying the
role of low-frequency Rossby wave basin modes. By improving our understanding of
low-frequency variability in the Pacific ocean this project has the potential of
greatly enhancing the ability to predict climate and to better manage fisheries.
The investigators are committed to integrating their research activities into
teaching and educational outreach. Basin-scale waves with oscillation periods of
more than a decade are ideally suited to capture the imagination of a public
whose acquaintance with ocean waves is likely to be limited to the high-
frequency phenomenon of the surf crashing on the beach. At the University of
California, Irvine (UCI), Dr. Primeau will continue to contribute to UCI CAMP
(promoting minority-student participation in science), and to the NSF-sponsored
UCI FOCUS! (Faculty Outreach Collaborations Uniting Scientists, Students, and
Schools) program by training elementary-school teachers from minority, high-need
school districts. A graduate student at UC Irvine and a post-doc at the New
Mexico Consortium will receive training in ocean modeling, advanced numerical
analysis, data analysis and statistical methods.&lt;br/&gt;