* 0928563
* Full-Scale and Modeled Hurricane Wind Loads on Residential Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Kurtis Gurley, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 08/31/2014
* USD 270,000.00

Scale model tests in boundary layer wind tunnels have been the primary tool for
the development of the design wind loads prescribed in codes. However, questions
have been raised concerning the ability of wind tunnel methods to replicate the
hurricane wind environment and to determine peak loads on low rise structures in
hurricanes. This research will address two outstanding issues in the development
of risk consistent construction practice in hurricane prone coastal regions.
First it will quantify the precision and accuracy of wind tunnel modeling of
extreme wind loads on low rise structures, and second it will develop the proper
representation of the approaching turbulent hurricane wind field. Both efforts
will utilize an existing hurricane wind velocity and pressure load database
collected in-field during eleven hurricane seasons. Four wind tunnel facilities
will independently produce estimates of loads on scale model houses. Results
will be compared with real hurricane wind load data measured on the models? full
scale counterpart. The upstream turbulence employed by the wind tunnel
facilities will be compared with turbulence data directly measured during land
falling hurricanes. Thus the relative influence of scaling effects, approach
turbulence, and variability between facilities on the precision and accuracy of
extreme wind load estimates will be quantified.

The research will produce evidence to foster the professional consensus required
to validate or suggest changes to current experimental wind load evaluation
methods and prescriptive wind load practice. Research outcomes will improve the
scientific methods used to mitigate loss of life and property and promote
coastal development consistent with an accurate view of the wind damage risk.
Reducing damage and post-storm recovery time via risk consistent construction
results in shorter down time for coastal businesses, improving the economic
sustainability of hurricane prone coastal regions. Engineering students will
participate in the research, and findings will be incorporated into the wind
engineering curriculum.

