* 0928508
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Anthropogenic Impacts on Fire and Forest History  in Native Yellow Pine and Mixed Hardwood-Pine Communities of the Southern Appalachians
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Sally Horn, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 08/31/2012
* USD 10,550.00

The long-term role of fire in the southern Appalachians and its interplay with
southern yellow pines is a theme that has generated speculation, but little hard
evidence. Indigenous and Euro-American societies have left unique signatures of
land use in the southern Appalachian region, but to what extent has each
subsequent group of inhabitants created changes in forest composition and fire
occurrence?

Doctoral student Christopher Underwood, under the supervision of Dr. Sally Horn
at the University of Tennesse seeks to document forest and fire history in
modern yellow pine and mixed hardwood-pine forests of Great Smoky Mountains
National Park, Tennessee, through the recovery, identification, and dating of
soil charcoal. The over-arching idea to be tested is whether prehistoric fires
set by indigenous occupants or lightning caused sufficient disturbance to
maintain yellow pine communities on sites other than rocky slopes and ridge
tops. Forty-eight soil cores for charcoal analysis have been recovered from
eight sites in the western portion of the park. In a companion study, other
researchers have quantified modern forest composition and tree age structures at
the eight sites, and have reconstructed fires over the past several centuries
based on analyses of fire-scarred trees. The identification and dating of
macroscopic charcoal fragments will extend the dendrochronological record of
fire, and provide evidence of past local fires and forest composition that
cannot be obtained through any other method. While charcoal assemblages in
surface soils reflect forest composition at the time of historic fires, charcoal
assemblages at depth include significantly older particles that provide evidence
of local forest composition before the period of Euro-American settlement.
Comparing surface charcoal assemblages to recent forest composition as
documented by vegetation surveys provides a basis for calibrating the taxonomic
signal provided by this deep charcoal.

This research will be the first to specifically address the spatio-temporal
patterns of forest composition and fire history in the southern Appalachians
using taxonomically-identified soil charcoal as the primary proxy. Information
on forest composition and fire history in the early historic and prehistoric
periods is needed to help place indigenous and Euro-American human impacts on
forest composition and fire history in context. This research design can also be
applied in other regions to facilitate similar studies. Data and conclusions
will assist forest and park managers in making conservation and management
decisions regarding forest and fire management. Information about past forest
fires and the departure of current fire occurrences from past conditions is
important for guiding and justifying forest management practices such as the use
of prescribed burns for ecosystem restoration. A better understanding of long-
term fire-vegetation dynamics is important not only to the health and
conservation of the forest communities of the southern Appalachians, but also to
the protection of human life and property along the expanding forest-urban
interface of Great Smoky Mountains National Park.