* 0928348
* A Numerical Study of the Patagonia Upwelling Region
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Ricardo Matano, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 09/30/2013
* USD 587,663.00

The Patagonia shelf is a broad submarine terrace that extends from the mouth of
the La Plata River (~36S) to the tip of Tierra del Fuego (~55S). Satellite and
in-situ observations indicate that this region is an active upwelling center
harboring some of the largest chlorophyll blooms of the world ocean, the most
distinctive of which is located at the shelfbreak. Patagonia's shelfbreak
upwelling brings iron and other nutrient from the deep layers of the Southern
Ocean to the photic zone, fertilizing not only the shelf waters, but also the
entire subpolar portion of the South Atlantic. Satellite observations, for
example, show chlorophyll plumes extending from South America to Australia. Yet,
in spite of its regional and hemispheric impact, we know little about
Patagonia's upwelling regime or its interaction with the deep-ocean circulation,
which this project intends to address. This is a modeling study to investigate
the dynamical mechanisms driving Patagonia's shelfbreak upwelling and the
interactions between the shelf and the deep ocean. The basic premise is that the
shelfbreak upwelling is primarily modulated by the along-shelf variations of the
bottom topography and time variations of the Malvinas Current transport. The
study seeks to quantify the spatial and temporal variability of the upwelling
and link it to the atmospheric forcing. It is hypothesized that, although local
wind might have little impact over the upwelling, large-scale wind variations,
particularly those over the Pacific and Indian basins might significantly
influence its variability. The study will also identify the regions of Patagonia
with the largest cross-shelf exchanges and identify the dynamical mechanisms
controlling these exchanges. It is anticipated that Patagonia entrains
Subantarctic waters through the Le Maire Straits and the shelfbreak region
between ~50S and 46S, and primarily detrains at the Subtropical Shelf
Front.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;This study will contribute
to the development to ongoing and future biological and geochemical projects of
the southwestern Atlantic region. For example, the upwelling index that will be
developed by this project will help to relate observed changes in the
Patagonia's ecosystems to variations in the magnitude of the shelfbreak
upwelling and to large-scale modes of climate variability. The identification of
cross-shelf exchanges mechanisms (and regions) will contribute to our
understanding of carbon cycles and the development of future observational
programs. The multi-disciplinary workshop proposed as part of this project will
foster international cooperation. The project includes support for a PhD student
who, throughout her/his studies, will work in close collaboration with
oceanographers in Latin America. This strategy should help to foster the north-
south integration of the next generation of scientists interested in shelf
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;At its most basic
level this project proposes to test new ideas about the dynamical mechanisms
generating shelfbreak upwelling and controlling cross-shelf exchanges in regions
bounded by cyclonic western boundary currents. The arguments are general enough
to be applicable to other similar regions (e.g., New Zealand, Japan, the Weddell
Sea, etc), thus broadening the potential impact of the intellectual work
developed in this project.