* 0928526
* Collaborative Research:  The M8.0 Pisco Peru Earthquake - A Benchmark Ground Failure Event for Remote Sensing and Data Archiving
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,01/31/2012
* Jackson Cothren, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 01/31/2012
* USD 177,064.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)

Large earthquakes that strike populated regions present invaluable opportunities
to improve our understanding of seismic hazards, and advance the state-of-
practice in engineering and science through investigation and analysis of case
histories. Traditionally, earthquake case studies in geotechnical engineering
have been undertaken at the site-specific scale, leading to many key
advancements in the field. Increasingly, however, it is recognized that
earthquake impacts extend over vast areas and have unique spatial signatures
that are a function of regional-scale factors such as geologic setting, ground
motion intensity, and land use patterns. Moreover, the highly networked nature
of modern infrastructure systems with their internal feedback loops, potential
for cascading failures, and sensitivity to extreme events, suggest that that the
consequences of earthquakes be considered within a larger spatial framework.
Advancements in the field of remote sensing, combined with new opportunities in
information management and spatial analysis, provide a promising new direction
for earthquake studies that needs to be taken advantage of.

This research will use remote sensing, geotechnical investigations, and
traditional "boots-on-the-ground" reconnaissance information to collect,
process, interpret, and digitally archive ground failure events (landslides and
a massive, several km2 lateral spread) from a large portion of the mesoseismal
region of the 2007 Mw8.0 Pisco, Peru Earthquake. The research plan is guided by
the vision of using state-of-the-art remote sensing and data management tools to
establish the Pisco Earthquake as a fully documented "benchmark" ground failure
event that will be permanently archived in a searchable, professionally curated
NEEScentral data repository. Several factors make the Pisco Earthquake well
suited for use as a benchmark ground failure event: (i) its effects were
documented by a ground-based Geo-engineering Extreme Events Reconnaissance
(GEER) team immediately after the earthquake, (ii) the mesoseismal region spans
a variety of land uses and geomorphic settings ranging from coastal plains to
steep mountainous terrain more than 4,500-m in elevation, and (iii) a rich and
varied "living laboratory" of earthquake effects ranging from severe soil
liquefaction to massive rock avalanches occurred.

The work draws on the expertise of a multidisciplinary, multiple-institution
team with collective expertise in geotechnical earthquake engineering, remote
sensing, and field data collection. It will focus on two main types of ground
failures caused by earthquakes: landslides and lateral spreads. Remote sensing
of these failures will generally be accomplished through high resolution, pre-
and post-earthquake stereo satellite imagery analysis. However, terrestrial
LiDAR measurements will also be used at select sites to enhance the stereo
derived surface models, and potentially allow for ultra high resolution (sub-
pixel) satellite image displacement analyses. Products of this work will
include: (i) a comprehensive, open-source, geospatial database containing an
inventory of ground failures over an approximately 1,000 km2 region (including
geo-referenced archives of photographs, geological, geotechnical, and
damage/impact information), (ii) advancements in remote sensing applied to
earthquake ground failures (e.g. refined change detection algorithms for
automated landslide identification, and sub-meter lateral displacement analysis
on a massive lateral spread), (iii) a series of empirical relationships
quantifying the link between geophysical factors (topography, geology, and
shaking intensity) and ground failure characteristics, (iv) a geospatial
database template for ground failures that will serve as a model for future
earthquake geo-archiving efforts, and (v) openly disseminated non-technical
educational modules to promote a better understanding of earthquake consequences
among the general public and policy-makers.

Broader impacts affecting those in the U.S. and abroad include: rich foreign
research experiences for students on the team, fostering graduate education for
Hispanic students, further strengthening of ties between U.S. and Latin American
research communities, and much-needed information to assist local officials with
earthquake hazard planning and mitigation in the developing nation of Peru.