* 0928450
* Investigating YREE Co-Precipitation with Phosphate and Biogenic Aragonite as Possible Indicators of Ocean Acidification
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Johan Schijf, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2013
* USD 403,536.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers at the University of
Maryland will conduct a laboratory study of carbonate co-precipitation and
phosphate complexation of yttrium and the rare earth elements (YREEs). These
processes are anticipated to be sensitive to minor pH variations, thus changes
in ocean acidification could play a role in their chemistry. YREEs have
carbonate-dominated solution speciation in seawater, and carbonate and phosphate
both form biogenic minerals that are known to contain these elements. The
relative concentrations of YREE in many biogenic and geological carbonate and
phosphate accretions have been interpreted in terms of 'vital' and diagenetic
effects. However, these explanations require an understanding of the basic
principles underlying the YREE adsorption process, which is presently lacking.
The experiments that will be conducted during this project provide a theoretical
framework against which interpretations of YREE/Ca ratios in biogenic aragonite
can be made. In particular, this research will allow an assessment of their pH
dependence and potential usefulness as indicators of ocean acidification.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Progressive acidification of the oceans essentially lowers
the saturation states of aragonite and calcite in seawater. While most ocean
acidification studies are concerned with the immediate consequences for the
health of calcifying organisms, there is a growing awareness that other marine
geochemical cycles may be affected in various ways, for example through shifts
in the chemical speciation and surface reactivity of trace metals. The focal
elements for this study, by virtue of their incorporation into biogenic
minerals, might act as recorders of seawater pH on historic to geological time
scales. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Yttrium and the rare earth
element fractionation patterns, abundance anomalies, and radiogenic isotopes
have long been utilized as geochemical tools. Numerous applications are found
across many branches of the geological and environmental sciences and new ones
continue to emerge. In view of the widespread importance of carbonate and
phosphate minerals in marine and terrestrial systems, the insights generated
from this study are expected to be of broad relevance to many current problems
in low-temperature geochemistry. The collection of pteropod shell material by
the PI will involve participation in two research missions to the Northeast
Pacific Ocean, which would allow for collaboration with Canadian scientists. The
work will involve graduate student training and offers opportunities for
educational outreach to the general public.