* 0928280
* Collaborative Research: Serpentinization and cycling of B, Nd and Sr in submarine hydrothermal systems: An experimental study on the effects of pH and temperature
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Michael Bizimis, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 07/31/2012
* USD 173,958.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hydrothermally altered ocean crust
provides a record of heat and mass transfer between seawater and the earth's
mantle that takes place during hydrothermal circulation at mid ocean ridges and
subduction zones. Hydrothermal vent systems that generate the mineral serpentine
are linked to alkaline fluids enriched in organics and are central to generating
the energy supply for microbial life at the seafloor. This research uses boron,
strontium, and neodymium elemental concentrations as well as boron isotope
fractionation to examine the role of water-rock reaction in the conversion of
peridotites and other ultramafic rocks common on the seafloor and in the lower
crust to serpentine and other minerals. The work involves novel, controlled,
hydrothermal, laboratory experiments that examine the pH, temperature and
mineral composition controls on boron isotope fractionation and combined B-Sr-Nd
mobility and rock-fluid exchange. Targeted geochemical elements were picked
because they are recorders of temperature and fluid pH conditions and allow
application of the results of the experiments to fossil hydrothermal systems and
associated ore deposits. Furthermore, the measurements will constrain the
effects of low-temperature serpentinization on the efficiency of elemental
recycling across volcanic arcs and enhance our understanding of geochemical
fluxes from subducting slabs which impact island arc volcanics. Broader impacts
of the work are support of two early career researchers, promotion of a new
collaboration, support of students, international collaboration, and support of
an institution in an EPSCoR state