* 0928013
* PRISM:  Scientists Prepared Enriched and Challenged Through Research-based Activities (SPECTRA)
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2009,09/30/2015
* Jason Miller, Truman State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 09/30/2015
* USD 1,210,581.00

Truman State University's NSF-PRISM program, "Scientists Prepared, Engaged,
Enriched, and Challenged Through Research Activities" (SPECTRA), seeks to
increase the number of Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM)
majors. Faculty members from mathematics, biology, and chemistry will be
involved. The goal is to enhance the interdisciplinary, research-based
experiences for undergraduates and to create a cross-disciplinary learning
community. Students' experiences will include (1) a summer bridge course before
their first semester (2) a new freshman seminar which will orient students to
the University and to STEM degrees in an integrative fashion, (3) a second-
semester Inquiry Seminar which will prepare students for independent research
and (4) support for conducting research with faculty. SPECTRA will providing
focused support for early-career students and will enhance their opportunities
to participate in integrative STEM learning experiences both through new courses
and through academic-year research experiences. Scholarships will attract
students to STEM degrees and support them as they work through their major
degree programs. A special pathway course for potential majors will be offered
to first-time freshman in the summer before their first regular semester of
courses. Tutoring support and academic interventions will be used to assist
students in their pathway courses.

The SPECTRA program will create a community that will attract STEM majors and
increase the number of STEM graduates. The SPECTRA program will also work with
our community college partners to develop pre-STEM and 2+2 programs to help
decrease the time-to-STEM-degree for community college students who transfer to
Truman, and it will provide pre-STEM students with scholarships to encourage
them to transfer.