* 0928627
* GOALI/Collaborative Research: Interface Engineered Diamond Coatings for Dry Machining
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Kevin Chou, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* Zhijian Pei
* 08/31/2013
* USD 131,556.00

The objective of this Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry
(GOALI) collaborative research project is to investigate the material substrate-
processing interfacial conditions in chemical vapor deposition (CVD)-grown
diamond films on cobalt-cemented tungsten-carbide (WC-Co) tools. Coating
delamination is the major life-limiting factor to diamond-coated WC-Co cutting
tools. Interface engineering, by means of surface treatments and interlayer, and
optimum nanocrystalline diamond (NCD) deposition are the key solutions to
achieve high-quality diamond coatings for dry machining. This collaborative
research will focus on the fundamental mechanisms of interface fabrications,
properties and functions to enhance the substrate/coating performance over the
life of the cutting tools, and will form joint tasks of modeling,
characterization, and optimization of surface conditioning, interlayer
interfacial preparations, and subsequent deposition processes. Validation of
enhancements to interfacial performance will be demonstrated through machining
analysis and wear characterization. In addition, environmental process
monitoring, in both coating and dry machining with diamond coated tools, will be
conducted with data collected for life-cycle inventory and environmental impact
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this research will lead to
breakthrough of diamond coated tools whose performance is comparable to or
better than costly polycrystalline diamond tools. Engineering of interlayer and
NCD coating optimization, with material characterizations and performance
analysis, will further mature the diamond coated tooling technology for
industrial applications. This research will also advance knowledge of interface
science, critical to coating system functions, especially in harsh tribological
services. The findings gained on interface characteristics and behavior modeling
will also offer knowledge transformable to other coating system studies. The
proposed program will also synergize universities-industry partnership by
providing opportunities for faculty and students to conduct research and gain
experiences with production processes in an industrial setting. The
collaborations will offer opportunity to students working with industrial
colleagues and use of their state-of-the-art equipment facilities.