* 0928515
* Conference: Perspectives in Mathematics and Physics
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2011
* Tomasz Mrowka, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 04/30/2011
* USD 50,000.00

The conference "Perspectives in Mathematics and Physics" will bring together the
legends and leaders of modern mathematics and physics to discuss the latest work
at the interface between mathematics and physics. The conference will also honor
the 85th birthday of Professor Isadore Singer. Interactions between mathematics
and physics have long been important for the development of both disciplines.
The extremely distinguished list of speakers at this conference will present
many different perspectives on the future of these synergistic developments. A
few of the speakers will give historical views of Singer's contributions in this
area. The conference will take place May 22-24, 2009 in Cambridge MA and rotate
between MIT and Harvard.

The interaction between mathematics and physics has produced the theoretical
underpinning that informs the development of the technology that touches almost
every aspect of modern life. At the vanguard of this interaction is the
understanding of the fundamental laws of nature, whether at the small scale via
quantum field theory and string theory or at the large scale of cosmology and
gravity. To honor Isadore Singer's 85th birthday and his deep contributions in
developing the mathematics used in these areas, this conference will bring
together leaders in both mathematics and physics. They will speak about the
current edge of our knowledge and highlight the areas that are likely to lead to
future progress.