* 0928742
* Theory:   Biological systems organize to maximize entropy production subject to information and biophysicochemical constraints
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Joseph Vallino, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 08/31/2013
* USD 758,000.00

This project seeks to answer the question: What is the governing principle that
determines how energy and matter flow through biological systems composed of
independent but interacting individual organisms, such as occurs in ecosystems?
Surprisingly, no predictive theory exists for such a fundamental question. The
theory of evolution by natural selection provides a mechanism for self-
organization of complex biological structures, but is indeterminate in regards
to the emergent properties biological systems follow, if any. As a consequence,
the flow of energy and mass through biological systems is often attributed to
the chance composition of the community at any instance in time, which is
currently unpredictable. This project takes the perspective that biological
systems evolve and organize in a manner that is, in a sense, independent of
community composition. In the field of nonequilibrium thermodynamics a
provisional proof on the theory of maximum entropy production (MEP) has recently
been proposed, which posits that steady state systems with sufficient degrees of
freedom will organize to maximize the rate of entropy production; that is, the
rate of energy dissipation. While organized structures decrease the entropy of a
system, they are maintained by external entropy production and have a higher
probability of persistence if their presence increases overall entropy
production. However, the configuration of structures that generate entropy, and
dissipate energy, are constrained by system resources from which the structures
must be synthesized from. Hence, biophysicochemical constraints (i.e., elemental
resources, organic chemistry, etc.) limit the complexity of dissipative
structures. Hurricanes that dissipate thermal energy between the atmosphere and
ocean are examples of such dissipative structures. This project proposes that
evolution by natural selection produces biological systems that tend to follow a
pathway of maximum entropy production by dissipating high temperature radiation
and chemical potential. Consequently, an ecosystem composed of organisms that
produce entropy at a high rate has a greater probability of persistence and
occupation than an ecosystem under the same constraints that produces entropy at
a lower rate. While MEP theory does not distinguish between abiotic and biotic
systems, biological systems differ from abiotic ones in one key way: biological
systems store information within their metagenome. Therefore, it is proposed
that abiotic systems maximize entropy production instantaneously, while
information stored within the metagenome allows biological systems to produce
entropy along pathways that can increase entropy production when averaged over
time. For instance, by storing internal energy, biological systems can maintain
entropy production and persist during periods when external energy inputs cease.
Based on MEP theory, it is hypothesized that biological systems with greater
information content will have higher entropy production rates than biological
systems with lower information content.&lt;br/&gt;To test these hypotheses, the
project will use flow through microcosms (i.e., chemostats) as experimental
systems inoculated with natural microbial communities. Changes in chemical
composition will be used to determine entropy production and massively parallel
454 pyrosequencing applied to hypervariable regions in rRNA genes will provide a
direct measure of the information content of complex microbial communities. The
project will demonstrate that 1) community composition changes to maximize
entropy production, 2) loss of information due to decreases in biodiversity
results in lower entropy production and 3) communities organize to maximize
entropy when averaged over time. In addition to experimental tests, the project
will develop a mathematical framework based on MEP theory to model
biogeochemistry orchestrated by biological systems using a distributed metabolic
network representation. Computational models and experimental results from this
project, including educational outreach activities, will be posted on the
project's web site: http://ecosystems.mbl.edu/MEP