* 0928582
* Developing a Global Perspective on Dynamics of Riverine Transfer of Terrestrial Biospheric Carbon to the Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2009,11/30/2013
* Valier Galy, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 11/30/2013
* USD 304,560.00

Over short timescales, small changes in the rate of exchange between large pools
of "active" carbon such as soils and vegetation can significantly impact the
size of the atmospheric CO2 reservoir. Therefore, to predict the ecological and
biogeochemical consequences of the current atmospheric CO2 increase and
concomitant global warming, we need to understand the natural processes of
carbon exchange between these carbon reservoirs. A key aspect in this regard is
the global-scale interaction between climate and the dynamics of terrestrial
biospheric carbon cycling. In particular, we have only a very rudimentary
understanding of the timescales over which carbon fixed by vascular plants on
land is exported to the oceans - a crucial component of the carbon cycle.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, researchers at the Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution will begin to build a global database on the age of
different terrestrial organic carbon (OC) constituents exported by rivers. The
focus will be on terrestrial biospheric carbon exported within the particulate
OC pool because it has a pivotal role in the global carbon cycle, is potentially
the more sensitive to rapid perturbations such as climate change and
anthropogenic activity, and leaves a legacy within continental margin sediment
records that can be retrieved for paleoclimate reconstructions. The team will
study the composition of terrestrial biospheric carbon discharged by rivers to
the oceans by characterizing suspended sediments collected close to the terminus
of the rivers, as well as deltaic deposits and inner shelf flood deposits. They
will attempt to couple radiocarbon (14C) measurements at different levels - from
bulk OC to specific molecules (biomarkers) - in order to constrain the age and
relative proportion of the different constituents of the biospheric OC pool.
They expect to derive a global picture of the dynamics of terrestrial biospheric
OC export to the ocean by examining age characteristics of vascular plant-
derived carbon discharged by a wide range of rivers that differ markedly in
terms of drainage basin size, elevation, latitude, and materials flux.
Specifically, they will (1) evaluate the robustness of the preliminary
relationship observed between the age of riverine vascular plant-derived OC and
the latitude of the river outlet, (2) more precisely define the nature of this
relationship, (3) examine whether similar relationships holds for different
components of the biospheric OC pool, and finally, (4) use these findings to
explore the mechanisms controlling the age of the biospheric carbon discharged
by rivers to the ocean at the global scale, and hence to derive insights into
the interactions between OC cycling and regional and global climate.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: This research initiative is fundamentally
based on a collaborative approach that will utilize samples and knowledge shared
by a large number of American, Chinese, and European colleagues who are involved
in river studies all around the globe. The publications arising from this
endeavor will reflect these collaborative partnerships. The project will provide
a collaborative research, training and learning environment for a postdoctoral
scientist at WHOI. Data emanating from the project will be contributed to a
legacy database that is currently being compiled. The data will be shared with
the community through publications, through a dedicated website, as well as by
linking to other web-accessible community databases.