* 0928953
* Collaborative Research: Framework for Quantifying Structural Robustness through Modeling and Simulation
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Sashi Kunnath, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 08/31/2014
* USD 159,972.00

Robustness is the ability of a structural system to resist progressive collapse.
While research on evaluating structural robustness has been ongoing for a while,
many critical questions still remain unanswered. What are the sources of
collapse resistance? Can structural robustness be quantified, and if so, how?
Can simple design modifications, such as seismic-resistant detailing, provide
increased collapse resistance, particularly at the system level? To address
these open issues, special-purpose connection macromodels will be developed to
enable collapse simulations of RC and steel moment frames. The calibration and
validation of the simulation models will be accomplished in two ways: through
comparison with unique experimental data on large-scale testing of connections
and through comparison with high fidelity analyses. Several quantitative
measures of structural robustness will be developed to assess local and global
collapse potential of typical steel and RC building structures. The research
results will then be synthesized into a probabilistic framework that can be used
as a basis for defining the probability of structural collapse for a given
damage scenario. The intellectual merit of the proposed work lies in the
unprecedented opportunity to leverage unique large-scale test data to answer a
number of critical questions that have long concerned the structural engineering
community.

The findings from this project will result in a significantly improved
understanding of collapse resistance of building structures. In addition, the
developed models and the framework for assessment of structural robustness will
form the basis of a more general methodology that can be extended to other
structural systems. At a broader scale, the proposed research will provide
critical information needed to support the development of a new generation of
design codes that attempt to explicitly quantify collapse risk. The new
structural robustness indices that will be developed are expected to lead to a
better understanding of reserve capacity in structures following the damage or
failure of one or more critical structural elements. These benefits directly
translate into saved lives and reduced injuries and suffering in the aftermath
of unexpected loads on buildings. The project will also provide advanced
training to graduate students by involving them in all phases of the research
activity.