* 0928093
* Understanding the  Relationship Between Processing and Performance for Functional Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Thomas Fuller, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 08/31/2013
* USD 364,344.00

The research objective of this award is to gain a fundamental understanding of
the manufacturing process of thin-film coatings and address a range of issues
that impact their performance. The challenge of flexibly fabricating uniform
defect-free functional materials for applications such as bioengineering,
apparels, electronics, energy and so forth is not trivial, due to the
interfacial phenomena between the material and coated solution. This project
will address the relationship between processing and performance for complex
polymer solutions directly coated onto woven structures through a synergistic
mix of experimentation, modeling and performance testing. The flexibility and
repeatability of the manufacturing process will be analyzed based on changing
the processing conditions (i.e., temperature, velocity, casting thickness,
etc.), using design of experiments (DOEs), and evaluated using destructive and
non-destructive evaluation techniques. A theoretical model that predicts the
required operating conditions to fabricate uniform defect-free carbon woven
structures CWSs will be developed based on fundamental principles and validated
against data collected from the DOE. Finally, performance analysis will be
conducted to evaluate the film properties of the resulting functional material.

Successful completion of this research will fundamentally broaden the knowledge
base on how functional coated woven structures are fabricated in a uniform,
defect-free manner. Although this work is applicable to many areas, due to the
advancements needed in the renewable energy area, this project will focus on
understanding the mechanisms that prohibit direct coating of polymer solutions
onto functional materials, such as gas diffusion layers for fuel cell
applications. Success of this investigation will present an approach to
fabricate such functional materials more flexibly, with increased production
rates, decreased waste, and using a more robust process, which will have an
exponential economical impact, due to their use in transportation, stationary,
and portable devices. To broaden the participation of underrepresented groups at
minority and primary institutions not traditionally exposed to research, Dr.
Harris has co-developed a program called ELECTRoDE: Educators Leading Energy
Conservation and Training Researchers of Diverse Ethnicities.