* 0928573
* International Collaboration: Capacity Anticipation and Modeling for Production Planning with Flexible Resources
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Reha Uzsoy, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Edwin Romeijn
* 07/31/2012
* USD 10,000.00

This grant provides funding for an international research collaboration on
methods of modeling capacity in manufacturing systems with flexible resources.
Improved modeling of the capacity of a manufacturing system will enhance the
ability of planning systems to make the best use of the manufacturing system's
capability and is of considerable theoretical and practical interest. A
promising approach to this problem in recent years has been to represent the
nonlinear relationship between the work-in-progress (WIP) levels and the
throughput using nonlinear clearing functions. This project explores the
extension of the clearing function concept into the domain of manufacturing
flexibility. The NCSU group has substantial practical and theoretical expertise
on production planning and clearing function representations of aggregate
capacity and the Boðaziçi University group provides research infrastructure,
work force and substantial experience in the field of modeling, simulation and
real-time management of manufacturing systems with high degrees of manufacturing
flexibility.

If successful, the proposed research program will open the way to a novel class
of capacity allocation and planning models, but also initiate the development of
international awareness and collaboration and initiate a longer-term
relationship between the two institutions leading to more extensive faculty and
student exchange programs in the future.