* 0928204
* A Model-Data Synthesis Study of the Marine Iron Cycle
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Jefferson Moore, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2012
* USD 313,803.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers at the University of
California Irvine (UCI) will develop a model that will utilize the extensive
field observations of dissolved Fe and Al concentrations and aerosol Fe and Al
solubility that have been made on recent field campaigns by project
collaborators. The goal is to improve upon the understanding of the behavior of
iron in the ocean, which is an important, and often limiting micronutrient for
ocean plant production. This work specifically builds upon prior efforts that
have highlighted the importance of atmospheric and continental margin marine
sediments as sources of dissolved iron to the oceans. The availability of new
data sets from the recent CLIVAR field campaigns can be used to test, validate
and improve upon a number of model parameters including the sedimentary iron
source, scavenging, and biological uptake. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: An improved understanding of the iron cycle and its links to the carbon
cycle are important for understanding of how oceanic iron inputs might be
altered with climate change. Likewise, an improved grasp of the iron cycle could
inform our knowledge of past climate history as well. The work will engage
students at UCI and will contribute to the goals of the GEOTRACES program. The
model that will be developed during this work will be made available to the
community as part of the Community Climate System Model.