* 0928801
* Biological and Physical Determinants of Euphausiid Aggregation, Behavior, and Interaction with Higher Predators at an Abrupt Topographical Feature in the Gulf of Maine
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2013
* Gareth Lawson, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 06/30/2013
* USD 649,727.00

Zooplankton are key members of marine ecosystems, but the biological and
physical factors governing their distribution and aggregation are not fully
understood, especially at the continental shelf break and margins of the deep
basins of the shelf. Euphausiids are an important group of crustacean
zooplankton in North Atlantic pelagic food webs and represent an interesting
model species for the study of zooplankton aggregation due to their strong
swimming capabilities and active aggregative behaviors. This project will
address the hypotheses that the formation and variability of euphausiid
aggregations along the northern flank of Georges Bank and the southern portion
of the Gulf of Maine during fall relate to the interaction of physical
concentration mechanisms with local topography and with plasticity in diel
vertical migration and active aggregative behaviors, and that this plasticity
arises from variability in food availability and predation by herring. These
hypotheses will be addressed through a field program employing a comprehensive
array of sensors, including both conventional narrowband and recently-developed
broadband acoustic systems to sample the euphausiids, and a variety of other
acoustic, optical, net, and other sampling devices to quantify their physical
and biological environment. These sensors will be used in an inventive
combination of (1) coarse-scale grid surveys to characterize along- and across-
slope variability in the distribution of euphausiids, their predators, other
zooplankton, phytoplankton, and physical conditions (e.g., the flow field), and
(2) fine-scale adaptive surveys used to track individual euphausiid aggregations
and observe how their three-dimensional structure and vertical position vary
with changing environmental conditions. Repeat surveys will be timed to
capitalize on known or likely variations in the flow field, food availability,
light levels, and predation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will promote
teaching, training, and learning via the participation of students at the
graduate, undergraduate, and high school levels. The results will be
disseminated via scientific publications and a session to be convened a national
meeting. Descriptions of the work and its findings intelligible to a lay
audience will be disseminated via a combination of web portals. The research
will be further integrated with education by developing on-line lessons produced
and distributed in collaboration with the Centers for Ocean Sciences Education
Excellence Networked Ocean World. Benefits to society as a whole will arise from
focusing on the interactions of euphausiids with herring, a commercially-
important fish species, and on the pelagic ecosystem of the Georges Bank/Gulf of
Maine complex, one of the world's most productive fishing areas.