* 0928118
* Modeling and Control of Magnetically Actuated Compliant Micromanipulators Enabling Multi-axis Scanning of 3D Micro/Nano Objects
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Chia-Hsiang Menq, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Zhijian Pei
* 09/30/2012
* USD 399,730.00

The objective of this award is to investigate the static and dynamic
characteristics of magnetically actuated compliant micromanipulators and to
realize innovative design and advanced control, enabling multi-axis scanning of
three-dimensional micrometer/nanometer objects. The proposed approaches consist
of three phases. First, static and dynamic models of the compliant manipulator
will be developed and multi-axis magnetic actuation will be analyzed. The aim is
to enable rational design and characterization of multi-axis probing systems.
Second, advanced control schemes will be developed to enable multi-axis scanning
of three-dimensional objects. The multi-axis scanning scheme can operate at
contact mode as well as tapping mode. Third, a two-axis scanning probe
microscopic system will be realized. Compared to other attempts to achieve
greater access to three-dimensional samples, which use specialized probes and
require a priori knowledge of the pose and nominal geometry of the sample, the
two-axis scanning probe microscopic system can be employed to scan three-
dimensional objects with unknown geometry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Upon successful
completion, technological innovations created from this award will open up
important new research applications in manufacturing. Compared to conventional
scanning probe microscopes, which are two-dimensional planar tools, the two-axis
scanning probe microscopic system is a three-dimensional surface tool. It
represents a transformational change in how scanning probe microscopy can be
used in ultra precision manufacturing. &lt;br/&gt;