* 0928397
* Collaborative Research: Use of Novel Heat Spreader Technology for Reduction of High Temperature Related Rutting in Asphalt Pavements
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Rajib Mallick, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 09/30/2013
* USD 144,697.00

Absorbed heat in pavements leads to enhanced pavement temperature and subsequent
rutting. Strategies of preventive maintenance are largely missing, and existing
methodologies of repair are expensive and energy intensive. An alternative
strategy involving flowing water under the pavement coupled with heat spreaders
allows reduction in pavement temperature and therefore prevention of rutting.
The objective of the this study is to understand the interaction between thermal
properties of novel heat spreading materials, asphalt mixture, piping material
and the subsequent temperature and structural response of the roadways. The goal
is to utilize this understanding to develop an optimum system of appropriate
heat spreader and pipes that could be used to minimize the temperature in
asphalt pavements under hot climatic conditions, and allow harvesting of heat
energy and reduce heat radiated from the pavement. The scope of work consists of
theoretical and experimental work with small and large scale models. The results
from small scale models will be utilized for building theoretical models, and
the predicted results from the theory will be validated with tests on large
scale models.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research will help in the design of
?smart pavements? that are more sustainable from a resource utilization
standpoint. Undergraduate students will gain experience in this research through
the observation and experimentation and also as assistants in research resulting
from collaboration. All of the experimental steps will be documented and
recorded using digital video, which will be used for undergraduate and graduate
level classroom instruction on instrumentation, heat transfer and fluid flow.
&lt;br/&gt;