* 0928752
* IDR/Collaborative Research: Manufacturing Functional Laminated Composites Structures on Patterned Uneven Three-Dimensional Surface
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Gary Cheng, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 08/31/2013
* USD 215,050.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The research objective of this award is to develop a universal manufacturing
method to fabricate composite functional structures/materials on three
dimensional surfaces using laser dynamic forming. This research will enable an
innovative and potentially transformative means for three dimensional
manufacturing on the micro or even nanoscale with high throughput, low cost and
high yield capabilities. The approaches include: a) studying the processing
mechanism of three dimensional laser dynamic forming for multilayer laminated
structures; (b) developing controlled fabrication of laminated structures on
uneven surfaces; (c) fabricating functional laminated composite structures, such
as a microelectromechanical system for biomedical applications; (d)
characterizing the physical properties of formed multilayer structures, and; (e)
investigating the manufacturability of the three dimensional laser dynamic
forming process and optimizing the process.

If successful, the results of this research will have significant impact on the
general area of flexible and stretchable microelectromechanical system devices,
such as flexible displays, smart textiles, various clinical and healthcare
applications, low-cost and flexible solar cells for portable electronics and
communications. The research is interdisciplinary, investigating gaps in
research currently performed in manufacturing, mechanics and device engineering.
Graduate and undergraduate students will engage in multidisciplinary research
opportunities and benefit through classroom instruction. Innovative outreach
efforts will be established, which include: a)engaging the general public
through exhibiting at the public science centers; b) collaborating with
engineering societies, such as Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Engineers, to create a general awareness of science and engineering principles
and demonstrating how these innovative concepts can benefit our well-being, and;
c)emphasizing the education of underrepresented and minority groups.