* 0928924
* A TIME for Freshman Physics in Missouri
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Dorina Mitrea, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 08/31/2015
* USD 4,999,969.00

The Academy for Teachers using Inquiry and Modeling Experiences for Freshman
Physics in Missouri (A TIME for Freshman Physics in Missouri) is a Partnership
among the University of Missouri-Columbia (MU), as the lead institution, and
seven core Partner school districts including Columbia Public Schools, North
Kansas City, Center, Hazelwood, Kirkwood, Chillicothe, and Hickman Mills, as
well as eMINTS--Missouri Virtual Instructional Program. Supporting Partners are
Lincoln University, William Woods University, MU Partnership for Educational
Renewal, MU Saturday Science and Cosmic Conversations Lecture Series, Missouri
Virtual School, Central Missouri Astronomical Association, Columbia Water and
Light, Science Teachers of Missouri, and the Heart of Missouri Regional
Professional Development Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Partnership creates
eighty Teacher Leaders from participating Missouri school districts. These
Teacher Leaders deliver a yearlong physics course to ninth grade students.
Through ten weeks in summer academies over three years and academic year follow-
up experiences Teacher Leaders deepen their physics content knowledge and
develop individualized leadership skills to assist other teachers of freshman
physics in providing all ninth grade students with an inquiry and modeling based
physics experience. Both university faculty and the Teacher Leaders develop an
expanded range of pedagogical and leadership skills that they share with others,
as they serve as resources and catalysts for reform in science education at the
secondary and post-secondary institutional levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
addition to the science teachers involved in the summer physics academies,
selected teachers of mathematics from the same schools participate in a
concurrent weeklong academy, and school administrators attend a three-day
academy, in order to provide additional support for teachers and students as
they engage in freshman physics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A curriculum team,
including some of the Teacher Leaders, adapts the professional development
curriculum used for teachers for use with ninth grade students by means of the
educative curriculum materials (ECM) model. Special education teachers are
involved in the curriculum repurposing, as well as becoming some of the Teacher
Leaders, to infuse principles of Universal Design for Learning (UDL) to ensure
the curriculum meets the needs of diverse learners. A series of formative
assessment tasks to enable teachers to identify student misconceptions are
identified, developed and embedded within the freshman physics curriculum
lessons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A substantive academic year component including
coaches or mentors and an online feature assists teachers. Additional teacher
supports include the formation of professional learning communities for small-
group teamwork, electronic resources such as pod-casts of reading pages and
videos of lab setups, online mentoring, kits and equipment access. Video access
to MU lecture series in physics and in astronomy, which addresses cutting-edge
research and is geared to non-experts is also available.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to generating evidence of the impact of this
endeavor, the project implements a research design to answer two important
questions: 1) In a teacher intellectual leadership project, can enhancement of
pedagogical practice, student content acquisition and teacher leadership growth
through participation in an online learning community achieve results comparable
to sustained classroom coaching support? And 2) Does implementation of Freshman
Physics through the project curriculum yield more positive results in student
achievement in mathematics and science than a more traditional educational
sequencing of science?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).