* 0928774
* GOALI:  A Hybrid Method to Support Natural Interaction of Parts in a Virtual Environment
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Judy Vance, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Collopy
* 07/31/2013
* USD 336,000.00

The research objective of this GOALI award is to develop and evaluate methods to
support natural human interaction with digital CAD models with a focus on
simulating manual assembly tasks in an immersive virtual environment. A hybrid
method is developed which combines voxel-based collision detection and haptic
rendering with enforcement of geometric constraints. An intelligent algorithm to
manage the tradeoffs between the voxel-based collision detection and the
enforcement of geometric constraints is a key component of this research.
Evaluation will include both controlled experiments with students and a protocol
analysis of the impact of the system on John Deere employees. The affordance of
physical assembly provided by the virtual environment and the potential impact
this capability has on the work actions of John Deere engineers will be
examined. The participation of the Deere employees is a key component of this
research as the system's application to a real-world manufacturing context could
not be assessed without the active participation and close collaboration of our
industrial collaborators.

If successful, the results of this research will have significant impact on
engineering design and manufacturing. It will open many doors for the use of
virtual reality as a product prototyping tool. In the design process, for
example, design for assembly relies on designing to accommodate an operator?s
ability to use tools, position components, attach parts, and reorient
assemblies. All of these actions rely on humans interacting naturally with
product geometry. Faster, easier prototyping through natural interaction with
CAD models is a key component for achieving better product designs at reduced
cost. Design for maintenance and training will also be positively impacted by
this research. The results of the research will be disseminated broadly through
journal papers, conference presentations, and demonstrations at technical
meetings. Outreach in the form of hands-on demonstrations and workshop
activities are planned for K-12 students through collaborations with the Program
for Women in Science and Engineering and the Society of Women Engineers student
section. Women and underrepresented groups will be recruited as part of the
research team through partnerships with an existing ISU NSF Alliance for
Graduate Education and the Professoriate program and an ISU NSF Research for
Undergraduates Site program.