* 0928518
* A System Dynamics Modeling Methodology to Predict Transient Phenomena in Compressible Fluid Flow Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Yann Guezennec, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 07/31/2013
* USD 327,861.00

&lt;br/&gt;This proposal integrates expertise in system dynamics and control
with expertise in fluid mechanics and engine modeling to develop a systematic
approach to modeling transient phenomena in compressible fluid flow systems.
Such a methodology does not exist today. The successful outcome of this project
will be the ability to systematically carry out model order reduction for
distributed parameter systems that describe the flow of compressible fluids, in
analogy with existing methods available, for example, for mechanical systems.
The ability to develop physically consistent lumped-parameter models of
compressible flow systems will enable improvements in the control of energy
conversion systems such as internal combustion engines, turbomachinery, fuel
cell systems, HVAC and refrigeration systems, leading to better performance,
reduced costs and reduced environmental impact. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
automotive industry is striving to improve engine fuel economy and to reduce
their emissions in view of increasingly stringent government mandates and market
demand for vehicles with near-zero exhaust emissions and significantly improved
fuel economy. It is well understood that such gains can only be achieved if
improvements in engine design can be matched by the ability to closely control
engine efficiency and emissions. The present project will lead to better fuel
economy and emissions control, but will also significant shorten the development
of new, more efficient and cleaner engines. Today, this process is very much ad-
hoc and it requires significant amounts of experimental calibration. The outcome
of the proposed project is a systematic and widely applicable methodology that
will shorten development time and that will lead to robust engine control
designs that will also be easily portable among engine platforms.&lt;br/&gt;The
project involves significant participation of Honor undergraduate students from
under-represented groups, and an international collaboration with the University
of Stuttgart, Germany.&lt;br/&gt;