* 0928757
* Study of Soil Abrasivity and Development of a Reliable Soil Abrasivity Index
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Jamal Rostami, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 07/31/2012
* USD 190,240.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of
2009&lt;br/&gt;(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abrasivity is an
important property of soil which it is often overlooked due to its less than
critical impact in many applications, including construction projects. With the
increased use of soft ground tunneling, the issue of tool wear and life has
become very crucial since in many cases tool inspection, maintenance, and
replacement is performed under pressurized conditions or so called ?hyperbaric
interventions?. This is a time consuming and costly step in tunneling, and
working in tunnel face under such conditions is very dangerous and risky. There
is no test or index that can provide a quantitative measurement of soil
abrasivity, especially as it may pertain to wear on the excavation tools. The
available measures of soil abrasivity are limited to the evaluation of the Moh?s
hardness of the constituent grains and minerals. In recent years, there has been
some interest in this field and a few preliminary research programs for testing
soil abrasiveness have commenced. These programs primarily involve application
of existing rock abrasivity measurement systems such as Norwegian Abrasivity
Value AV or French LCPC test to soil. There are inherent shortcomings of these
test system for application in soil. They change the grain distribution of the
soil, they are performed on dry samples, cannot simulate the operational
conditions of the excavation face such as moisture content and stress levels,
and can not include the soil conditioners and their impact on the tool wear.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We will study the parameters involved in soil abrasion and
its impact on cutting tools. This will include study of the actual conditions at
the face of the soft ground excavation systems to be able to closely simulate
the field conditions in the testing system. Simultaneously, a study of the
special grades of steel and tungsten carbide commonly used in excavation tools
will be performed to develop an understanding of their surface characteristics
as related to wear mechanism in soil excavation. This will include specialized
tribology tests to see the interaction of these materials and various soil types
and constituent minerals and grains. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based on the result
of these studies, an appropriate soil abrasivity testing machine will be
developed. This system will go through a critical review by team members and
detailed shop drawings will be produced. The device will be fabricated and will
be used to perform parametric studies on various factors influencing the soil
and tool interaction and wear of the cutting tool. This will include the testing
of the material properties used in the device to represent the cutting tools,
various speeds for propellers and peddles, different angles in the propellers to
mimic the stress levels between the cutting tool and soil, testing soils in dry,
wet, saturated, and at higher water pressures, and the impact of various soil
types and compositions. The results will be the selection of a set of operating
parameters for the testing to yield consistent, repeatable, and meaningful
results to be used as soil abrasivity index.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: Once the testing system is established, a standard method for
measurement of soil abrasivity will be introduced to complement the existing
soil mechanics testing. The applications will be to predict tool life more
accurately, improve tool design and material, and to objectively evaluate the
impact of soil conditioning agents. There will be a multitude of additional
developments linked to this index once it becomes a standard means of measuring
soil abrasiveness for application in civil, mining, and petroleum as well as
manufacturing sectors serving these industries. The test could also be used in
development of new materials and cutting tools used on various excavation
machines.&lt;br/&gt;