* 0928129
* Reliability and Safety of Suspension Bridge Cables Using Continuous Health Monitoring Data
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* George Deodatis, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 07/31/2013
* USD 401,957.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this award is
to develop a methodology for reliability and safety factor assessment of
suspension bridge cables over time using real-time measurements from sensors
installed inside the cables. Today, small-scale sensors that can measure
environmental parameters like temperature, relative humidity, pH, etc. and that
can be fit inside thousands of tightly compacted steel wires are becoming
available and are being tested for application in suspension bridge cables.
Using these measurements either from the initial construction or from the last
in-depth inspection, the proposed methodology will provide an estimate of the
current cable strength as it evolves with time, as a function of the
environmental conditions. By looking at how the strength changes with time, it
will be possible to estimate the rate of deterioration of the cable strength and
to extrapolate it for future prediction of the strength variation. This
evolution in time is expected to be a deteriorating one. The proposed
methodology will be based on a Monte Carlo simulation based approach to account
for all the uncertainties involved in the problem. This methodology will be
integrated and validated with experimental tests on single bridge wires as well
as on a full scale model of a suspension bridge cable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, the results of the proposed research will represent a dramatic
improvement over the current inspection methods that are unreliable (e.g. visual
inspection) and expensive (e.g. unwrapping and wedging the entire cable). These
results will be of major interest to every suspension bridge owning agency to
assess the safety and to improve the maintenance of such structures.
Undergraduate and graduate students as well as high-school students and teachers
will be involved at different levels of the research.