* 0928110
* U.S.-India Workshops for Catalyzing Research Collaborations in Connection with the 9th ASME-ISHMT Heat and Mass Transfer Conference, Mumbai, India, January 4-6, 2010.
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Milind Jog, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 08/31/2010
* USD 28,875.00

0928110 Jog This award provides support to foster collaborative research between
the U.S. and India in the areas of thermal science and engineering. Five
workshops will be held in conjunction with the 9thASME-ISHMT Heat and Mass
Transfer Conference at the Indian Institute of Technology, Mumbai, January
4?6th, 2010. This conference is the premier venue for disseminating research
findings for India's thermal sciences and engineering community. The American
Society of Mechanical Engineers co-sponsors this event to enhance interactions
between Indian and US thermal science researchers.

The interactive workshops in five topical areas are recognized as emerging areas
with significant current research thrust in both countries. These are: Thermal
Design and Management in Electronics, Thermal Transport in Biological Systems,
Development of Nuclear Energy and Nuclear Process Heat Based Energy Resources,
Recent Advances in Fuel Cell Engineering, and Gas Turbine Cooling and Heat
Transfer. They are designed to promote discussion about the next-generation of
thermal challenges and to seed new bilateral research collaborations in areas of
mutual interest. For the US participants this is an opportunity to gain first-
hand knowledge of the current research thrusts, expertise and facilities in
India.

The US delegation includes 8 senior scientists, 4 postdoctoral researchers, and
3 graduate students. The workshops, which target fundamental areas in heat and
mass transfer, are expected to enhance US-India cooperation on future thermal
technologies, share information and build institutional bridges, and promote
educational and cross-cultural experiences for all participants. US delegates
include women and members from under-represented groups who are early-career
faculty, graduate students, or senior researchers. The report on the workshops
and conference will be disseminated through a website so that heat transfer
researchers worldwide will be able to access this information. In U.S., the
results of the India conference and workshops will be reported to a larger
audience at the next major Heat Transfer Conference held in the U.S. Funding for
this workshop is provided by the Office of International Science and Engineering
and the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport
Systems.