* 0928806
* The Development of Microbial Associations in Major Reef Building Corals of the Pacific Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2014
* Michael Rappe, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 09/30/2014
* USD 428,916.00

Fundamental to the study of coral-microbial associations is an understanding of
when and how the relationships are established, and their specificity. Recently,
the investigators provided the first evidence of a specific association between
an early life history stage of a coral (Pocillopora meandrina) and a particular
group of bacteria (Jannaschia lineage of the Roseobacter clade of
Alphaproteobacteria). They will be expanding this work by examining the onset of
microbial associations in key reef building corals from Hawaii in the North
Pacific Ocean and Moorea, French Polynesia, in the South Pacific Ocean.
Understanding the onset, specificity and function of the microbial community
associated with these coral species is necessary to understand and predict the
coral holobiont response to a changing environment.

The main objectives of this proposal are to: 1. Use cultivation independent
techniques to identify and quantify microorganisms associated with several major
reef building corals of Hawaii in the North Pacific Ocean that represent a
variety of reproductive strategies (brooding and broadcast spawning) and
differing modes of zooxanthellae symbiont transmission (vertical vs.
horizontal), throughout the reproductive cycle, early developmental stages, and
post-settlement stages of each. 2. Collect and analyze similar samples from the
same (or similar) species of coral found in the South Pacific Ocean in Moorea,
French Polynesia, in order to assess whether the associations documented in
objective 1 are localized to Hawaii, or broadly distributed across the Pacific
and likely to represent common features of coral development. 3. Use
fluorescence in situ hybridization to enumerate cells of the Jannaschia lineage
of the Roseobacter clade throughout the development cycle of P. meandrina
collected in Hawaii. The PIs will expand this objective to include other coral
species, target bacteria, and/or geographic location as they identify additional
associations. 4. Isolate microorganisms prevalent in cultivation-independent
surveys of P. meandrina-associated microbial communities (e.g. Jannaschia sp.)
by the application of novel culturing techniques, in order to develop model
systems for the investigation of coral-microbe interactions.

Intellectual merit Coral reefs are in decline as a result of increasing
environmental stress due to anthropogenic activity, and there is now
considerable evidence indicating that they are under threat from the effects of
rising sea surface temperature and ocean acidification. Microorganisms
associated with corals are thought to play a variety of potentially important
roles in maintaining the health and resiliency of the coral host, and advances
in methodology primarily driven by developments in the field of molecular
biology are facilitating growing insight into this association. Much of coral-
microbial research is focused on the contribution of microorganisms to disease
and bleaching, and is focused almost exclusively on adult coral colonies. This
study will provide unique information on the manner in which microorganisms
interact with healthy corals throughout their developmental cycle, the
specificity of these relationships, how they are initiated, and their
distribution and frequency in nature.

Broader impacts (1) This proposal will support the training of one postdoctoral
scholar in advancing molecular microbial ecology techniques, novel cultivation-
based methodology, and coral biology. (2) The investigators will develop a
website that will contain information on coral-microbial interactions, with
content designed to serve as an educational resource for K-12 students, and to
serve as a resource for other scientists interested in coral-microbial
associations. Data generated from this study, including publications,
presentations, microbial strains, gene sequences, photomicrographs and
phylogenetic analyses, will be made publicly available via the website. (3) The
postdoc and PI will design and annually offer a five-day intensive training
workshop on the use of ARB sequence analysis program, including the application
of fluorescence in situ microscopy to marine bacteria and coral samples. (4) The
proposal will support the training of undergraduate students under the
mentorship of the postdoctoral scholar, and will take advantage of existing
programs and relationships to specifically offer these opportunities to
underrepresented students at the University of Hawaii such as Native Hawaiians
and Pacific Islanders.