* 0928703
* IDR: Remote and Directive Electromagnetic Stimulation of Transport Mechanisms to Enhance Soil Remediation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Elisa Barney Smith, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Dimitrios Papavassiliou
* 08/31/2014
* USD 373,783.00

Farid 0928703

EM fields can oscillate water dipole molecules, which can in turn stimulate
mechanisms such as airflow, seepage, microbial activities, desorption, and
volatilization. Several soil remediation technologies inject air into soil to
enhance microbial activities for bioremediation and volatilization of organic
contaminants for soil cleanup. The goal of this study is to electromagnetic ally
stimulate mechanisms to enhance soil remediation. Recent research has also shown
a strong potential to mitigate liquefaction by air sparging. Increasing air
injection pressure will create air channels within high porosity zones for easy
airflow. These channels are preferential paths for flow of the majority of the
injected air. The size, spacing, and formation of these air channels cannot be
controlled and air diffusion between these channels is extremely slow. Electric
current has become popular to enhance remediation processes. However, electric
current will find preferential paths of relatively higher electrical
conductivity. In sandy or even highly conductive lossy clayey soils, relatively
higher conductivity zones are the same high porosity zones, previously taken by
air channels. EM waves can oscillate water dipole molecules to stimulate and
enhance different transport mechanisms and increase hydraulic conductivity. EM
waves propagate better in zones of low conductivity (low porosity zones
(untouched by the previously mentioned methods). EM waves antennas can be
designed to operate above ground, be directive to input more power in desired
direction, and focus energy into desired locations with constructive radiation
patterns. The heating effect due to oscillation by an EM field can also be
controlled more easily than electric fields, using low voltage high frequency
waves. Effect of variations in frequency and power level on enhancement of
different transport mechanisms and microbial activities need to be studied. This
study is essential for developing theoretical models necessary to simulate these
interactions. In addition to enhancing airflow, the stimulation has the
potential to enhance volatilization, microbial activities, and desorption of
chemicals and heavy metals from soil-grains for cleanup. The project will also
integrate research, education, and active collaboration with industry. One
multidisciplinary graduate student will participate as will undergraduate and
high school students and teachers. The PIs will continue to expand their
connection with Boise high schools through the TRiO (Upward Bound Summer
Internship) program at Boise State University (BSU) with summer internships. A
website will be developed to deliver the research outcome to practitioners and
academic communities, especially the large group of companies within the
initiated collaborative group. With the help from the BSU TRiO program, portions
of the website will be designed for high school and middle school students and
linked to Boise public school websites.