* 0928997
* Enhancing the Quality of STEM Education and Retention @MVSU through Mentoring and Student Professional Development
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Dr. Raymond Williams, Mississippi Valley State University
* Continuing Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2015
* USD 2,674,312.00

The "Enhancing the Quality of STEM Education and Retention @MVSU through
Mentoring Strategies and Student Professional Development" project seeks to
implement mentoring strategies and student professional development activities
to affect the growing exodus of students from STEM majors between the freshmen
and sophomore years at Mississippi Valley State University. The project seeks to
assist underrepresented students who often have numerous difficulties which
deter them from attending college and being totally dedicated to academics. The
project will further improve the infrastructure and quality of the STEM programs
by strengthening the academic skills and support structures. &lt;br/&gt;Specific
components of the project are: 1) a STEM mentoring model to enhance the quality
of education to affect the number of students leaving STEM majors between the
freshmen and sophomore year; 2) faculty/student research teams to increase
opportunities for faculty and students to engage in collaborative research; 3) a
teacher education clinic to enhance the science and mathematics skills of K-12
students by strengthening the content knowledge and the pedagogical skills of
middle and high school teachers; and 4)infusion of computer security concepts
into the curriculum to create and build an infrastructure which supports it as a
viable research option for undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;This project is important
because a disproportionate number of students arrive at the University with poor
preparation for the STEM disciplines. This phenomenon is partially attributable
to the preparation and skill level of teachers in the K-12 school system. The
geographic region targeted for this project is the Mississippi Delta where 26
percent of all African Americans in Mississippi reside. Program activities are
designed to provide improved educational experiences and opportunities for
academically talented students who are pursuing STEM degrees, and to prepare
them for graduate school and the workforce.