* 0928103
* Math and Science Partnership - Motivation Assessment Program II (MSP-MAP II) Teacher Motivation in Professional Development
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2014
* AnneMarie Conley, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth VanderPutten
* 09/30/2014
* USD 1,927,048.00

Investigators from the University of Michigan and the University of California -
Irvine, in support of partnership projects of the Math and Science Partnership
(MSP) program, are conducting research on the role of teacher motivation in
professional development (PD). The Math and Science Partnership - Motivation
Assessment Program II (MSP-MAP II) is building on (a) capacity developed during
prior work, (b) current partnerships with two MSP projects, TEAM-Math (Alabama)
and TASEL-M (California), and (c) the development of new collaborations, most
notably with the Georgia-based Partnership for Reform in Science and
Mathematics. Whereas the MSP program has demonstrated success in improving
teacher content knowledge and pedagogical content knowledge, as well as student
proficiency in mathematics and science, the MSP-MAP II project answers a
fundamental need to examine the influence of teacher motivation for and
engagement in teacher PD. While motivational concerns are often alluded to in PD
programs (e.g., participation incentives or teacher confidence), the
motivational processes in teacher PD remains an understudied component of
teacher training interventions in general, and in MSP interventions in
particular. Recognition of the importance of teacher motivation in the PD
process arises at a time of renewed focus on teacher motivation, but what
distinguishes current work is its comprehensive application of contemporary
motivation theory and research. This research offers a range of constructs and
assessment tools that are relevant to the process of PD in mathematics and
science instruction, and to the formative and summative evaluation of teacher PD
interventions in the MSP program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MSP-MAP II is
systematically applying current work on teacher motivation to the domain of
teacher PD with the following goals: &lt;br/&gt; (1) developing a knowledge base
of motivation theory, research and assessment that is relevant for the PD
process; &lt;br/&gt; (2) developing and making available a suite of motivation-
related reliable and valid assessment tools for MSP projects to use for
formative and summative evaluation; &lt;br/&gt; (3) collaborating with MSP
projects to test and refine the proposed model of motivation in teacher
PD;&lt;br/&gt; (4) facilitating the incorporation of the model and motivation-
related PD assessment tools into existing and future MSP logic models and
evaluation designs; and &lt;br/&gt; (5) disseminating the PD model and
assessment tools to the broader teaching and research communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MSP-MAP II is accomplishing its goals by surveying more
than 2,000 teachers at various stages of PD. Through its systematic study of
teacher motivation in PD, MSP-MAP II is contributing to the growing theoretical
and empirical literature on teacher motivation, particularly in regard to
expectancy-value, achievement goals and interest theories.