* 0928274
* Education Research Grant: Does FORCE (Financially Oriented Research Calculus Experience) increase achievement in calculus?
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Anne Pierce, Hampton University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2013
* USD 565,441.00

Hampton University (HU) is implementing an educational research investigation to
answer the question: Does a proposed new model of curricular instruction focused
on the integration of financial applications significantly increase achievement
in calculus for STEM majors? The Financially Oriented Research Calculus
Experience (FORCE) project outlines an education research effort to enhance
student learning outcomes in mathematics and financial literacy. This effort is
associated with the HU 2008 Reaffirmation of Accreditation by the Southern
Association of Colleges and Schools, Hampton?s Quality Enhancement
Plan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Information about the effectiveness of financial
literacy programs at the college level has not been adequately examined. A
survey of college students revealed they wanted their universities to offer
financial literacy information outside of the normal focus of financial aid
(Cude et al., 2006). Though there was no general consensus regarding the
mechanism by which financial literacy should be delivered, the most common
request was to begin financial literacy during the freshman year. In addition,
students suggested the development of a financial literacy center, student
workshops, seminars and even the inclusion of financial education in required
college courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most STEM majors at Hampton are required
to take either the MAT 151 Calculus I or MAT 130 Calculus gatekeeper course for
the major. This study investigates the impact of curricular instruction focused
on financial applications on student learning outcomes in calculus and retention
of STEM majors. The findings contribute to the body of evidence that increased
academic achievement in calculus is a significant factor in retention of STEM
majors.&lt;br/&gt;A carefully designed education research study is being
implemented and evaluated. Mixed methods research paradigms is being employed.
Institutional, instructional and individual factors is being employed. Baseline
survey data on student performance is being captured. Student and faculty
interviews and survey instruments will be conducted. The research involves the
sequential and simultaneous use of quantitative and qualitative data collection
and multivariate analysis techniques. Data analysis techniques includes
graphical displays, descriptive summaries, contingency table analysis, one- and
two-way analysis of variance and paired data comparisons.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hampton University, founded in 1868, is an HBCU, privately
endowed, co-educational, nonsectarian institution of higher education.
&lt;br/&gt;