* 0928491
* Testing the turbulence avoidance hypothesis
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Jeannette Yen, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2013
* USD 445,759.00

This project will evaluate species-specific responses of copepods to turbulence
via laboratory experiments and computer simulations. Field studies strongly
suggest that oceanic turbulence affects the vertical position of copepods
primarily by changing their behavior, and only secondarily by physically
altering their position. The hypothesis to be tested is that fine-scale
turbulence alters copepod behavior via directed movements and changes in
swimming kinematics. The specially-designed laboratory apparatus enables
comparison of plankton kinematic patterns in response to fine-scale turbulent
flow features. The apparatus creates turbulent flows with dissipation rates,
length scales, velocity scales, and fluctuating strain rate levels that are
appropriate for zooplankton studies. Recent advances in 3D velocity measuring
techniques make this an opportune time to quantify the flow field around frees-
wimming zooplankton at high spatial and temporal resolution. To correlate
specific behavior responses to specific instantaneous 3D flow patterns, the
velocity field must be quantified in a 3D volume surrounding the animal. The
experiments will facilitate a quantitative correlation between copepod behavior
and hydrodynamic conditions and will provide new insight to the balance of
biological versus physical forcing. Further, the rules of copepod response to a
spatially-explicit physical environment will be entered into an individual-based
model (IBM) to provide a context to assess the ecological significance of
zooplankton behavior. The IBM simulations will test the influence of micro-scale
behavior on fine-scale copepod distributions, and hence allow the turbulence-
avoidance hypothesis question to be addressed: Do individual copepods react to
fine-scale turbulent features with a species-specific response that results in a
population distribution that does not overlap with the turbulent region?

Collaborative interactions are essential to extending understanding of the
biological, physical, and chemical processes that create and maintain fine-scale
plankton distribution patterns. This interdisciplinary effort relies on
combining expertise in fluid mechanics and biological oceanography to advance
understanding of copepod ecology and sensory systems. This project will increase
our understanding and ability to model the effects of turbulence on zooplankton
distributions. Further, the data will be used by NOAA personnel towards
developing long-term indices of secondary production as a function of wind-
generated mixed-layer turbulence as part of NOAA's FATE (Fisheries And The
Environment) program. Training will be provided for a graduate student in the
specific areas of advanced laser measurement systems, copepod mechanosensory
systems, and biological-physical interactions in the ocean. The student will
experience a rich interdisciplinary research environment and develop skills to
be a leader in her/his field. The project connects well with on-going
educational efforts, in particular NSF IGERT and REU programs to educate in the
area of aquatic chemical and hydromechanical signaling. Further, the
investigators plan to work with staff members at the Georgia Aquarium and Zoo
Atlanta to set up exhibits of invertebrate behavior and the role of underwater
perception in mediating behavior.