* 0928014
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Field Investigation of the Influence of Surface Moisture on the Initiation of Motion in Wind-Blown Sand Transport on Beaches
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Steven Namikas, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 07/31/2011
* USD 11,578.00

The movement of sand by wind is the primary mechanism responsible for delivering
sand from beach to dune. As such, it represents a critical linkage in the suite
of interactions that connect these places and that control coastal dune
development. A key uncertainty lies in the identification of the threshold
condition, that is, the wind energy level at which transport begins. Without
accurate representation of this threshold, it is not possible to determine
whether a given wind event will generate transport. This situation hampers
intermediate-scale modeling of aeolian sediment budgets, as it is not currently
possible to reliably predict the occurrence of transport events. The goal of
this doctoral dissertation research project is to validate and calibrate a new
model of the threshold condition for windblown transport on beaches. This effort
differs from previous approaches in the inclusion of a new term that accounts
for the range of grain sizes present in the sediment bed. The new model provides
significantly improved predictive capabilities, based on examination of
previously published data. Further, the model also encapsulates the effect of
surface moisture on the threshold condition, a key complicating factor on many
beaches. Field experiments will be conducted at two locations (Padre Island, TX,
and Cape San Blas, FL) to verify the model. Wind velocity and surface moisture
contents will be monitored leading up to the start of transport events. Mobile
stations, each comprised of a 3-D sonic anemometer and an array of microphone-
based saltation detectors, will be installed on the beach at locations of
various moisture contents. The anemometers and saltation detectors will be
logged in real time, and surface moisture measurements will be conducted using a
handheld optical device designed for this purpose. The data recorded during the
field study will allow validation and calibration of the
model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study represents a significant departure from
the current theoretical framework that is used to explain and model windblown
sand transport. The results will provide improved insight into the transport of
sand on beaches, and if the proposed model is successfully validated this study
will significantly advance predictive capabilities. This will in turn improve
calculations of larger-scale sediment budgets by providing researchers and
coastal managers with more accurate estimates regarding how much sand is
transported from beach to dune, and when and under what conditions such events
can occur. This will contribute to modeling of post-storm dune recovery, for
example, and for predicting the time required for dune re-establishment and
reconstruction programs. Finally, this study will address one of the most
problematic factors complicating wind blown sand transport on beaches: the
frequent presence of surface moisture which can inhibit or even completely
prevent the movement of sand by wind. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research
Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising
student to establish a strong independent research career. &lt;br/&gt;