* 0928444
* Implementation Grant: STEM Center for Research and Development
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2016
* Freddie Dixon, University of the District of Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2016
* USD 2,704,930.00

ABSTRACT HRD 0928444&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of the District of
Columbia (UDC) STEM Center for Research and Development is continuing to build
upon the successes of previous HBCU-UP funding and is introducing additional
novel and effective programs to enhance the likelihood that more STEM students
will complete their undergraduate education and enroll in graduate programs.
After an extensive recruiting effort, the Center is fostering innovative
activities that will retain and improve academic competencies of the STEM
undergraduate students and provide the required confidence and basic research
skills that will serve as the foundation to support the development of future
STEM researchers. There will be an introduction of new and an enhancement of
existing multidisciplinary course offerings (bioethics, computational biology,
statistics, genomics). New enrichment activities will add to the success of the
existing ones, such as a partnership with the new UDC Office of International
Development specifically designed to facilitate experiences for its
undergraduates interested in international summer research. For the first time,
the Center has a major focus on increasing the pedagogical skills of STEM
faculty. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is also support for the plan to increase
accommodating Students with Disabilities through partnership with the UDC Office
of Disabilities that will support the Center students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
STEM Center objectives are: (1) to provide support activities that will promote
a seamless transition from high school or community college, to undergraduate
school, to graduate school in STEM disciplines; (2) to provide opportunities for
faculty to improve their research and teaching skills; and (3) to improve the
STEM curriculum to include new and enhanced courses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project gives the University additional support to advance curricular reform,
increase student training, and enhance faculty development. The UDC goal of
institutional quality is consistent with the tangible goal and objectives of the
STEM Center, specifically retaining high quality faculty actively conducting
student-assisted research, improving teaching capabilities, and producing well
qualified graduates.&lt;br/&gt;