* 0928835
* Hybrid Nanostructured Material Systems for Tailored Stress-Wave Mitigation of Impact and Blast Effects
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Parviz Soroushian, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 08/31/2013
* USD 305,999.00

A novel concept for the mitigation of blast and impact effects on people and
structures with new materials that modify the transmission of stress waves in a
controlled or tailored manner is proposed. The concept is to develop new
materials by strategically reinforcing cellular solids (e.g., foams) at the
micro-scale level by the controlled deposition of nanometer-thick coatings.
Homogeneous and particulate-reinforced nano-layers will be deposited by the
layer-by-layer assembly method to develop complex multiscale multilayer hybrid
reinforcements with molecular-level control of its composition and
microstructure. Material and structural component testing will be done to
evaluate nano-scale morphology and mechanical properties under pseudo-static and
high-rate loads. Multiscale computational models will be developed to study
stress waves propagation through complex materials and to serve as design tools.

The research will lead to breakthrough knowledge for designing blast/impact
absorbing materials in which their deformation and failure is tailored to guide
the propagation of stress waves and thus control and optimize energy
dissipation. It will also provide new insight to the problem of three-
dimensional stress-wave propagation in complex materials. The concept has the
potential of revolutionizing the design of automobiles, aircraft, body armor and
protective devices for civil infrastructure. Two graduate students will be
trained towards a Ph.D. degree under the multidisciplinary basis of the
research. The project will be integrated with a new Residential Experience
Program for undergraduate engineering students at MSU by developing a Theme
Community in ?materials and security.? Summer research opportunities will be
offered to traditionally under-represented undergraduate students.