* 0928177
* Assessing the Impact of the MSPs: K-8 Science (AIM: K-8 Science)
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Iris Weiss, Horizon Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Julio Lopez-Ferrao
* 08/31/2015
* USD 1,919,910.00

This project is studying the impact of NSF's Math and Science Partnership (MSP)
program on teacher content knowledge, classroom practice, and student
achievement. This cross-site study is examining the relationship between the
nature of teachers' professional development experiences and both teacher and
student outcomes across 10 MSP projects. An advisory board with expertise in
research design, data analysis, professional development, and science content is
providing feedback throughout the study. What the field knows about professional
development strategies to deepen the content knowledge of mathematics and
science teachers is surprisingly limited given the extent of efforts in this
area. One challenge for moving forward from these findings is that people use
the term teacher content knowledge to mean very different things. Another
challenge for the field is understanding which strategies or features matter
most in professional development programs focused on deepening teacher content
knowledge. Finally, substantial constraints in the research design, and/or
instrumentation of many of the studies of professional development in the
current literature have limited what has been learned.

The study is addressing these challenges by developing a system for capturing
equivalent data across MSP projects. The study is documenting details on the
professional development offered to teachers (i.e., the interventions), as well
as measuring teacher content knowledge and student learning using common
instruments across the MSPs. Data are being analyzed using hierarchical linear
modeling (HLM). The first phase of the analysis examines the impact of the MSPs
on teacher content knowledge and investigates the relative impacts of different
approaches to the professional development. The second phase extends the work to
explore the relationships among teacher content knowledge, classroom practices,
and student achievement. The study is also examining which MSP approaches appear
most promising for closing historic achievement gaps.

In addition, the study is providing project-specific impact findings for each
partner MSP, including results from appropriate statistical tests, and assisting
partners with designing and implementing further analyses. Partner MSPs are
given feedback on reports/articles they prepare using the standards of evidence
review process developed by the MSP Knowledge Management and Dissemination
project.

This project is adding to the knowledge base in several important ways. First,
findings about the impact of MSPs on K-8 science teacher content knowledge,
classroom practice, and student learning can provide guidance in the design of
future professional development efforts. Second, the methodology for improving
project-specific evaluations and at the same time providing data for more
extensive and sophisticated cross-site analyses has the potential to enhance
knowledge generation in future programs supported by NSF and other funders.