* 0928493
* IT-Enabled Continuous Risk Assessment of Bridge Networks for Customized and Actionable Multi-Hazard Interventions
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Jamie Padgett, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 07/31/2012
* USD 380,793.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bridge infrastructure owners are
challenged to effectively manage risks not only from aging and deterioration but
also from natural hazards, such as earthquakes or storm surge. These
difficulties are stimulating an emerging trend of instrumentation and condition
assessment of bridges. This project will synthesize newly available bridge
condition datasets into bridge system and bridge network reliability and risk
metrics for multiple hazards, and promote effective interventions at the bridge
system and network level. Three primary research goals support this effort: (1)
To update models of bridge vulnerability from natural hazards with data on in-
field condition. (2) To enable a network of smart bridges capable inferring
condition status and reliability under multiple hazards given limited data from
sample instrumentation sites. (3) To identify critical bridges and required
upgrades that ensure uniform network-level performance through a new nested
inverse reliability method. Integrating the new tools for rapid fragility
assessment and inference modeling within the novel inverse reliability method
provides an approach to effectively invest funds to achieve target network-level
performance goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to rapidly communicate
risks, flag sources of network vulnerability, project future risks, and provide
actionable network-level intervention will help avoid future catastrophic
events, save lives, and present economic means for achieving infrastructure
safety. Accomplishment of the project goals will provide a solid framework for
integrating monitoring data within the context of multi-hazard systems risk, and
can serve as a benchmark systems approach with extensive applications to other
fields. Working closely with collaborating agencies will help ensure infusion in
next generation maintenance programs, emergency management plans, and bridge
retrofit guidelines. The integrated research and education program will have a
broad impact on the preparation and experiences of future generations of IT and
engineering integrators, and directly addresses the need to engage and recruit a
diverse pool of students. This ambitious program leveraging existing University
resources accomplishes these goals through such activities as student community
forums, revitalized undergraduate curriculum, and targeted interactive K-12
outreach. The project addresses a workforce shortage in the critical area of
civil infrastructure protection, and prepares students to contribute to public
service and infrastructure sectors by using real-world educational experiences
and by emphasizing the importance of integrating information technology and
engineering.