* 0928144
* Evolution of the Philippine Sea Plate: Geochemical and Geochronological Studies of Pre-Oligocene Igneous Rocks
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Rosemary Hickey-Vargas, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 09/30/2012
* USD 81,694.00

This research addresses the origin of the unusual felsic and intermediate
intrusive rocks collected from the slope of the southern Mariana Trench. These
unusual rocks appear to represent the middle part of the ocean crust under the
Izu-Bonin/Mariana (IBM) volcanic arc. Unexpectedly, these early rocks have an
island arc geochemical signature with Pb isotope ages indicating they are
Cretaceous in age. If verified, this would indicate that older arc or crustal
fragments comprise some of the IBM arc basement. which has significant
ramifications for the evolution of the seafloor in the IBM arc area and possibly
for volcanic arcs in general. Research goals are to determine at what time
during arc evolution these rocks formed and/or whether they are parts of older
or arcs and if these intrusive units enhanced intracrustal magmatic
differentiation and middle crust development. Geochemical and isotopic data will
be collected to examine possibly inhereted features and the development of the
intrusive middle crustal section. Understanding the formation of how intra-
oceanic arc crust forms is critical for development of continental crust and its
modeling. Broader impacts of the work include support of an investigator and
graduate student from a gender under-represented in the sciences, international
collaboration, and support of faculty at minority-serving institution. The work
enhances work being carried out by the NSF-funded MARGINS program.