* 0928257
* GOALI/Collaborative Research: Understanding Cracking and Defect Formation During AlN Crystal Growth
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Matthew Miller, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Demitris Kouris
* 08/31/2012
* USD 300,287.00

CMMI - 0928257 - GOALI/Collaborative Research: &lt;br/&gt;Understanding Cracking
and Defect Formation During AlN Crystal Growth &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal will be awarded using funds made available by the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5), and meets the requirements
established in Section 2 of the White House Memorandum entitled, Ensuring
Responsible Spending of Recovery Act Funds, dated March 20, 2009. I also affirm,
as the cognizant Program Officer, that the proposal does not support projects
described in Section 1604 of Division A of the Recovery Act.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this research are to i) gain an
understanding of and ii) create a predictive methodology for crack initiation
and overall crystal quality evolution for Aluminum Nitride (AlN) single crystals
during processing. AlN has outstanding electrical and thermal properties making
it particularly well-suited for high power, high frequency, energy efficient
electronic and photonic devices, such as light emitting diodes (LEDs) and laser
diodes, but the use of AlN is currently limited by the high production cost.
Crystal IS, the industrial partner on this proposal, has developed a new
technology for growing large AlN crystals - up to 50 mm in diameter. However,
these large crystals often crack due to stresses that arise when the material is
cooled from its growth temperature as high as 2300C. In this project, a team of
experts in the fields of stress measurement and simulation of loaded materials
from Cornell and Rensselaer will study AlN as a "structural" material. High
energy X-rays will be used to see the crystal structure of the AlN deep inside a
test specimen as it is loaded. By matching simulations to the experimental
results, key temperature-dependent mechanical properties, related to strength,
stiffness and fracture resistance will be determined. This information will be
used in a crystal growth process model to predict crystal quality for given
growth conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will guide crystal growth
process designers so that large, high quality crystals can be produced. This
work will be integrated into educational programs at the participating
institutions. The industrial collaboration will provide excellent learning
opportunities. Any experimental capabilities developed will reside at the x-ray
beamline and become available to other users.