* 0928282
* Advanced Aeroelastic Analysis Framework for Cable-Supported Bridges under Turbulent Winds
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Ahsan Kareem, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 08/31/2014
* USD 250,000.00

Modern cable-supported bridges, akin to automobiles, are being designed with
streamlined deck cross-sections replacing more traditional truss and box
sections. These sections, however, introduce complex aerodynamic features which
result in a behavior that departs from the assumptions implied in conventional
analysis and design practice. This is further complicated by the fact that there
is no conclusive evidence concerning the stabilizing or destabilizing effects of
atmospheric turbulence on the aerodynamics of bridges and the role of unusual
gust structures experienced during gust fronts and hurricanes. Clearly, these
critical issues, if unaddressed, would have strong bearing on planned and
existing bridges in the future paths of landfalling hurricanes. Herein it is
proposed to develop an advanced analysis framework that aids in seeking improved
performance while enhancing safety and integrity of bridges in extreme wind
environments. Both experimental and computational simulations will be conducted
to capture the aerodynamic characteristics of streamlined deck sections.
Collaborations with a distinguished group of bridge experts from Japan, China
and Italy have been established for sharing of information and data. In
parallel, synergistic collaborations with the design community would ensure
immediate utilization of the developed body of knowledge in practice and design
standards. The project would introduce transformative advances in the state-of-
the-art of the bridge aerodynamics and in efficient tailoring and design of
bridge decks.

The project involves professional development activities, wide dissemination of
research results for practical applications, and educational initiatives that
are likely to have lasting broader impacts. The bridge designers will be
informed of the recent advances in bridge aerodynamics through a cyber-based
virtual organization. Other sectors involving flexible structures such as large
wind turbines and super tall buildings would also benefit from the analysis
framework to be developed in this project. The proposed study promises to
provide a strong intellectual foundation supported by well-trained students at
the graduate, undergraduate and pre-college levels and well-informed designers
equipped with advanced tools for the visionary design of cable-supported bridges
and other wind sensitive structures. These activities are essential to maintain
the American leadership in the burgeoning global market for innovative design
solutions and construction of these important structures.