* 0928154
* Analysis of Large-Scale Stochastic Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,09/30/2010
* Kavita Ramanan, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Robert L. Smith
* 09/30/2010
* USD 324,931.00

This proposal concerns the analysis of large-scale stochastic systems that arise
in manufacturing and service systems, computer data systems and financial
engineering. Three broad classes of problems will be considered. The first
involves the design, control and performance analysis of networks of multi-
server systems with generally distributed service times. The effect of customer
abandonement in these systems will also be considered. The second problem arises
in the study of microstructure in finance. The research in this part of the
proposal aims to introduce a rigorous model that will provide insight into the
dynamics of limit order books. The last topic concerns the study of time-varying
stochastic networks. Although a lot of work has been carried out in the study of
homogeneous systems, most real- world applications exhibit non-negligible time-
varying behavior. However, there is relatively little theoretical analysis of
the control of these systems.&lt;br/&gt;The proposal aims to take a preliminary
step towards establishing rigorous conditions under which the study of a simpler
system can shed insight into the analysis of the time-varying network.If
successful, the analysis on multi- server queues would provide guidelines for
routing and staffing in call centers, as well as help assess the performance of
computer data systems. The work on limit order books could lead to a better
understanding of the effect that protocols governing an exchange have on
important financial quantities such as the bid-ask spread. The study on time-
varying stochastic systems would identify conditions under which simple
heuristics may be used to construct near-optimal controls for more complex
systems. In addition, the work in this proposal is likely to require the
development of mathematical techniques in diverse areas, ranging from measure-
valued processes and stochastic partial differential equations to large
deviations and stochastic games, which would be of broader interest.