* 0928803
* Self-positioning Microspheres for Direct-write Nanolithography using Bessel Beam Optical Traps
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Craig Arnold, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 09/30/2012
* USD 316,627.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;Optical trap-assisted nanolithography is a novel
technique providing high resolution nanoscale rapid prototyping over different
types of surfaces. Small plastic beads, used as near-field lenses for pulsed-
laser processing, are placed in close proximity to a surface by means of an
optical trap. The force from the light pushing down on the beads suspended in
liquid is balanced by a repelling force pushing up from the surface allowing the
beads to reach an equilibrium position near the surface and enabling one to move
them with computer-controlled accuracy. Arrays of beads provide high-throughput
parallel-processing for nanomanufacturing applications without the need for
active feedback and monitoring of each bead. In this study, the fundamental
interactions among the bead, surface, and solution are examined experimentally
and theoretically in order to understand the underlying physics of the
configuration, providing a direct path toward improved speed and scalability and
expanding the applicability of this emerging technique to other new and exciting
systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this project will have a
significant impact on the field of direct-write nanomanufacturing as well as
other important areas in which interactions between a bead and a surface under
different environments appear, such as biology, energy, colloidal sciences, or
even consumer foods and skin care products. Given the broad appeal, a number of
important educational activities are planned including module development for
community science museums and web based projects. &lt;br/&gt;