* 0928002
* Linking infaunal hydraulic activities, porewater flow and biogeochemical processes in marine sediments
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Sarah Woodin, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2013
* USD 591,351.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most of the oceanic seafloor is
pervaded by burrows and tubes of infauna. Activities of these animals, such as
burrowing, feeding, and defecation, are of fundamental importance to
biogeochemical processes as these activities are associated with movement of
sediment porewater. These bio-advective processes increase benthic-pelagic
coupling and microbial activity, but the underlying mechanisms by which infaunal
activities drive biogeochemical cycling through bio-advection are very poorly
understood. Recent work has demonstrated that bio-advection is the result of
behavior specific, hydraulically generated pressure fields with changing
directions and radial extent from the burrow of 50 cm or more. These results
force a re-evaluation of sediments as habitats with transient conditions
predominant to the depth of biotic activity. This project addresses (a) which
types of infauna contribute significantly to these bio-advective processes, (b)
what behaviors generate porewater fluxes, how frequently and under what
conditions, (c) what is the impact on oxygen availability within the sediment
and how transient is this availability, (d) what is the impact on biogeochemical
rates and microbial community structure, and (e) what are the direct effects and
feedbacks on biological processes, such as primary productivity and recruitment?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The general goals are to determine the influence of large,
numerically dominant polychaetes, bivalves, and crustaceans on bio-advective
porewater flow and its consequences for biogeochemical cycling and feedbacks on
the benthic community. First, using a combination of field and laboratory
measurements, the research will analyze the diversity of hydraulic activities by
important large infauna to determine which types of infauna contribute most
significantly to these bio-advective processes and what behaviors are the most
important to porewater flux. Second, laboratory experiments will link species-
specific hydraulic activities to chemocline dynamics using live animals and
biomimetic 'robolugs' to produce controlled porewater flows. For selected
hydraulic behaviors the impact on microbial activity and diversity will be
analyzed. Finally, feedback mechanisms on benthic communities in habitats that
they partly create will be analyzed using a combination of large laboratory
aquaria and field deployed robolugs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
This research challenges the traditional view that most sediments are primarily
steady-state, diffusion-dominated systems. The research will be transformative
to the fields of benthic ecology, microbial ecology, and biogeochemistry as it
makes obvious the central role played by infaunal animals in driving changes in
the chemical and physical properties of sediments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: Two postdoctoral fellows will take part in this project and will
receive training in research, mentoring of graduate and undergraduate students,
scientific integrity, and career preparation. This project will also engage
undergraduate students who will participate in weekly lab meetings, do research
designed in part by them and meet weekly one-on-one with their mentor PI. All
will be encouraged to present posters at national meetings. During the summer
these students will participate in the Biology REU program, which has weekly
meetings about research ethics, publishing scientific papers, applying to grad
school, and strategies for success in grad school. To expose pre-college
students to the excitement of interdisciplinary research and increase hands-on
participation in science by students and teachers, the research team will
participate in the SCience Lab program run by Dr. Bert Ely, Director of the
Center for Science Education and funded in part by NIH. Middle school students
will come to USC to do a research exercise that meets the state science
standards and that can be completed between 9:30 am and 1:30 pm. An exercise
using the robolugs will demonstrate the impact of organisms on sediments.