* 0928968
* Reassessment of dissolved DMSP concentrations and turnover flux in the ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Ronald Kiene, University of South Alabama
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2013
* USD 412,866.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers at the University of South
Alabama will evaluate new approaches for measuring the biologically available
pool of dimethylsulfoniopropionate (DMSPd) and its turnover rate in a variety of
marine systems. DMSPd is rapidly cycled in the upper ocean and is thought to be
a source of carbon and sulfur for microbial communities. In addition, it is
believed to be a major precursor for DMS, which is a volatile sulfur compound
that is involved in the atmospheric sulfur cycle and DMS is a climate-active
gas. However, conclusions regarding certain components of the DMSPd cycle that
are based on prior research might be in error because of inaccurate
determinations of its dissolved concentration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new
information that will be developed during this project will be used to
reevaluate the role of DMSPd in the carbon and sulfur cycles of the surface
ocean and as a precursor of DMS. The first objective of the work includes
determining the biologically available fraction of the dissolved DMSP pool in
estuarine, coastal and oceanic waters. The second objective will be to assess
the existing analytical procedure to determine if it overestimates the
biologically available fraction of DMSPd. The third and fourth objectives focus
on the methods for, and quantifying the turnover rates of, this compound, and
the fifth objective is focused on utilizing this rate information to assess
whether DMSPd is a significant source of carbon and sulfur for marine
microbiological communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DMSP may have some of the
highest mass fluxes through the ocean system of any single known compound.
However, knowledge of those fluxes is uncertain and this work will remove a lot
of that uncertainty. DMSP cycling is of interest to scientists from a broad
range of disciplines including biogeochemisty, ecology and atmospheric science.
Oceanic-atmospheric trace gas exchange is important to the climate feedbacks,
and DMS is an important example of ocean-produced gases that can influence the
atmosphere. One graduate student, one undergraduate student and one research
technician will be trained as part of this project, and several activities
involving public outreach and education will be initiated.