* 0928871
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Geography and Identity Among Russia's Buddhist Populations
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2009,02/28/2011
* Edward Holland, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Thomas J. Baerwald
* 02/28/2011
* USD 12,000.00

In contemporary Russia, the state-instituted atheism of the Soviet Union has
been replaced by a growing religiosity. Social science researchers have found a
significant rise in the proportion of religious believers in Russian society. At
the same time, Russia continues to negotiate the federal structure inherited
from the USSR, which facilitated the territorialization of identities among
titular groups during the transitional period from communism to democracy. The
nationalist mobilizations that developed had a range of political and cultural
goals, from autonomy to the redrafting of language laws. Only in the case of
Chechnya did an ethnic republic's opposition to the center lead to conflict, but
taken together, these regions have served as key sites of interaction in center-
periphery bargaining during the post-Soviet period. More recently, religion has
emerged as a key basis for political action and resistance, as exhibited during
the second Chechen war and the ongoing conflict in the North Caucasus. As a
result of these and other centrifugal factors, Russia's long-term cohesion is
far from assured, and when future challenges to the state emerge, the federal
republics will be positioned to promote alternative political and economic
projects. This doctoral dissertation research project will analyze religion and
territoriality as predictors for nationalist mobilization in the three Buddhist
ethnic republics of the Russian Federation, Kalmykia, Tuva, and Buryatia. The
doctoral candidate will seek answers to the following research questions: (1) To
what extent do the titular and Russian nationals in the three republics support
forms of political self-governance, from increased power in Russia's federal
structure to autonomy or independence? (2) With respect specifically to titular
groups, what is the degree of religious revival among practicing Buddhists in
the post-Soviet period, and is there a verifiable relationship between such
practices and stronger attachments to territory and nation? (3) What other
factors, including socioeconomic status and attitudes regarding intergroup
relations, influence support for changes to each of the republics' respective
positions in the Russian federal hierarchy? To answer these questions, the
student will employ a mixed-methods approach, combining quantitative analysis of
survey results with a qualitative approach using focus groups. The findings are
expected to demonstrate the strength of the religious revival in the three
selected republics and further explore religion as a politically mobilizing
force in Russia.

Diverging from previous work on state viability and the challenge of ethno-
religious communities in the Russian Federation, which has primarily focused on
the importance of ethnic entrepreneurs as organizers of political support and
Islam as the principal religious challenge, this project will collect survey
responses from individuals living in the federation's Buddhist ethnic republics
in order to investigate the localized characteristics in these regions that are
most relevant to political behavior. In doing so, the project will provide new
insights into the geographical, cultural, and religious contexts in which
mobilization can occur, disaggregating Russia's ethno-territorial divisions for
a more in-depth study of three regions of particular importance. More broadly,
the research will address the association between religious identity and the
consolidation of territorially-based national identities, a topic that is
understudied in the literature in political geography. As a Doctoral
Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to
enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research career.
This project is jointly supported by the NSF Geography and Spatial Sciences
Program and the NSF Office of International Science and Engineering.