* 0928550
* Adaptive Systems-Based Prioritization of Bridge Infrastructure Maintenance: Integrated Modeling of Technical, Socio-Economic, and Normative Dimensions
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Yacov Haimes, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Konstantinos Triantis
* 08/31/2013
* USD 553,000.00

The research objective of this project is to develop a methodology for
integrating multiple models and databases with which to understand decisions of
large-scale physical infrastructure systems, and to propose frameworks for
decisions that would improve system-wide maintenance allocations. The engine for
such methodology is termed Phantom System Models (PSM)--a real and virtual
modeling laboratory, comprising an array of models that will enhance modeling
and understanding of the emergent multiscale bridge systems. The research
initiatives are focused on an over-arching case study of the Hampton Road
Planning District in the Southeast of Virginia, a regional emergent system with
522 bridge assets. Three major perspectives of models and corresponding data
needs are addressed: Technical Bridge-System Engineering, wherein currently
available engineering-based assessment models are enhanced with systems-driven
probabilistic and extreme event analyses; Socio-economic Analysis, which
develops models to estimate cascading impacts of bridge maintenance decisions
and potential failures through econometric and agent-based models; and Normative
Dimension Analysis, which seeks to expand policy analysis through an
understanding of the embedded technical, programmatic, and socioeconomic
dimensions associated with the bridge system as well as the competing risks,
costs, and benefits among all of the system's stakeholders. This effort results
in a framework for exploring factors that have significantly influenced
prioritization decisions in the past and the development of new prioritization
methods for maintenance allocation stemming from the integration of current
engineering-based practices with the above contributions in new data analysis
and modeling approaches.

Decisions involving large-scale physical infrastructure systems are complex and
are influenced by a myriad of technical, socio-economic, and normative
dimensions. The broader impact of the proposed research will be in understanding
decisions that have been made and making science-based recommendations to
support the formulation of bridge maintenance and maintainability policies at
the local, state, and federal levels. A symposium will be organized to
disseminate new knowledge and lessons learned with practicing engineers and
policymakers from academic institutions, government agencies, and the private
sector. This research will engage students (especially under-represented
students) at the undergraduate and graduate levels. Students pursuing graduate
degrees will be involved in the development of the theoretical and
methodological aspects of this integrative and multi-disciplined systems
project. It is expected that this work will improve our understanding of how
decisions are made regarding large-scale physical infrastructure systems and
provide a clear targeted improvement path for adopting decision processes for
better maintenance of our interconnected regional bridge systems.