* 0928615
* Enhancing Research Infrastructure for Solid-state Chemistry
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Nan Ding, Claflin University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2011
* USD 150,000.00

The Department of Chemistry at Claflin University is proposing to acquire an
Energy Dispersive Micro X-ray (EDX) Fluorescence Spectrometer for enhancing
research and educational infrastructure for solid state chemistry, materials
science and biology. As one of the oldest Historically Black Colleges and
Universities, Claflin has been working on building competent science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) programs and providing an
excellent teaching and research environment for minority students. The
Department of Chemistry is ACS-certified and strives to build and maintain a
vigorous undergraduate program by acquiring and incorporating modern
infrastructure into its research and educational curriculum. The addition of the
EDX spectrometer allows the department to target the instrumentation
requirements for continued ACS-certification. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The
requested instrument will be incorporated into existing experiments in general,
inorganic, physical and analytical chemistry laboratories. Undergraduate
students at all levels will have the opportunity to gain hands-on experience on
state-of-the-art techniques. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The Department of Chemistry
is committed to establishing a strong research program in solid state chemistry,
a field that is at the leading edge of current technological advances. The
requested EDX is an essential addition to the physical characterization toolbox
available for faculty and student research involving materials, chemical and
biological sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;