* 0928440
* Fabrication of Zinc Nitride and  Zinc-Oxy-Nitride Thin Films for Photovoltaic and Optoelectronic Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Ahalapitiya Jayatissa, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 08/31/2014
* USD 280,374.00

The objective of this proposal is to fabricate zinc nitride, zinc oxy-nitride
and their hetero-structures while enhancing the fundamentals understanding of
their the structure, interface, and surface properties. The zinc nitride and
oxy-nitride system is an environmentally benign and potentially low-cost
semiconductor material which shows much promise. This proposal brings together
several key aspects of good materials manufacturing and surface engineering: (i)
The reactive sputtering-deposition and nitridation of zinc films, which enables
control of composition, as well as synthesis of multilayer structures for the
study of interfaces between zinc nitride, zinc oxy-nitrides, and zinc oxide.
(ii) The determination of the properties of the thin films so grown by a variety
of experimental techniques, leading to a cross-correlation between the growth
parameters, the resulting film structure and its physical properties. (iii) A
synergistic experimental and theoretical investigation of structural, energetic,
electronic, and optical properties of the grown films. (iv) Technological
approaches and procedure to fabricate device-relevant structures are expected be
outcomes of this work. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; If successful, the results of this
research will create an opportunity to develop new class of thin film
photovoltaic devices based on zinc nitride and zinc oxy-nitride material system.
Pertinent technological impact comes from the significantly wide applicability
of this material system for renewable solar energy and cost saving opto-
electronic devices. The project will also have a significant outreach component
to high school students in the Midwest region through physics and engineering
workshops at The University of Toledo. It is expected that 70-80 students will
attend the events in the spring and fall semesters each year. The proposed
outreach program will create more learning opportunities for underrepresented
communities and female students. Such activities will increase their interesting
and motivation for careers in science and engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;