* 0928340
* Spectrum Support Program (SSP): A transition and support program for students with Autism Spectrum Disorders pursuing degrees and careers in STEM fields
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2011
* Nicole Boulais, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 08/31/2011
* USD 193,237.00

The Spectrum Support Program seeks to demonstrate success for undergraduate
students with Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD) entering, succeeding and
completing Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) degree
programs at Rochester Institute of Technology (RIT) and transitioning to the
STEM workforce. Having one of the largest private STEM program portfolios in the
country as well as a robust disabilities service program, RIT is uniquely suited
to pilot an innovative program designed to support students with ASD. With
approximately 42 students who have ASD and are currently enrolled at RIT in STEM
programs, this initiative is poised to support an increase in the success rate
of such students in persisting through and graduation from college as well as
achieving successful placement in STEM professions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal seeks to advance education related to ASD on multiple levels including
the impact on undergraduate program participants and that of peer coaches, who
are graduate Psychology students preparing to enter the secondary school
environment. Additionally, this proposal supports training and education for
campus faculty and staff as well as potential employers, community partners, and
colleagues at other college campuses. Developing and sharing a successful model
of supporting ASD students in STEM programs while providing parallel training
for future employers and service providers, will establish a network of support
for the long term success of this emerging population in the world of higher
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project goals follow:&lt;br/&gt;1.
To support undergraduate students during the transition into college STEM
programs by using case management and peer coaching models.&lt;br/&gt;2. To
support undergraduate students in maintaining academic success and persisting
toward the achievement of their STEM degree.&lt;br/&gt;3. To support
undergraduate students and assist potential employers in allowing for successful
transition into the workforce for STEM related employment.&lt;br/&gt;4. To
explore potential partnerships with local, regional and national institutions
and organizations to support students pursuing STEM careers. These
collaborations are expected to result in the development of a proposal for an
Alliance for Students with ASD in STEM to the NSF's Research in Disabilities
Education program.