* 0928539
* RUI: Controlling the Properties and Performance of Concrete Using Computer Aided Molecular Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Joseph Biernacki, Tennessee Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 07/31/2013
* USD 371,708.00

Modern concrete is no longer portland cement, aggregate and water but may
include sophisticated additives known as admixtures. These chemicals are
designed to modify specific properties of the concrete including those that make
it easier to place the fresh, fluid concrete, alter the hardening process and
improve the resulting hardened properties. A team of researchers at Tennessee
Technological University (TTU) propose to use computer-aided molecular design
(CAMD) to invent new and non-intuitive admixtures for concrete. CAMD is an
approach that enables the discovery of new molecules from the behavior of known
substances. The team will be collaborating with colleagues from the National
Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) as well as industrial partners from
W. R. Grace. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Inventing new admixtures for concrete
promises to improve the life cycle performance and reduce the cost of using
concrete for a wide range of infrastructure applications. Since production of
portland cement is responsible for about 7% of the world?s carbon dioxide
emissions, anything that can be done to reduce the amount of concrete used, by
extending service life for example, would benefit society and reduce the burden
of green house gas emissions on the environment. The research team at TTU also
recognizes that CAMD is an important and enabling technology for future
scientists and plan to work with regional high school teachers to develop
modules that help pre-college age students to learn about the science behind
CAMD and the powerful benefits of using such
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;