* 0928716
* Liquid Fuel Reformation in Direct Droplet Impingement Microreactors
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Andrei Fedorov, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 07/31/2013
* USD 285,737.00

0928716 Fedorov

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Objectives and Methods to be Employed

Chemical processing frequently requires vaporizing liquid reagents, mixing, and
heterogeneous reaction in the presence of a solid catalyst, followed by product
separation. In traditional large scale chemical reactors each process is
typically carried out in dedicated components, optimized for their given
function, and linked together to form the overall system. Scaled down versions
of these large-scale chemical plants have been considered for distributed
applications, in particular hydrogen generation from hydrocarbon liquid
feedstock, but the reactor design based on the individual unit operation
approach has been shown to quickly become sub-optimal especially for space-
constrained applications. To address this challenge of reactor scale-down, the
concept of multifunctional reactors has emerged, in which synergistic
combination of different unit operations is explored to achieve improved
performance.

The Direct Droplet Impingement Reactor (DDIR) is a new concept for
multifunctional chemical processing of high energy density liquid fuels at very
high rate, enabling development of high density power conversion technologies.
This project focuses on establishing fundamental understanding of the complex
interplay between the fuel delivery, evaporation, and reaction in DDIR reactors,
resulting in an experimentally-validated methodology for optimal design and
operation of this new class of reactors.

Intellectual Merit

New theoretical and experimental tools will be developed to carry out a
comprehensive study of the DDIR reactor concept. The following contributions are
expected to result from the proposed investigation: (1) Theoretical analysis and
simulations will yield the DDIR design map(s) that allow determination of
optimal operating points using conversion rates and selectivity as performance
metrics; (2) Theoretically-derived optimal design map(s) will be experimentally
validated, demonstrating the predicted trends in DDIR reactor performance. The
experimental validation will be instrumental in establishing a degree of
confidence in extending the general theoretical framework developed to other
reacting systems; and (3) Exploratory studies of the forced unsteady-state
operation of the DDIR reactor will be undertaken, via experiments and
simulations. It is conjectured that by changing these forcing time scales
relative to the natural time scales of the system, improvements in time-averaged
reactor performance may result.

Broader Impacts

If successful, this research could provide a significant benefit to society with
potentially transformational benefits to a wide range of engineering
applications, including development of a new reactor technology for portable and
distributed power generation and efficient chemical processing for a broad range
of liquid fuels, including renewable energy sources. This research will advance
discovery and understanding while promoting teaching, training, and learning by
incorporating the research results into several academic courses and through
undergraduate research opportunities. Broadening of participation by
underrepresented groups will be achieved by engaging graduate and undergraduate
students from under-represented groups, including graduates of HBMUs: Clark
Atlanta, Spellman, and Morehouse Colleges. The work will enhance the
infrastructure for research and education by developing and maintaining
facilities for MEMS fabrication and characterization at the PI's institution.
Broad dissemination to enhance scientific and technological understanding will
be achieved through several activities. First, active industry involvement will
be facilitated to enable the transfer of research results into industry
practice. Second, research results will be disseminated through technical papers
and presentations in engineering forums, as well as special events that the PI
will organize for local high school students.