* 0928095
* Adaptive Mobile Sensor Networks for Structural Health Monitoring
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,01/31/2012
* Yang Wang, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 01/31/2012
* USD 239,888.00

0928095 Yang Wang Georgia Tech

With great potential to ensure the safety of civil structures, structural health
monitoring (SHM) systems have attracted much attention in recent years. This
research will investigate a novel approach of harnessing mobile sensor networks
for SHM. With optimal placement and reconfiguration strategies, intelligent
mobile sensor networks provide a means to adaptively reconfigure network
architecture while achieving unprecedented high spatial resolutions.

The research will begin with investigating criteria and principles for designing
mobile sensor nodes; a magnet-wheeled mobile sensor prototype will then be
developed for navigating on ferromagnetic structures. Substructure-based finite-
element (FE) model will be updated and damage detection algorithms that best
utilize the high spatial resolution provided by the mobile sensing nodes will be
developed. Finally a systematic methodology will be developed for adaptively
optimizing and readjusting network configurations.

Benefiting from the high-valued educational tradition at Georgia Tech,
considerable efforts will be made to recruit graduate and undergraduate students
from minority groups. The prototype mobile sensors will be integrated with a new
course on advanced dynamics and smart structures, which is to be offered by the
PI at Georgia Tech. One-day outreach activities will be designed for groups of
K-12 students, in order to spark their strong interest in science and
engineering.

