* 0928865
* Collaborative Research: Large-Scale Fabrication of Thin Polymer Nanocomposite Films
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Howard (Hao) Wang, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 08/31/2013
* USD 205,000.00

Collaborative Research: Large-Scale Fabrication of Thin Polymer Nanocomposite
Films PI: Howard Wang (SUNY Binghamton) and Cheol Park (NIA) Abstract

The objective of this research is to investigate fundamental materials
processing issues associated with the large-scale fabrication of functional
polymer nanocomposite films (PNFs) on flexible plastic substrates. Particularly,
slot die coating (SDC) methods will be explored since SDC is one of a few
industrial processes for precisely coating high quality films from liquid
suspensions, and is compatible with roll-to-roll (R2R) manufacturing. More
specifically, the research will investigate the challenges and possible
solutions in coating PNFs using two representative materials systems: (1)
polyimide containing single walled carbon nanotubes, (2) Pd-
nanoparticle/polycarbonate composites. This large-scale SDC for these new
functional nanomaterials has never been attempted and innovative external field
(electrical or magnetic) induced morphology alteration is also proposed. With
better understanding the dispersion and metastability in nanocolloid/polymer
solutions and films, technologically meaningful methods to control equilibrium,
metastable and non-equilibrium structures that lead to optimum device
performance will be investigated. Furthermore, the degradation of the PNFs and
the release of nanomaterials into the environment will be investigated by
controlled UV radiation and through various materials characterization
techniques.

If successful, this collaborative project will have a profound impact on broader
materials challenges in the emerging industry of nanotechnology and flexible
electronics. Particularly, (1) critical scientific and technological issues in
large-scale fabrication of PNFs, such as the structure and dynamics of complex
fluids and their responses to flow and force fields, will be addressed; (2) new
understanding and better control of non-equilibrium and metastable structures
arising due to the competing thermodynamic/dynamic driving forces in complex
fluids and PNFs will be obtained; (3) a
processing/morphology/property/performance database will be constructed as a
part of materials informatics effort that will enable the development of
constitutive equations and computational fluid dynamics models; and (4) the
degradation and environmental impact of PNFs will be assessed. This project will
engage in the BU?s NSF-funded undergraduate nanotechnology education program in
?Nanotechnology for Manufacturing Flexible Electronics?, and participate in the
Go Green Institute which involves middle school students and teachers from 15
school districts in the southern tier of New York State. By introducing the
basics of nanotechnology and flexible electronics to middle and high school
students including minority and underrepresented ones, and providing the
opportunity for them to gain hands-on experiences in real industrial settings in
local electronics and materials companies, this program intends to help students
of all backgrounds to capitalize on intellectual, career and commercial promises
of nanotechnology and flexible electronics.