* 0928669
* Chicago Transformation Teacher Institutes
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2009,09/30/2015
* Donald Wink, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 09/30/2015
* USD 4,994,911.00

The Chicago Transformation Teacher Institutes (CTTI)involves five institutions
of higher education (University of Illinois at Chicago, DePaul University,
Illinois Institutes of Technology, Loyola University Chicago, and Northwestern
University) and the Chicago Public Schools (CPS). CTTI provides mathematics and
science leadership development for the CPS High Schools through support of the
district's High School Transformation Project (HSTP) by expanding the school-
university partnership. This project will develop teams of mathematics and
science teacher-leaders in twenty high schools, chosen on the basis of an
application procedure to determine school readiness and administrative support.
The key outcome of the project within schools will be teacher-led work in the
selection, refinement, and implementation of rigorous 12th-grade capstone and AP
curricula. In addition, teacher leaders will have new competencies to coordinate
curricula across grades 9-10-11. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CTTI is organized
from a theoretically-focused and research-based logic model of school change,
based on the idea that school capacity to carry out and sustain change requires
specific inputs, including the teacher content knowledge and leadership skills
that CTTI will provide to the teachers. This model describes how school
capacity, with its dimensions of in-school collaboration, teacher reflection,
and instructional development, directly affect both teacher practice and student
outcomes. The faculty from the Universities will learn from the CPS teachers how
to recruit, retain and support students from the schools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CTTI teacher program develops leaders through three
different experiences: (1) recruitment and initiation of cohorts of teachers;
(2) courses in interdisciplinary content and educational research (3) workshops
on linking content knowledge to reform curricula and school leadership. These
will be given to 80 math and 80 science teachers over four CTTI cohorts,
producing robust teacher-leaders teams in 20 schools. Teachers are in one of
three tracks: mathematics (80 teachers), physical science (40 teachers), or life
and environmental science (40 teachers). The CTTI's specific focus on teacher
content knowledge and the application of that knowledge to teaching and school
leadership is enhanced by its connection to multiple universities that are
themselves at the forefront of STEM research, as will be reflected in the
content of the CTTI courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project builds on a logic
model that links program activities with teacher and student outcomes. The
research program will coordinate with other district- and university-based
studies of school reform, making use of extensive data already available in CPS,
the HSTP, and the classrooms. A separate evaluation of the CTTI will include
observations of teacher change and specific links to large assessment and
accountability measures already in place as part of the
HSTP.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).