* 0928289
* GEOTRACES Atlantic Section: Characterization of phytoplankton trace metal quotas and their contribution to the particulate metal pool in the upper ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2013
* Benjamin Twining, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 06/30/2013
* USD 349,430.00

Incorporation of the trace elements Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu and Zn into
phytoplankton, and the chemical, biological and biochemical mechanisms which
regulate this process, are of central importance to our understanding of the
biogeochemical functioning of the oceans. These trace elements (TE) have the
potential to control ocean productivity, ecosystem structure and the utilization
of macronutrients in large regions of the global ocean. Significant effort has
been expended to study the response of cellular trace element quotas to
environmental conditions in laboratory cultures, but measurements of cellular
trace element quotas and stoichiometries in natural biogenic particulate
material are rare and sorely needed to constrain and evaluate biogeochemical
models. The international GEOTRACES program was initiated to advance our
knowledge of the concentrations and physical and chemical speciation of trace
elements in the global ocean. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, researchers
at the Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences will measure the Al, Si, P, Mn, Fe,
Co, Ni, Cu, Zn and Cd contents of individual phytoplankton function groups and
bulk particulate matter across biogeochemical gradients in the surface waters of
the Atlantic Ocean using a combination of bulk and microanalytical elemental
techniques. Samples will be collected from the surface mixed layer and deep
chlorophyll maximum layer during the GEOTRACES North Atlantic Survey Section
cruise using a combination of GoFlo bottles, in situ pumping and a towed
¡®fish¡¯. Individual phytoplankton cells representing major functional groups
(diatoms, autotrophic flagellates, cyanobacteria, coccolithophores) will be
analyzed with synchrotron x-ray fluorescence analysis (SXRF). Particulate matter
collected on 0.45-¦Ìm polyethersulfone membranes will be digested and analyzed
with high resolution inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS). In
this way, the response of phytoplankton trace element composition to natural
gradients in dissolved and particulate macro- and micronutrient supply can be
resolved. Additionally, three methods commonly used to better characterize bulk
particulate matter (oxalate/EDTA rinse, weak acetic acid digestion, correction
for lithogenic material with TE:Al ratios) will be applied and their
effectiveness evaluated through comparisons with direct SXRF measurements of
cellular trace elements. Single-cell analyses of diatoms and their frustules
will enable evaluation of Zn and Ni as potential paleoceanographic proxies, as
well as determination of synergistic and antagonistic relationships among
macronutrients and micronutrients and taxa-dependent preferences for specific
micronutrients, addressing several core GEOTRACES objectives.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The broader impacts of this study include
a strong commitment to providing research experiences and mentorship to high
school and undergraduate students as well as outreach to the general public
through presentations at local organizations (e.g., libraries, churches, civic
groups) and via the Caf¨¦ Scientifique program at Bigelow. &lt;br/&gt;