* 0928252
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Social Consequences of Neighborhood Economic Diversity
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Christopher Jencks, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2011
* USD 7,500.00

SES-0928252 Christopher Jencks Laura Tach Harvard University

Residential economic segregation is modest relative to racial segregation in
most U.S. metropolitan areas, which implies that there are many economically
diverse neighborhoods. Researchers have not seriously investigated this economic
diversity within neighborhoods, however, focusing instead on neighborhoods at
the extremes of the income distribution characterized by concentrated poverty or
affluence. This leaves many assumptions, but little empirical evidence, about
the social dynamics within economically diverse neighborhoods. The study uses a
mixed-method research design to study whether and how neighborhood economic
diversity influences the psychological, interpersonal, organizational, and
spatial dimensions of neighborhood life. Specifically, the research studies
whether residents of economically diverse and homogenous neighborhoods differ in
their attitudes towards their neighbors, the level and content of their
neighborhood engagement, and their perceptions and use of neighborhood space. At
the community level, the research looks at whether economically diverse and
homogenous neighborhoods differ in their institutional and organizational
diversity and whether there is cross-class overlap in the use of these
organizations and other neighborhood spaces. Finally, the research examine
whether the social dynamics of economically diverse neighborhoods vary based on
their racial diversity. The research combines multiple sources of quantitative
data on the economic conditions and the social and organizational features of
Boston neighborhoods. It then uses qualitative in-depth interviews of Boston
residents in four neighborhoods that vary in their economic and racial diversity
to uncover how the associations observed in the quantitative analyses manifest
themselves in residents? daily lives and discern why residents say they act in
the manner that they do.

This dissertation research makes several contributions to sociological
knowledge, public policy, and the welfare of local communities. It shifts
attention away from the traditional focus on high poverty neighborhoods and
toward a broader examination of the income distribution within neighborhoods.
This creates possibilities for new theoretical insights and empirical findings
on how neighborhood economic and racial contexts affect individual and
collective wellbeing. By identifying local practices and organizational features
that limit or enhance the development of cross-class ties, this project may
suggest policies that could support the successful economic integration of
neighborhoods. The research also speaks to the large-scale mixed-income
redevelopment projects currently taking place across America by documenting the
struggles involved in creating and maintaining such communities and detailing
what we might reasonably expect from efforts to disperse poverty through mixed-
income development.

