* 0928279
* Effects of salt marsh (Spartina alterniflora) genotypic diversity and the associated community on population and community processes
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Ralph Grubbs, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 07/31/2013
* USD 380,710.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ecological research on biodiversity has
typically focused on the effects of species diversity, yet a growing body of
evidence points to the importance of diversity within species, i.e., genetic
variation, for population, community, and ecosystem level processes. This
project examines the relationship between plant genetic diversity and associated
species in the ecologically and economically valuable salt marsh ecosystem along
the Gulf Coast of the United States. These salt marshes are dominated by a
single plant species, Spartina alterniflora, but plants differ genetically in
ecologically-important traits such as growth rate, morphology, and competitive
ability, and several faunal species closely associated with Spartina can have
strong impacts on plant biomass and productivity. This project will quantify the
degree of morphological variation among Spartina genotypes grown in a common
environment, and investigate the consequences of this diversity to other species
at multiple spatial scales in marshes along the Gulf Coast of Florida. Field
experiments will be conducted to examine the relationship between individual
Spartina genotypes and key associated species, and to experimentally investigate
the interactive effects of Spartina genetic diversity and associated species
presence on marsh productivity. This project will provide critical information
on the ecological role of genetic diversity in an important marine foundation
species, and will advance our general understanding of the interaction between
genetic diversity in plants and the faunal communities that depend on them.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Salt marshes and other coastal ecosystems are increasingly
impacted by development, fishing, and other human activities, and have
experienced significant declines in some areas. Genetic diversity can be an
important component of transplant success of marine vegetation as well as the
productivity and diversity of the associated community. Thus, this project will
have implications for salt marsh restoration, currently the focus of significant
effort along the Gulf Coast. In addition, outreach efforts through public events
hosted in partnership with the St. Joseph Bay Aquatic Preserve will educate the
public about salt marshes and environmental science in general. This project
will also provide research training in ecology and molecular techniques for
graduate and undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;