* 0928092
* New Model and Methodology for Signal Estimation and Decoding
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,09/30/2014
* Jing Li, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 09/30/2014
* USD 230,000.00

This project aims to apply nonlinear dynamics to the study of (iterative)
statistical inference, an important class of algorithms with well-proven
applications in communications, signal processing and artificial intelligence.
Existing models and methodologies for iterative analysis, coming largely from an
information theoretical perspective, are inadequate in predicting and
controlling the individual (rather than the ensemble-average) time-evolution
behavior of a large-dimension and highly-dynamic signal sequence. On the other
hand, estimating nonlinear dynamical systems, especially the challenging case of
chaos, has not taken advantage of the powerful tool of statistical inference
nearly as much as it could have. A wide spectrum of activities are planned to
bring together the important ideas and tools from these two fields, to supply
each other with new perspectives and new approaches, and to hopefully generate a
whole new engineering methodology for unifying classical signals and chaotic
signals. Specific focus will be set on understanding the cause and impact of
chaotic behavior in statistical inference, developing ways to control chaos and
transient chaos, and using statistical inference on appropriate models, such as
Markov random fields and factor graphs, to predict and synchronize chaotic
systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In view of the very pervasive scope of the
practical applications associated with statistical inference algorithms and
nonlinear dynamical theory, the research work in the proposed direction will
have significant societal and scientific impacts. The potential application is
broad, including many communication systems and discrete dynamical systems, such
as cellular networks, wireless sensor and ad-hoc networks, digital data
recording systems, radar systems, weather and tornado prediction, ecology, and
population estimation. The proposed research also integrates a meaningful
education and outreach component, which includes opening a series of seminars,
supplying undergraduate and graduate students with theses projects, developing a
new graduate level course, and engaging under-represented students in
research.&lt;br/&gt;