* 0928067
* Mechanics of Cell Alignment due to Contact Guidance by Nanoscale Surface Topography
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Martin Dunn, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Robert Carter
* 08/31/2012
* USD 320,000.00

The research objective of this award is to develop a comprehensive understanding
of cell alignment induced by nanoscale surface topography. Surface topography
can significantly influence cell behaviors including shape, alignment,
spreading, and differentiations, a well known phenomenon typically referred as
contact guidance. The research will result in understanding on the interplay
between mechanics and contact guidance and providing insights on how mechanical
environment can influence cellular behaviors. The research approach combines
experimental investigation, theoretical development, and numerical simulations.
Cell alignments will be investigated on precisely engineered surface topography
with systematic variations in both critical dimension and geometrical shapes;
theoretical models will be established to account the corresponding experimental
observations; numerical method will be developed to simulate the process of
contact guidance and compare with theoretical models and experiments. This
research will also establish collaboration with National Institute of Standard
and Technology. Deliverables include a suite of fundamental understanding of
contact guidance mechanism, experiment modeling and simulations tools,
documentation of research results, high school and engineering student and K-12
teacher education.

If successful, the results of this research will provide guidelines for
designing and manufacturing scaffold with nanoscale surface topography to guide
the growth of tissues. Nanoscale surface topography that can control the
orientation of cells including the nuclei will lead to control of gene
expression which determines the tissue growth. Fundamental understanding gained
from this research will expedite the design of efficient scaffold that can
promote tissue growth. The results will be disseminated through journal
publications, national conferences, and TeachEngineering digital library.
Students at the levels of high school to graduate school will be involved in
this research. K-12 teachers will benefit through TeachEngineering digital
library.