* 0928764
* Investigating the Fundamental Units of Natural Selection Amng Coral-Algal Symbioses:  Ecological, Geographic, and Physiological Diversity of Host-Symbiont Genotypes
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Iliana Baums, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2013
* USD 612,780.00

Cnidarians and dinoflagellates in the genus Symbiodinium combine to form one of
the most important symbioses on the planet. This project addresses both directly
and indirectly several major fundamental gaps in our knowledge of coral-algal
symbioses, and how these partnerships may respond to severe natural selection
during periods of environmental disturbance, pollution, and climate change.
Molecular genetic investigations conducted independently on the animal hosts and
algal symbionts have enlightened our appreciation of their diversity. However,
rarely have both partners been studied together in any detail. The realization
that Symbiodinium populations in most coral colonies appear to be clonal means
that genotype analyses can be conducted on both the animal and algal component
of an intact association. Genotyping to the level of "individual" addresses
questions of specificity and stability at the finest scale of genetic resolution
and quantifies the diversity of "holobionts" at its most basic unit. Data
acquired through genotyping are critical for deducing evolutionary processes
between host and symbiont populations and how these partner combinations are
potentially co-evolving in the face of climate change. Indeed these data will
ultimately be used to parameterize evolutionary models of these symbioses with
theoretical collaborators. Realizing the functional significance of natural
diversity in all ecosystems is vital for understanding how life evolves and how
it may respond evolutionarily to climate change over ecological time scales.
This study will investigate the clonal diversity of Symbiodinium populations
that associate with one of the most important Caribbean reef-building corals,
Acropora palmata. This animal is highly specific for Symbiodinium, A3 despite
the fact that its larvae must acquire symbionts from environmental pools. In
recent work describing the population genetic structure of the A. palmata,
thousands of samples were genotyped for the animal and then archived. These
specimens provide an exceptional resource for intensive analyses of Symbiodinium
genotype diversity within an individual colony, among separate colonies with the
same animal genotype (ramets), among large stands of genetically unique colonies
(genets), and across populations of A. palmate throughout much of its Caribbean
distribution. Initial genotyping of 170 specimens based on four variable loci (4
to 8 more will be developed) indicates that each colony harbors a single
dominant clone. This one-to-one host-symbiont genotype correspondence allows for
direct comparison of host population genetic structure with that of the symbiont
genetic structure to identify and then model how dispersal barriers and life
history strategies influence the co-evolution of corals and dinoflagellates.
Field collections, comparative physiological studies, and infection experiments
will be conducted to investigate the ecological significance, specificity, and
stability of diverse host populations with diverse populations of symbiont
(Curacao) verses diverse host populations with a low diversity (few genotypes)
of symbiont (US Virgin Islands), and finally low diversity host populations with
low diversity symbiont populations (Florida). Significant geographic differences
in the diversity of host-symbiont genotypic combinations mean that certain
populations may be more responsive to natural selection than
others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Determining the ecological and evolutionary
processes that define the interactions between symbiotic corals is critical to
our basic understanding of coral-algal symbioses and how these animal-microbe
systems may respond to severe selection induced by climate change. Acropora
palmata is particularly worthy of attention because it is one of two coral
species currently listed as threatened under the US Endangered Species Act. By
identifying the significance of symbiont diversity, conservation efforts can
prioritize source populations for restoration material. This information is
urgently needed as stated by the NOAA Acropora task force and results from this
project will be made available regularly. The data generated here will serve
prominent theoreticians to parameterize their evolutionary models of these
symbioses and thus benefit the wider biological community and society at large.
This study includes outreach missions to educate and train the public and public
institutions. The ecological importance of coral-microbe interactions make them
charismatic examples for teaching about the importance of microorganisms and
symbioses to the health of the biosphere. Through continuing a series of
workshops held since 2005 by SECORE (SExual Coral REproduction), the project
will help build a cooperative international network of public aquariums and
research institutions to establish coral breeding programs of A. palmata. This
collaboration between scientists and specialists from large public aquaria and
zoos located around the nation and world, serves to engage the public through
the outreach mission of the zoos and thereby promotes understanding about the
importance of coral symbioses and the basic process of science. Graduate and
undergraduate students are an integral part of this project and will receive
training in field and laboratory work and lecture courses.