* 0928050
* New Approach to Nanoindentation Experiments and Modeling: Toward Fundamental Understanding of Thin Polymer Films and Polymer Nanocomposites
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Lynda Brinson, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Siegmund
* 08/31/2013
* USD 380,000.00

New Approach to Nanoindentation Experiments and Modeling: Toward Fundamental
Understanding of Thin Polymer Films and Polymer
Nanocomposites&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: LC Brinson, Northwestern University
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mechanical
properties of polymers in confined domains are examined from a novel combination
of nanoscale indentation experiments and theory. The work will be directly
applied to thin polymer films and then extended to model polymer nanocomposites.
These results will be the first of their kind to determine the nanoscale, local
mechanical properties of polymers, providing new insight to help understand the
physics of polymer chain motion and response near interfaces. The mechanics
simulation and modeling will extend methods developed from contact mechanics
theory to soft materials with viscoelastic properties and strong surface-driven
property gradients and will overcome current limitations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is a creative, interdisciplinary endeavor,
directly training graduate students, undergraduates and postdocs in research
methods, experimental design, modeling, and nanotechnology, as applied to
polymer systems and soft materials. The results will help understand fundamental
issues in design of polymer products in the microelectronics, medical and
structural fields ? these applications increasingly hinge upon polymers in small
domains and at interfaces, demanding a deep understanding of local polymer
properties to intelligently tailor small scale architectures. The work also has
far-reaching impacts beyond the study of polymers in the development of a
rigorous method to probe properties of materials via nanoindentation in cases of
small sample sizes, where current size effects prohibit results. The analysis
approach developed here can be extended to biological samples, with many of the
same features and concerns, where small scale mechanics are increasingly
discovered to play critical roles in biological properties and function.
&lt;br/&gt;