* 0928604
* Quantifying the Fundamental Behavior of Green Roofs in an Urban Environment
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Wade McGillis, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 06/30/2013
* USD 476,020.00

&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment
Act of 2009 &lt;br/&gt;(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One emerging
alternative to improving the state of inadequate, or decaying, infrastructure in
urban environments, which does not involve a perpetuation of large scale, costly
systems, is an approach known as low impact development (LID). LID interventions
are small-scale interventions that be used at the building, lot or even
neighborhood scale to conserve or reuse water, mange storm-water, and/or reduce
energy demands. Because LID interventions are a distributed, rather than
centralized, form of infrastructure, they also have the potential to build
resilience into existing infrastructure systems. Furthermore, as less costly and
more ?nimble? infrastructures, LID interventions hold promise as urban
adaptation strategies in the face of uncertain of climate change impacts
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A current LID intervention that is increasingly being
adopted in urban environments to manage storm-water impacts, improve
environmental conditions and reduce energy consumption, is green roof
technology. A green roof is an environmental system that incorporates layers of
specialized waterproofing and root-resistant materials, drainage or water
storage layers, and a growing medium to support vegetation on a structure?s
roof. Although green roofs have been in use for over thirty years in Germany,
they are relatively new to North America. Nonetheless, green roofs are rapidly
gaining popular attention in the U.S. and have recently become a high-profile
component of sustainable building construction: They are lauded for provision of
multiple benefits in the urban environment, including stormwater management,
building energy savings, mitigation of the urban heat island effect and urban
air pollution, and provision of habitat and aesthetic amenity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Numerous groups in the U.S. have initiated research
programs to investigate green roof behaviors. These groups are using
instrumented model roofs, green roof platforms and larger-scale green roofs on
buildings in rural and peri-urban environments to further understanding of green
roof performance under a variety of different conditions. The unique
contribution of this project to this body of ongoing effort is the
quantification of extensive green roof behavior in a dense urban environment,
where the complexities of local eco- and climatic conditions, coupled with
building density, are likely to significantly impact green roof performance.
Over the course of three years, the project will develop a monitored Urban Green
Roof Network to quantify: (i) the impact of different plant species and growing
medium thickness on green roof behavior, (ii) the contribution of
evapotranspiration to stormwater retention and reduction of urban heat island
effects, (iii) the quality of green roof water run-off, and (iv) the ability of
green roofs to trap air-borne particulates and take up other contaminants such
as CO2.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from the project will be used to improve
scientific understanding of green roof performance in an urban environment and
help identify green roof configurations that can maximize desired environmental
performance objectives. The project will also determine whether data collected
from small, instrumented ?green roof test boxes? located on urban roof-tops are
useful indicators of urban green roof behavior, and examine the applicability of
available groundwater/ geo-environmental modeling software for predicting green
roof water balance. The project will enhance infrastructure for research and
education by establishing an Urban Green Roof Network in New York City that can
be used as a living laboratory for research and educational activities alike. In
order to widely distribute project results to a broad audience, a green roof
consortium, termed The Columbia University Green Roof Consortium, will be formed
to provide a unique forum for urban stakeholders to interact and expand their
knowledge of urban green roof behavior. Student research participation and
educational/ teaching activities will also be used to expose students at all
levels to extensive green roof technology and its potential role in urban
sustainable development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;