* 0928184
* Advancing the Capabilities of Adaptive Management Techniques in Geotechnics
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Richard Finno, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/2013
* USD 460,034.00

&lt;br/&gt;Adaptive management techniques provide a means to incorporate
advances in sensor development, information technology, and numerical analyses
to a variety of problems in geotechnical engineering. If one wants to predict
and subsequently evaluate the overall performance of a design, the
?observational method? espoused by Peck is a well-known framework wherein
construction and design procedures and details are adjusted based upon
observations and measurements made as construction proceeds. Adaptive management
techniques allow one to automate the observational approach so that quantitative
information can be distributed to interested shareholders in a timely enough
fashion to be of use in a number of applications. This methodology has
particular application when extending civil infrastructure into the subsurface
environment. The increase in population density, as well as new imperatives for
infrastructure investment, homeland security, energy conservation and
sustainable design, will require major advances in our ability to create
underground space more efficiently and safely. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Many
factors affect the ground movements caused by excavations, including
stratigraphy, soil properties, support system details, construction activities,
contractual arrangements and workmanship. While numerical simulations have
become more common when analyzing ground response to excavations as part of the
design process, finite element predictions contain uncertainties related to soil
properties, support system details, and construction procedures. These factors
are explicitly considered when applying adaptive management methods to the
problem, although the methodology has its limitations as subsequently discussed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stricter limits on allowable ground movements associated
with deep excavations are being imposed in many locales by either regulatory
agencies or by recognition of adverse effects of excessive ground movements.
Excavations in some urban areas are being subjected to movement limitations that
are much smaller than even just 5 years ago. For example, excavation-induced
ground movements in the Seattle area are limited to 1 inch for cuts at deep as
70 ft. Requirements for excavations in Chicago are now targeted for maximum
ground movements of 1-1/2 to 2 inches, down from 4 inches just over a decade
ago. These issues are compounded in Chicago by the fact that excavations now are
being made to depths of 75 ft, much deeper than the typical depth of 40 ft. Many
excavations in the Boston area are limited to 1 inch of ground movement. Given
that the subsurface conditions at Boston and Chicago consist of relatively soft
clays, these requirements present a challenge in excavation support design and
construction. Consequently, the state-of-the-art of predicting ground
deformations has reached a point where major advances in practice are required
to make accurate design assessments when movements are limited to such small
amounts. These advances also are needed to make the adaptive management approach
applicable to these types of problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this
research is to extend the adaptive management approach so that it applies to a
range of problems where ground deformations must be limited to prevent damage to
adjacent buildings and other infrastructure. In particular it is proposed to
quantify the relative effects of small strain non-linearity of soils, non-linear
stiffness of walls and shrinkage of floor slabs used in top-down construction on
the deformations associated with excavations. This research will include
laboratory experiments on block samples cut from excavations in Chicago and
Boston to characterize the constitutive behavior of the soils with emphasis on
the small strain responses, detailed field experiments at deep excavations where
ground deformation and structural responses of the support system are measured
and related to the construction activities at the site, and finite element
simulations and after-the-fact adaptive management evaluations using inverse
analysis based on observed field observations. &lt;br/&gt;