* 0928094
* A New Atomistic-to-Continuum Thermomechanical Model that Enables a Novel Averaging Method for Molecular Dynamics Simulations
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Albert To, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Siegmund
* 07/31/2013
* USD 234,945.00

The objective of the proposed research is to establish a new atomistic-to-
continuum thermomechanical model for describing the relation between atomistic
(microscopic) quantities and continuum (macroscopic) quantities in solids. The
proposed model allows the development of novel multiscale denoising (averaging)
method employed to decompose the dynamical quantities obtained from
nonequilibrium molecular dynamics (MD) simulations into their respective local
thermal and mechanical contributions. In the proposed research, the
thermomechanical model will be established by 1) testing the Gaussian
approximation and temperature estimation, 2) developing a multiscale spatial-
temporal thresholding estimator, 3) testing the thermomechanical additive model
with the new multiscale averaging method, and 4) estimating the continuum stress
using the new averaging method. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The successful completion
of the proposed research will impact a number of disciplines that include
mechanics, heat transfer, signal processing, and nonparametric statistics. For
example, new multiscale method coupling MD and finite element methods for
simulating nonequilibrium thermomechanical processes will be made possible to
extend the time and spatial scale of MD simulation. Nanotechnology applications
such as laser ablation for nanoscale patterning and laser-assisted imprinting
will be benefited tremendously from the proposed research. Efforts to broaden
the participation of students including the underrepresented ones include 1)
organizing ?nanotechnology visualization? workshops for high schools students in
the larger Pittsburgh area, 2) building an interaction platform for high school
students in San Francisco, and 3) introducing a new course in computational
nanomechanics. These activities will integrate new research results and concepts
from this proposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;