* 0928987
* Collaborative Research:   Evolutionary dynamics of invasion and escape in hierarchical systems
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Sebastian Schreiber, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 08/31/2014
* USD 196,409.00

When life forms invade new habitats or experience sudden environmental changes,
they can find themselves in a race between adapting to the new conditions or
going extinct. Particular challenges can arise from the hierarchical
organization of life: evolutionary changes that help an organism at one scale of
biological organization may hurt it at another. For example, faster reproduction
of viruses within a host may cause rapid death and hence reduce transmission to
other hosts. This project will develop new theory for evolutionary escape with
an emphasis on adaptation across multiple scales. The research will focus on
emerging viruses such as influenza or HIV, and will develop a framework to
understand why some viruses go extinct after they jump into humans from their
animal reservoirs, while others adapt to human hosts and start pandemics. The
results will also be applicable to problems ranging from antibiotic-resistant
bacteria to tumor growth to pesticide-resistant weeds or insects. Beyond its
applications to important problems such as pathogen emergence and cancer, this
project will have many direct benefits to society. Undergraduate students from
under-represented groups will gain research experience through summer
internships and term projects. Graduate and postdoctoral students will receive
inter-disciplinary training and career mentorship. Concepts from this project
will be incorporated into several new undergraduate courses and into a textbook
on calculus and modeling in the life sciences. Graduate students in Africa will
be taught and mentored in short-courses and associated research projects.
Finally, insights into viral evolution will be shared with public health
researchers and policy-makers via existing collaborations and participation in
NIH-sponsored infectious disease working groups.