* 0928542
* XROADS: Planning the Future eXtreme Digital Cyberinfrastructure
* CSE,OAC
* 05/01/2009,12/31/2010
* Richard Moore, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Barry I. Schneider
* 12/31/2010
* USD 1,600,000.00

This project is a fifteen-month planning activity to develop a design for the
successor to the TeraGrid project. This activity will engage researchers and
educators in the refinement and validation of system requirements. The project
includes the development of a detailed science case, concept of operations,
design, and implementation plan for the eXtreme Digital (XD) Integrating
Services. The primary goal of the next phase of the TeraGrid, XD, is to enable
major advances in science and engineering research, in the integration of
research and education, and in broadening participation in science and
engineering by under-represented groups, by providing researchers and educators
with usable access to extreme-scale digital resources, beyond those typically
available on a typical campus, together with the interfaces, consulting support
and training necessary to facilitate their use. The target for XD is innovation
in the design and implementation of an effective, efficient, increasingly
virtualized approach to the provision of high-end digital services ? extreme
digital services - for researchers and educators. The XD infrastructure is
intended to integrate extreme-scale digital resources and services into a common
framework that makes it easy for researchers to take advantage of multiple
resources and services, including the ability to move between using local
resources and national resources within a single, well integrated environment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed activity is a planning activity for a project
that, if successful, will provide infrastructure for research and education
across a broad range of areas in science and engineering. In addition to users
who are career researchers, it can reasonably be expected that this
infrastructure will be used by several hundred graduate students and post-
doctoral researchers each year as part of their research. The planning activity
includes outreach to scientists and engineers from many fields.&lt;br/&gt;