* 0928845
* GOALI: Understanding the Microstructural Evolution and High-Temperature Behavior of Osmium-Ruthenium Coatings for Dispenser Cathodes
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Thomas Balk, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 08/31/2014
* USD 299,917.00

The research objective of this award is an improved understanding of osmium-
ruthenium coatings during their fabrication and service in dispenser cathodes.
These cathodes, which serve as electron sources in devices such as traveling
wave tubes and cathode ray tubes, must withstand demanding environmental
conditions including vacuum, high operational temperature and high current
density. The osmium-ruthenium films undergo significant microstructural changes
during processing and initial service, but must remain intact to maintain
electron emission from the cathode. Topics of fundamental scientific importance
include the effects of thin film microstructure on the diffusion of refractory
metals, as well as the effects of film texture on electron work function. There
are also several industrially relevant issues, including how to achieve enhanced
emission, longer lifetime and/or lower operating temperature. By systematically
investigating the effects of microstructure on the compositional stability and
emission properties of annealed and conditioned cathodes, a scientific,
microstructure-based understanding of osmium-ruthenium film coatings will be
built.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The knowledge gained from this project will help
advance the dispenser cathode industry from an empirical field with decades of
experience, to a field with scientific understanding and the ability to tailor
new coatings for improved performance. This project will establish the knowledge
needed for a fundamental shift in cathode manufacturing and also mitigate the
effects of increasing material costs. If successfully implemented, the results
of this research will lead to improved devices for the dispenser cathode
industry. This will enable lowered production costs and improved yield, and will
benefit customers by increasing cathode lifetime and reliability. The project
will enhance both graduate and undergraduate education by providing research
experience that has a direct and tangible impact on industry and by providing
industrially relevant materials problems for the capstone design course taught
by the PI.&lt;br/&gt;