* 0928873
* Theoretical and Experimental Study of Debris Removal and Tool Wear in Micro Electro Discharge Machining (Micro-EDM)
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Kamlakar Rajurkar, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Zhijian Pei
* 08/31/2012
* USD 250,000.00

The research objective of this project is to increase process productivity,
reliability and economy of micro electro discharge machining process for making
micro scale size critical parts used in electronic, automotive and medical
device industries. The formation of debris at the micro gap and tool wear affect
the productivity, accuracy, reliability and economy of machined micro
components. The approach involves establishing a comprehensive data base and
fundamental understanding of debris formation and tool wear. Therefore, a
theoretical and experimental study of micro electro discharge machining process
will be conducted to understand and model debris formation at the gap and tool
wear. The machining rate, tool wear, tool geometry and debris size and shape
will be measured for various machining parameters and work and tool materials.
The contamination models used in waste water disposal will be applied with
appropriate modification to model debris
concentration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Knowledge of debris removal gained from this
study is expected to have a transformative effect on the design and development
of micro fluidic transportation systems for future hybrid/micromachining
processes. This research project will extend the capability of micro electro
discharge machining especially for high aspect ratio micromachining and freeform
micromachining which will be very useful for United States die and mold making,
electronic and medical devices manufacturing industries. The research results
will be shared with students, academic researchers and industry practitioners
via University of Nebraska web site.