* 0928537
* RUI:  Understanding the Role of Flexible and Rigid Barriers in Mitigating Surface Blast Effects on Underground Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Anirban De, Manhattan College
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 09/30/2013
* USD 158,789.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of
2009&lt;br/&gt;(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The effects of flexible
and rigid protective barriers adjacent to underground structures (such as
tunnels and pipelines) subjected to surface explosions will be investigated in
the proposed project. The centrifuge is an attractive tool for this type of
experiments, since the effects of a blast scale as the cubed of the centrifuge
scaling factor, such that a small quantity of explosives can be used in a
centrifuge model to create the same effects as a much larger quantity of
explosives on a prototype scale. The results from centrifuge model tests will be
used to calibrate a three-dimensional numerical model, which will be used to
simulate the surface blast, using explicit dynamic analyses technique.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The use of a geotechnical centrifuge to conduct tests
where the effects of blasts are simulated on models is well-documented in
technical literature. Numerical analyses have also been recently employed to
simulate effects of explosions. This project includes synergistic use of
physical and numerical modeling to understand the role of different barriers in
mitigating the effects of explosions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
continue the PI?s earlier work in which the potential mitigating effects of
flexible barriers immediately adjacent to underground structures were reported.
Limitations to the beneficial effects identified in earlier research will be
further investigated. Once calibrated, the numerical model will be utilized to
understand the influence of various parameters, such as stiffness and thickness
of barrier, relative density of soil, size and location of explosion,
etc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide an understanding of the
influence of soil parameters and protective barriers on damage caused by surface
blasts on underground structures. The interaction between soil, barrier, and
underground structure due to dynamic loading such as explosions is not well-
understood. A study utilizing both centrifuge and numerical modeling is expected
to provide valuable understanding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will be
undertaken as Research in Undergraduate Institution (RUI). An undergraduate
research assistant will work on this project with the PI and will gain valuable
research experience, especially from collaborative work with Rensselaer
Polytechnic Institute (RPI). The activities of this project will be shared with
undergraduate and graduate students at Manhattan College (a predominantly
undergraduate institution) as well as students from local high schools, who
participate in summer engineering programs at the College. An estimated total of
120 students will be impacted by the project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Live video
broadcasts of the experiments from RPI will be shown to students (high school,
undergraduate and graduate) at Manhattan College. The strong visual elements in
the proposed study (experiments involving blasts and animation from numerical
model) and the emphasis on topical issue (terrorist threat) are expected to
appeal to students and demonstrate to them ways in which the Civil Engineering
profession can contribute to Homeland Security.