* 0928023
* Extended Mathematical Programs: Hierarchical Models and Solution
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Michael Ferris, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Sheldon Jacobson
* 08/31/2013
* USD 225,001.00

Traditional optimization approaches are no longer effective in solving
practical, large scale, complex problems from many application domains. Typical
applications require a sophisticated coupling of a number of optimization and
complementarity modeling approaches with specific domain knowledge and expertize
to generate solutions in a timely and robust manner. This project will develop
tools and algorithms that help in solving coordinated problems of this nature by
formulating and exploring the notion of an extended mathematical program (EMP).
This provides the ability to model competition between agents using the notion
of an embedded model, a feature that is missing from other optimization
approaches. Specific instances include dynamic games that are used to analyze
interactions between agents in multiple fields, including industrial
organization, labor and financial bargaining and contracts, government design of
fiscal and monetary policies, auction design, political decision-making and
international conflict resolution. The major benefits are threefold: EMP will
make the modelers task easier, in that the model can be described more naturally
and at a higher conceptual level; the actual model to be solved can be reliably
and efficiently generated; an algorithm can exploit additional structure in an
effective computational manner. Building on earlier work, this project will
develop theory-based, efficient, fast, reliable, user-friendly numerical methods
to solve extended mathematical programs.

If successful, this project will develop a general modeling framework,
applicable to a wide range of real problems and will produce a coherent and
comprehensive suite of tools for modeling and computation that can be applied to
systems in many application areas. It is anticipated that further significant
advancements in operations research applications can be achieved via
identification of specific problem structures within a given model, a notion
that forms the core of an EMP. Difficulties associated with multiplicity of
equilibria and the large dimension of the underlying problems will be addressed
by communicating structure to solvers and developing new algorithms that
explicitly utilize that structure for more robust solution. The project aims to
demonstrate that the availability of such structure fosters the generation of
new features to existing solvers and drives the development of new classes of
algorithms. The algorithms and methods that will be implemented here will be
made available to the whole user community via modeling system hookups to GAMS,
AMPL and MATLAB, and via broad dissemination via the internet using resources
such as the NEOS server and the COIN-OR project.