* 0928084
* U.S. GEOTRACES North Atlantic Sector: The Fractional Solubility of Aerosol Iron in Seawater
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Ana Aguilar-Islas, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2012
* USD 115,305.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The role of iron as a limiting nutrient
in many oceanic regions has been established, and atmospheric deposition has
been recognized as a major source of iron in the global ocean. The fraction of
iron that dissolves in seawater after its atmospheric deposition is thought to
be available to phytoplankton, and thus an important parameter not only for the
marine biogeochemical cycle of iron, but also for the global carbon cycle. Our
estimate of this parameter is still uncertain, and the processes that control
aerosol Fe dissolution in seawater are poorly understood.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The US GEOTRACES North Atlantic Section cruise will survey
the distribution of trace metals and isotopes in a basin where there is an
enhanced influence from atmospheric deposition. In this project, researchers at
the University of Alaska at Fairbanks will participate in this expedition to
collect and slowly leach ambient aerosols (and source materials) with large
volumes of ambient surface seawater (and with other leaching solutions) in order
to determine the range of fractional solubility of aerosol iron (Fe) in the
North Atlantic, and to provide insight into the processes that cause this
variability. This work will address the guiding mission of GEOTRACES: "to
identify processes and quantify fluxes that control the distributions of key
trace elements and isotopes in the ocean, and to establish the sensitivity of
these distributions to changing environmental conditions". Iron is a key trace
element in the GEOTRACES program, and the proposed study will investigate the
fractional solubility of aerosol Fe using a novel field approach. Results will
improve our understanding of how aerosol deposition affects the surface
distribution of Fe in the North Atlantic. Information obtained from this work
will also help establish how changing environmental conditions (e.g., increased
dust flux) may affect the distribution and speciation of Fe.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Essential information concerning the
dissolution of Fe in seawater will be generated and incorporated into the
GEOTRACES database. This project will provide a unique approach for
investigating the fractional solubility of aerosol Fe in seawater that will
result in important information for models of global carbon cycling and climate
change that incorporate the aeolean supply of Fe. Additionally, it will support
an early-career, female principal investigator at the University of Alaska
Fairbanks (UAF), and will help build research infrastructure at UAF. An
undergraduate student at UAF will receive support from this study. Information
gained from this research will be incorporated into materials for web
dissemination and public outreach events.