* 0928644
* Enhancing Creativity with a Concept Generator - Evaluation and Team Training
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Timothy Simpson, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Paul Collopy
* 07/31/2012
* USD 350,000.00

This award is funded under the Americproan Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The research objective of this award is to provide
substantive and empirical evidence of the ability to enhance engineering design
creativity through the use of a computational concept generator paired with team
training support. The research activities will identify the strengths and
weaknesses of concept generators for engineering design and advance a repository
of existing design knowledge to help produce innovative new solutions. In
addition, a novel gaming-style iPhone application will be researched to help
populate the design repository with diverse design solutions via user-entered,
user-policed, and user-rated data that will support the concept generator.
Finally, the research team will produce and validate team training protocols
designed to stimulate individual creativity within a team-based design
environment that will accompany the concept generator in order to
synergistically cultivate innovative solutions.

If successful, this research will result in a concept generation technology and
team training protocols capable of enhancing the creativity of engineering
designers at all levels of experience and for both academia and industry alike.
The software, including the concept generator and the iPhone application, as
well as the team training modules, will be freely available for educators,
industry, and the population at large. The research will incorporate test cases
from several different freshman and senior undergraduate team-based design
projects, including assistive devices for the elderly or disabled and engineered
entertainment devices for theater special effects. The results will be
disseminated through journal and conference publications and special topic
workshops held in conjunction with annual conferences for both engineering
design and psychology communities involved with creativity research. In
addition, results from this grant will support research to create a suite of
cyber-infrastructure tools for conceptual design under the NSF Engineering
Virtual Organization project known as VOICED (a Virtual Organization for
Innovation in Conceptual Engineering Design).