* 0928423
* Collaborative Proposal: Connectivity of Disease in Marine Ecosystems: Multi-scale Dynamics of a Viral Disease Infecting Caribbean Spiny Lobster
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Robert Cowen, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2013
* USD 265,667.00

Intellectual Merit: Scientists are struck by how different terrestrial
epidemiology is from that in marine ecosystems, a crucial difference being the
more rapid spread of diseases in the ocean due to the presumed absence of
barriers to waterborne dispersal. Yet, the movement of pathogens in the sea and
its importance to disease dynamics in marine metapopulations is virtually
unstudied. Marine pathogens do spread among distant host populations, as
demonstrated by dramatic epizootics, but is this common or demographically
relevant? Nearly all studies of marine diseases treat such events as transitory,
focusing instead on local disease dynamics. This approach suggests either that
small-scale phenomena normally trump the influence of large-scale pathogen
connectivity or, alternatively, that the dispersal of marine pathogens by highly
motile adults or free-living waterborne pathogens is simply too intractable for
empirical investigation. Yet, there is another unappreciated mechanism -
dispersal by infected larvae. Most marine animals have life histories that
include planktonic larvae, many of which are highly dispersive. If infected by
pathogens, these "larval vectors" would provide an efficient mechanism for
distributing pathogens at high concentrations directly into habitats where hosts
dwell. Perhaps more so than passive, waterborne pathogens that are subject to
rapid dilution and have no means of targeting distant hosts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators in this collaborative study have new
evidence that long-distance pathogen dispersal in the sea via infected
meroplanktonic larvae is possible. The pathogen in question is an often lethal,
pathogenic virus (PaV1;Panulirus argus virus 1) that infects the Caribbean spiny
lobster, Panulirus argus - a species broadly distributed throughout the
Caribbean where it supports the most valuable fishery in the region. The
investigators described the PaV1 virus in 1999 and since then have studied its
pathology, epidemiology, transmission, and effects on juvenile lobster
populations in the Florida Keys. While the focus of previous studies has been on
local pathogen-host dynamics, PaV1 infections in lobsters are now confirmed in
distant areas of the Caribbean (Belize, Mexico, St. Croix) in regions that are
demographically linked only by dispersing larvae that spend &gt;6 months in the
open ocean. The researchers recently discovered that many lobster postlarvae
recruiting to coastal nurseries in Florida are infected with PaV1, providing
novel evidence for pathogen connectivity among distant host populations.
Focusing on the spiny lobster-PaV1 virus association as a case study, this
project is an ambitious program of laboratory, field, and modeling research
whose broader implications will better the understanding of the importance of
dispersal by infectious agents on the spread and maintenance of disease in
marine populations. The project builds upon data and techniques developed with
prior NSF sponsorship, and brings together partners in developing Caribbean
nations with a multidisciplinary group of scientists with long-standing research
programs in larval biology, biophysical and ecological modeling, crustacean
biology, molecular biology, and the study of marine diseases. The study has
three objectives:1) To investigate the dynamics and mechanisms of PaV1 infection
of larvae and the effect of infection on larval behavior and mortality, which
influence dispersal and demographic connectivity.(2) To examine the importance
of large-scale connectivity by PaV1-infected postlarvae on the maintenance of
local disease dynamics and patterns of disease prevalence at local scales.(3) To
explore the ramifications of planktonic pathogens and the hydrodynamic
environment on large scale patterns of disease
connectivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project will result in
significant cross-training of students and postdocs, participation by
undergraduates in REU programs, and targeted workshops with fishermen and
resource managers in Florida and the Caribbean. The project involves resource
management personnel from developing Caribbean countries, ensuring that the
results will find application in management impacting the Caribbean's most
important fishery species. The continued development of advanced molecular and
modeling techniques will also yield new assays for the detection of viral
infection, and deeper insight into the role of disease and large-scale
connectivity in metapopulation dynamics, respectively.