* 0928926
* Developing A "Living Laboratory" for Examining Community Recovery and Resilience After Disaster
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Walter Peacock, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 08/31/2013
* USD 374,036.00

This research builds upon several existing research initiatives along the Texas
coast to provide a "living laboratory" for examining community recovery and
resilience after a disaster. The Texas coast is quickly becoming the fastest
growing area in the United States, exposing potentially millions more people to
the adverse impacts of meteorologically-based disasters. Most recently,
Hurricane Ike made landfall overnight on September 12, 2008 near Galveston,
Texas. Prior to Hurricane Ike, the Texas Coastal Communities Planning Atlas
documented the physical, environmental, regulatory, and social development
patterns present along the Texas Coast (see coastalatlas.tamug.edu). Data
collection under NSF Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) CMMI-0901605
provided immediate data on impact, dislocation, and early repair and rebuilding
decisions. These data provide baseline measures for the proposed research
measuring community recovery at multiple scales over a two-year period. Using
the original sample, the researchers will establish a series of panel studies of
households, housing units, business owners, businesses, and business structures
to track recovery trajectories and adaptive learning. A geo-coded parcel-level
dataset allows us to aggregate units to draw conclusions at multiple scales. In
addition, the researchers will, through participatory observation analysis,
qualitative interviews, and documentary analysis, track policy changes by county
and city governments to assess adaptive management and social learning.

The disaster research community has called for increasingly systematic and
quantitative approaches to modeling the impacts and recovery processes following
a disaster, with greater attention to measuring recovery at multiple levels, to
better model community resilience. Systematic identification of the key
decisions made by public authorities regarding disaster preparedness, response,
recovery and mitigation planning and policy development is also needed to assess
a critical dimension of resiliency associated with adaptive learning. The
synergy of this research with existing projects provides the ability to do just
that - to quantitatively model the dynamics of the built, regulatory, and social
environment from pre-hazard event to community response, learning, and recovery
- each of which are key dimensions in resilience. Findings from this research
will leverage existing outreach tools to further knowledge that will enable
local communities and professionals involved in the design, regulation, and
management of the built and natural environments to construct communities that
are more socially and physically resilient.