* 0928666
* Boston Energy in Science Teaching (BEST)
* EHR,DRL
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2014
* Arthur Eisenkraft, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 07/31/2014
* USD 2,267,017.00

The Boston Energy in Science Teaching (BEST) project is a Phase II MSP that
explores the use of one of the organizing principles of science, Energy, as a
vehicle to extend and research how teacher in-depth conceptual understanding
translates into deeper student engagement, exposition and learning of science.
This innovative focus on Energy will allow the Partnership to examine how
fundamental organizing principles (e.g., energy, models, scale, systems, and
constancy/change) can be used to better teach science at the elementary through
the undergraduate level. The BEST Partnership is comprised of the University of
Massachusetts-Boston (UMB), the Boston Public Schools (BPS), Northeastern
University (NEU), and Roxbury Community College (RCC). The Educational
Development Center (EDC) and UMB conduct the BEST educational research and the
Program Evaluation Research Group at Lesley University provides the independent
project evaluation. The BEST project researches whether and to what extent
participation in concept-driven vs. discipline-driven professional development
improves grade 3-8 science teachers and university faculty members conceptual
understanding, the nature of their instruction, the outcomes of their students,
and/or faculty members' interactions with teachers, as well as their thinking
about their own research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The BEST theory of action
exemplifies the hypothesis that in order to understand how the world works,
people require a deep understanding of the fundamental concepts of science, a
broad base of scientific observations, and a multi-dimensional and coherent
approach to learning. It recognizes, however, that current science curricula,
course materials, and university science departments are predominantly organized
into single scientific disciplines. Teachers and students, especially at the
intermediate level (grades 3-8), are re-teaching and re-learning the same
concepts within disciplinary silos. These conceptual disconnects and the
segregated way of teaching fail to take advantage of the innate curiosity
students bring to learning and the real-world connections that they experience
daily. At the same time, huge advances in science and technology have recently
resulted from a new emphasis on "interdisciplinary" or "cross-disciplinary"
research. Therefore, the BEST Partnership effort hypothesizes that similar
advances in science learning can be made for teachers and their students through
a new emphasis on the foundational concepts that straddle all science
disciplines. The Partnership extends and modifies two of its Phase I successful
strategies, Contextualized Content Courses (CCC) and Collaborative Coaching and
Learning in Science (CCLS), by using Energy, a theme that integrates the
fundamental concepts that pervade science, to develop better teaching of science
at elementary through undergraduate levels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The BEST
vision is one of a growing community of STEM higher education faculty that works
side-by-side with K-12 teachers in science education reform; Boston teachers
having a deep sense of the organizing principles of science and their connection
to disciplinary curricula; and students from all backgrounds entering and
remaining in the STEM pipeline supported by the Boston Science Partnership. The
goals of this Partnership are to 1) better understand how increasing teacher
knowledge increases student achievement and research why the BEST model is
effective, 2) increase teacher understanding of science and therefore teacher
efficiency and effectiveness at teaching existing curricula, 3) engage
disciplinary higher education faculty in a deep discussion of cross-disciplinary
research and science education in order to spark new research directions and
center institutional changes in STEM education, and 4) increase student interest
and achievement in science in the intermediate grades. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
BEST project will result in an innovative instructional approach integrating the
theme of Energy, a science education masters degree, a growing community of
strong science educators, a highly effective and innovative professional
development model for both college faculty and teachers which will be
disseminated to other university-school district partnerships, and significant
research on teaching and learning.