* 0928679
* Engineering the Pore Fluid of  Sands with Highly Plastic Nano-Particles for Liqefaction revention
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Clifford Johnston, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 07/31/2013
* USD 179,997.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of
2009&lt;br/&gt;(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Liquefaction is an
important cause of damage to civil infrastructures during earthquakes, and
techniques that can minimize the liquefaction susceptibility of a site, with no
ground disturbance can greatly impact geotechnical earthquake engineering
practice. While many factors affect liquefaction resistance, laboratory and
field observations demonstrate that the presence of plastic fines reduces
liquefaction susceptibility. With this premise, previous work explored the use
of bentonite-based thixotropic slurries for liquefaction mitigation. This work
showed a ten fold or greater increase in cyclic resistance in presence of 3%
bentonite in the sand pores; demonstrated that permeation of concentrated
bentonite suspensions is possible through treatment of the clay with Na-
pyrophosphate; and established that increased cyclic resistance is due to the
rheology of the pore fluid formed in presence of
bentonite.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work has the potential to be further
advanced through the use of laponite, a synthetic, inert, high purity, highly
plastic nano-clay, ten times smaller in size than bentonite. As bentonite,
laponite does not pose environmental concerns and benefits from the experience
base in geotechnical engineering with clays. Early results suggest that,
compared to bentonite, smaller percentages of laponite may be required to obtain
the same improvement in cyclic resistance; and that, thanks to the delayed gel
time, permeation is possible with no chemical treatment of the clay (although
chemical modification may be necessary to extend the time window for
permeation). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is based on an absolutely novel
approach to soil improvement ? one that relies on engineering the pore fluid,
rather than the soil skeleton. It also represents the first attempt in civil
engineering to utilize laponite. Hence, the research has the potential to be
transformational providing a next generation solution to the problem of soil
improvement for liquefaction mitigation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall scope
of the research is to provide sound laboratory evidence of the effectiveness of
this treatment and address key issues that will enable field testing. The
specific objectives are to: quantify the improvement in cyclic resistance of
sand following permeation with laponite; identify the mechanism(s) responsible
for this behavior; determine the chemo-physical modification of the laponite
that can optimize treatment; and explore means by which to verify the delivery
of the laponite inside a sand matrix. These objectives will be pursued through
an experimental program that will include: cyclic triaxial tests and resonant
column tests on sand specimens permeated with laponite; permeation tests of
laponite suspensions in laboratory prepared sand columns; characterization of
the rheology and of the microstructure of the laponite pore fluid using advanced
rheometrical techniques, and cryo-scanning electron microscopy; study of the
surface chemistry of laponite through XRD, FTIR and thermal analyses; and bench-
scale tests exploring changes in electrical, physical and chemical properties of
the treated sand volume, that may be helpful to define field verification
methods.&lt;br/&gt;