* 0928404
* DSU-SMILE: A Science and Mathematics Initiative for Learning Enrichment
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Mazen Shahin, Delaware State University
* Continuing Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2015
* USD 2,454,186.00

The HBCU-UP program at Delaware State University will focus on engaging incoming
freshman STEM students in programs that will enhance their academic success and
identification with the University and their major discipline. We expect to
significantly improve the retention and graduation rates of minority STEM
students. STEM freshmen will be divided into learning communities of 5 - 6
students who will enroll together in three linked courses: a mathematics class,
an English class and Freshman Seminar. Each learning community will be assigned
a peer mentor who will communicate with their mentees daily and ensure that they
attend their classes, go to tutoring and office hours, and meet with their study
groups. Faculty mentors responsible for 4 - 5 of the freshman learning community
groups will meet weekly with the peer mentors and will lead co-curricular
activities involving both students and mentors. The project brings together STEM
and English faculty and student services administrators to focus on revising the
freshman experience of STEM students to involve them in a community of peers,
peer mentors and faculty. To support student engagement with research we will
continue the successful undergraduate research program begun in the first HBCU-
UP project. The proposed program will support faculty development and research.
Faculty will submit research proposals for research grants to work with
undergraduate students. These proposals will be reviewed by a committee. This
process will help faculty develop better student research projects and give them
experience in writing research grants.