* 0928978
* Universal Design and Technology for Students with Disabilities in STEM Fields
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Maria Kaylor, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 08/31/2012
* USD 200,000.00

The Universal Design and Technology for Students with Disabilities in STEM
Fields is an enrichment project that will advance the field?s knowledge of how
Hispanic students with disabilities transition from high school to post-
secondary education, which student interventions and faculty training strategies
improve the success of Hispanic undergraduate students completing Algebra and
Pre-Calculus gateway courses, and how Hispanic-serving institutions collaborate
with regional minority-serving secondary and post-secondary institutions to
collect baseline data and pilot student interventions for a future Alliance for
Students with Disabilities in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this
project are to: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) Create a system to collect and analyze
data on students with disabilities in local high schools and community colleges
who identify an interest in the STEM fields; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(2) Use
technology to create an online learning center for faculty and students with
disabilities in the gateway post-secondary math classes; and
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(3) Train faculty to use universal design in post-
secondary gateway math courses to assist students with disabilities majoring in
a STEM field through the critical juncture of transition from high school to a
university setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposed project provides the
foundation for a future proposed Alliance for Students with Disabilities in STEM
with local high schools, community colleges and the University of Texas at San
Antonio; the Alliance will be a national model for STEM programs for students
with disabilities at Hispanic serving institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr.
Abelardo Villarreal, who is the Director of Field Services for the Intercultural
Development Research Association, is the external evaluator for the project. The
project information and findings will be disseminated to the public via
professional conference presentations, journal publications, and a project
website.