* 0928247
* Temperature recorded in DNA and soft-tissue biomass: Implications for the deep-sea biosphere
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Ruth Blake, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 08/31/2012
* USD 361,286.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is potentially transformative
research that focuses on whether the oxygen isotope ratios in phosphate in DNA
record the temperature at which organisms grow. Its purpose is to explore the
environmental conditions and temperature optima for life in ancient and modern
extreme environments. The approach uses controlled laboratory experiments in
which microbes and a limited number of model macrofauna, such as zebra fish, are
cultured/grown over a wide range of temperatures. Microbial studies will be done
on pure cultures of species with known growth temperature ranges. The impacts of
growth rate, nutrient limitation, pH, and phosphate uptake rate on the
temperature dependence of the oxygen isotope ratio of phosphate in DNA will also
be examined. In addition the work will test the robustness of the DNA and
biomass isotope temperature record by analyzing natural samples of micro-and
macro-organisms collected from thermally extreme environments such as hot
springs and deep-sea hydrothermal vents. Because DNA is a fundamental unit of
all life, this work will provide a robust understanding of its temperature-
recording properties which could have far-reaching implications for determining
the upper temperature limit for life and will shed light on environments in
which life can exist on Earth and other planets. Broader impacts of the work are
significant and include complete integration of research and education from the
high school to the postdoctoral level, support of students, and support of two
researchers who are from groups under-represented in the sciences.