* 0928448
* Man-made Hazard Mitigation of Reservoir Dams: Monte Carlo Simulation with Multiscale Modeling of Concrete and Accurate Fluid-Structure Interaction
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,04/30/2012
* Gianluca Cusatis, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 04/30/2012
* USD 301,000.00

The main objective of this project is to study effective computational methods
that will allow the failure and reliability analysis of dams subjected to man-
made hazards, such as blast and penetration. This requires the accurate modeling
of reservoir/dam failure response, which is not handled satisfactorily by
available computational tools. The research approach progresses from the
probabilistic modeling of concrete at the length scale of the major material
heterogeneities to the formulation of a multi-scale framework for the analysis
of large structures. The computational simulation of the dam is then coupled
with the simulation of the reservoir water through a novel fluid-structure
interaction algorithm. Finally, the developed framework is used to compute the
probability of failure associated with projectile penetration and air-blasting.

The successful completion of this research will lead to a significant
improvement in the computational tools for dam failure analysis available to
practitioners. Engineers will be able to assess accurately the probability of
failure of existing dams and dam administrators will be able to use these
assessments to prioritize investments and resources. In addition, the research
will have a significant impact on education and promotion of diversity through
the wide range of activities aimed at the involvement of pre-college,
undergraduate, and graduate students, especially those belonging to minority and
underrepresented groups. This is achieved mainly by the development of an online
NSF Virtual Center for Resilient Infrastructures (VCRI) in the context of the
virtual reality world ?Second Life? (SL). The VCRI will give unprecedented
opportunities for outreach activities, dissemination, and training.

