* 0928705
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Using Neutral Models to Evaluate the Effect of Topography on Landscape Patterns of Fire Severity: A Case Study of Lassen Volcanic National Park
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Alan Taylor, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 07/31/2011
* USD 11,980.00

Fire has become an increasingly important disturbance to understand due to
recent increases in fire size and severity, along with growing human habitation
in rural areas. Causes of spatial variation in fire severity across landscapes
include daily weather conditions, fire suppression and fuel build up, other past
management action, and climate. Fire severity patch location could be
stochastic, or fixed in space by topographic influences. However, quantifying
the effect of topography on observed patterns of fire severity patches is
difficult because fires are stochastic events burning through dynamic and
heterogeneous fuel, weather, and historic management conditions. Neutral
simulation models will allow this research to hold these confounding factors
constant to assess the interaction of topography on predicted fire intensity.
This research will address the following questions, using Lassen Volcanic
National Park as a case study: 1) What is the distribution of forest surface and
canopy fuels and how are those fuels related to the underlying biophysical
landscape? 2) What is the effect of topography on fire intensity for a landscape
of homogenous fuels burning under constant weather conditions? 3) Do observed
patterns of high intensity fire match either the hypothetical neutral model
results or the results from fire simulation of real landscape conditions using
mapped surface and canopy fuels? Canopy fuels will be mapped by combining field
measurements with topographic information and remotely sensed Landsat data
within a classification and regression tree model to predict canopy fuel loads
across the landscape. A neutral model approach to fire behavior modeling will
compare hypothetical landscapes with both real landscapes and historical data on
fire severity to assess the strength of topographic controls on fire intensity
and the usefulness of this novel approach.

The results of this study will address the role of topography in creating
heterogeneity in vegetation community structure and composition across the
landscape through its influence on fire intensity. Furthermore, this research
will evaluate the impacts of fire suppression on changing the landscape location
of high intensity fire-created patches. Some types of vegetation, especially in
Lassen Volcanic National Park, but also in other locations throughout California
and the US west, require high severity fire that has been vigorously suppressed.
Using neutral models to assess the potential for high severity fire to create
heterogeneity on the landscape will help both resource managers and fire
fighters to make better decisions regarding wildfires, Wildfire Use, prescribed
fire, and other fuel treatments in highly altered forests. As a Doctoral
Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to
enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research career.