* 0928521
* Micro-Optics Based 3D Microfabrication System
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2013
* Allen Yi, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Zhijian Pei
* 12/31/2013
* USD 267,999.00

The research objective of this award is to establish an innovative and
affordable process for creating complicated three dimensional microstructures on
nonplanar substrates using an optical projection system based on nonconventional
micro-optical structures. These micro-optics are precisely fabricated on an
arbitrary surface that can be used to project micro and meso scale structures on
a pre-defined nonplanar substrate where a layer of photoresist is spin coated.
After proper exposure and development, the desired micro or meso pattern will be
created on the photoresist layer. The research plan includes two fundamental
components: (1) three-dimensional micro-optics fabrication by use of a slow tool
servo ultraprecision machining process, (2) design and analysis of a three-
dimensional projection lithography system for micro and meso scale structures on
nonplanar substrates.

If successful, this research will result in a high volume and low cost
manufacturing process for true three-dimensional micro and meso scale
structures. This process complements conventional photolithography in many
applications and the results of the research can be easily converted to
producing optical components with micro and meso size features for
optoelectronic applications. The major benefits of this research to society will
be demonstrated by its impact on several other areas in optical manufacturing,
including waveguides, micro and diffractive optics for telecommunication, laser
and solar concentrator applications. The results from this research will
potentially provide an alternative process for fabricating components with
three-dimensional micro size channels, pumps and reservoirs for biomedical and
medical applications as well as many other additional consumer products.