* 0928074
* Tactile Mapping Dissemination Project
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Amy Lobben, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 08/31/2013
* USD 223,754.00

The Tactile Mapping Dissemination Project objective is to disseminate products
about tactile mapping for students who are blind or visually impaired learning
STEM. This project is based on a previously NSF-funded project, Tactile Mapping
Software for Blind and Low Vision Science Education (HRD-0533251). Two primary
products were developed from that funded project: 1) TaME-a Tactile Map Editor,
and 2) The United States national, and state, scale tactile socioeconomic maps.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The dissemination process for the current project will
include development and subsequent evaluation of materials to aid in effective
and efficient dissemination of information about the TaME and the US and state
tactile socioeconomic maps. These dissemination materials include: software
tutorials, Best Practices in Tactile Map Production, and National Geography
Standards-based lesson plans and activities designed to integrate the tactile
socioeconomic maps into K-16 geography curricula. All activities are designed to
meet the three project goals:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Goal #1: Author
software tutorials and Best Practices in Tactile Map Production, including
guidelines for tactile map design and production; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project
Goal #2: Develop and deliver hosted and self-guided workshops to K-12 state
schools for students who are blind and visually impaired, to universities, to
organizations providing significant educational outreach, and to RDE-funded
Alliances for Students with Disabilities in STEM;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project
Goal #3: Produce National Geography Standard-driven lesson plans, activities,
and guidelines for integrating the tactile socioeconomic maps into geography
curricula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The external formative and summative evaluation
for this project will be conducted by Donald A. Ouimet, the Director of the
Oregon School for the Blind, and by Sherry Hahn, the Digital Learning
Coordinator at the Washington State School for the
Blind.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project materials will be disseminated at Dr.
Lobben's Spatial and Map Cognition Laboratory website at the University of
Oregon Eugene. Workshops and trainings are planned for the Oregon School for the
Blind, the Washington State School for the Blind, multiple universities and
educational organizations with outreach missions, and NSF-funded Alliances for
Students with Disabilities in STEM.