* 0928941
* Assessing the Impact of Developing-World Land Use on Riverine Organic Carbon Delivery to the Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Caroline Masiello, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 07/31/2013
* USD 389,261.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

River inputs play a significant role in the geochemistry of the global oceans.
Rivers provide a significant source of nutrients, organic matter and suspended
sediment to coastal shelves and the open ocean. The delivery of high nutrient
loads to coastal areas can increase primary production, which will further
increase the amount of organic carbon delivered to marine sediments.
Understanding the amount, as well as the chemistry, of the terrestrial materials
delivered from rivers to the ocean is essential to comprehend both the current
and future patterns of carbon burial in ocean sediments.

It is recognized that watersheds located in tropical and subtropical developing
regions play an increasingly important role in river nutrient release, and to
predict the human impact on coastal and global ocean processes, it is important
to understand the impacts of the developing regions of the globe. Researchers
from Rice University will study a suite of Venezuelan rivers to characterize the
effects of developing-world land use practices on river nutrients, organic
carbon, and total suspended solid inputs to the ocean. Correlating an impact and
land use index with the chemistry of exported materials, will provide
clarification on the relationship between land use and the mass and composition
of the riverine material delivered to the ocean. The results from this research
will also provide a better overall understanding of the global marine carbon
cycle. This research is being done as a collaborative effort between United
States and Venezuelan scientists and will provide support for two PhD students.