* 0929143
* CONFERENCE:  Sharing Advances in Symbiosis Research and Education at the 2009 6th International Symbiosis Society congress/ Univ. of Wisconsin August 9-15, 2009 Madison, WI
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2010
* Heidi Goodrich-Blair, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Mary Beth Saffo
* 05/31/2010
* USD 15,000.00

Heidi Goodrich-Blair Conference: 6th International Symbiosis Society Congress
IOS-0929143

Symbiosis is the intimate association between two or more species. Symbiotic
relationships are ubiquitous, and allow many plants and animals to thrive in
diverse environments. For example, reef corals obtain most of their energy from
algae that live inside their tissues. Almost all land plants rely on fungi to
provide essential minerals, and most animals, including humans, rely on bacteria
for nutrition and defense against infectious diseases. Despite the importance of
symbiosis in the health of plants and animals, scientists understand little
regarding the mechanisms that promote and maintain healthy long-term
associations. Such knowledge could help ameliorate the impact of global climate
shifts on animal and plant health and could lead to the discovery of new drugs
that are produced by symbiotic partners for pathogen defense. Furthermore,
symbiotic systems are fascinating, engaging, visually striking and relevant to
our world. Therefore, symbiosis can help educate students on fundamental
biological principles in evolution, ecology, molecular biology, cell biology,
and physiology. Two critical steps toward realizing the potential of symbiosis
research are increasing communication among symbiosis researchers in diverse
fields and educating the public regarding the importance and elegance of
symbiotic systems. The 6th International Symbiosis Congress project will support
these efforts by allowing the participation of scientists, students, and
teachers in an international conference to be held in Madison Wisconsin August
9-15, 2009. Presenters will discuss cutting edge research on the evolution,
ecology, metabolism, and molecular biology of symbiosis in corals, legumes,
flowering plants, forests, humans, and insects among others. Specific topics
that will be addressed are how global climate changes are influencing symbiotic
systems and how symbiotic associations evolve and are stabilized. This project
also will promote professional development and symbiosis education workshops at
the conference that are designed to encourage success among junior scientists
and expand the integration of symbiosis research in education and outreach.