* 0929262
* 2010 Project:  Arabidopsis 2010:  Transcriptomes for Functional and Evolutionary Studies
* BIO,IOS
* 12/01/2009,11/30/2013
* Richard Clark, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Kent Chapman
* 11/30/2013
* USD 737,804.00

A basic challenge in the life sciences is to understand how genetic variation
among individuals (DNA sequence differences) leads to variation in traits, for
example, eye color in animals or crop yield in plants. Ultimately, trait
differences among individuals result from differences in the kind or amount of
molecules (for example, RNA and protein molecules) produced by cells. In this
project, the investigators will generate a resource to address the fundamental
question of how differences in DNA sequences among individuals lead to the
production of different RNA molecules, which in turn affect protein types,
levels, and whole-organism traits. To do this, the investigators will exploit
newly developed technologies, including so-called 'second generation' DNA
sequencing methods, to characterize in a highly cost effective manner the
majority of RNA molecules from 19 diverse strains of the model plant,
Arabidopsis thaliana, for which sequenced genomes are available. &lt;br/&gt;A
general outcome will be an understanding of how genetic variation affects RNA
levels, and hence how DNA differences lead to trait differences. Specifically,
the resource will allow investigators from around the United States and the
world to understand the regulation of genes relevant to a multitude of traits of
critical importance for agriculture in the coming century. The resource of
sequence data that will be generated by the project will be released publically
via the deposition in the DNA sequence database of the USA National Center for
Biotechnology. Internet links to these data, and a description of the project,
will be available on website of the lead project investigator within the public
University of Utah website. Hands-on training will be provided to each of the
undergraduate students, graduate students, and postdoctoral researchers involved
in the project. The project will expose trainees to advanced biological
technologies and analysis methods of ever increasing importance in
biology.&lt;br/&gt;