* 0929265
* Implementation Grant - Project GeNex: Educating the Next Generation of STEM Professionals
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Herbert Pennick, St. Philip's College
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2013
* USD 396,648.00

St. Philip's College, one of the Alamo Community Colleges, a two-year public
college and the only nationally designated Historically Black College and
Hispanic-Serving Institution, will implement "Project GeNex: Educating the Next
Generation of STEM Professionals" as it aspires to improve its STEM education
programs and increase the number of diverse, competitive and globally engaged
STEM professionals in the nation's workforce. St. Philip's College will recruit,
retain, graduate and transfer students to four-year institutions where they will
complete undergraduate degrees in STEM disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project
GeNex aims to improve STEM education at SPC and increase the number of STEM
professionals in the nation's workforce. To achieve this goal, three objectives
will be targeted: &lt;br/&gt;1) To increase the number of students who enroll as
STEM majors; &lt;br/&gt;2) To increase rate of course completion of STEM majors;
and &lt;br/&gt;3) To increase the retention rate of STEM majors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is innovative in that it will provide
additional opportunities to increase the recruitment, retention, graduation and
transfer to universities of minority students in the STEM disciplines. Through
St. Philip's College's existing relationships with high schools, universities
and industry partners, Project GeNex will have the necessary framework to ensure
student and project success.