* 0929633
* Modeling Spatial Organization of Cardiac Cell Function: Application to Calcium Waves and Arrhythmia
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Yoram Rudy, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Athanassios Sambanis
* 07/31/2013
* USD 294,621.00

0929633 Rudy

The long-term goal of this application is to introduce the spatial dimension
into models of the cardiac action potential and calcium cycling and to develop
new modeling tools that will be used to address unanswered questions regarding
the cellular origins of cardiac arrhythmias. Specifically, the mechanisms that
underlie the local (subcellular) effects of the calcium-dependent signaling
pathways on the temporal and spatial dynamic properties of calcium cycling and
the cardiac action potential will be studied. The model will account for calcium
diffusion, thus allowing for simulation of calcium waves and their
arrhythmogenic effects on the cell electrophysiology. This model will provide,
for the first time, a theoretical tool for simulating experimental calcium
fluorescence images and for reconstructing from these images the actual calcium
transients. Using this model, the mechanism of calcium - wave initiation and
propagation, their modulation by signaling pathways activity, and their role in
abnormal action potential repolarization and arrhythmogenic afterdepolarizations
will be investigated.

The proposed project encompasses several strata of intellectual merit. From a
scientific perspective, it is aimed at bringing mathematical models of cardiac
cells to the next level of physiological detail by incorporating important
elements of cell architecture. The proposed model takes the important next steps
of incorporating the spatial dimension and calcium-dependent signaling pathways
in the cell models. From the healthcare perspective, there is increasing
evidence that calcium wave dynamics underlie life threatening arrhythmias and
sudden cardiac death in heart failure patients and in individuals who carry
mutations in proteins that participate in calcium cycling. Mathematical modeling
will provide mechanistic insights into these processes that are essential for
developing novel effective approaches to diagnosis, prevention and treatment.
Finally, from the educational perspective, their cell models have been used
extensively in many institutions as teaching and developing tools in
engineering, physiology, biophysics and pharmacology, and for training
physicians and scientists at various levels (medical students, residents, and
fellows specializing in cardiac electrophysiology and arrhythmia). Adding the
sub-cellular spatial organization and its major role in cell function will
enhance significantly these learning experiences.

While this proposal focuses on cardiac cells, spatial organization of the
calcium subsystem, calcium signaling and calcium waves are essential components
of cell excitation and contraction in other muscle systems, including skeletal
and smooth muscle cells. Formulation of a cardiac cell model that incorporates
these properties could serve as a paradigm for these other muscle systems. For
the cardiac research community, the new class of cell models will provide
cellular building blocks for integrating into higher levels of organization
(multicellular tissue, whole heart) in a multi-scale approach for studying
cardiac electrophysiology and arrhythmia. The students and fellows will be
trained in cardiac cell modeling. To this end, and to facilitate use of the
models by other laboratories and academic institutions, the models developed
under this proposal in the Matlab platform with Interactive Graphical User
Interface will be fully available on the website and assistance for their
implementation will be provided.