* 0929830
* Perihelion advance and Yarkovsky drift of near-Earth asteroids: asteroid physical properties, solar oblateness, and general relativity.
* MPS,AST
* 01/01/2009,11/30/2011
* Jean-Luc Margot, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Thomas S. Statler
* 11/30/2011
* USD 96,877.00

Drs. Jean-Luc Margot and Jon Giorgini will obtain and interpret high-precision
radar range measurements on twelve near-Earth asteroids (NEAs) that have
trajectories strongly affected by the light of the Sun, the shape of the Sun,
and general relativistic effects. Asteroid orbits are influenced by the
absorption and reemission of solar energy, the so-called Yarkovsky effect. These
changes to the motion will be quantified with the radar measurements in order to
constrain the densities, compositions, and thermal properties of NEAs. Other
perturbations to NEA orbits arise as a result of the non-uniformity of the
gravitational field of the oblate Sun. The ranging data to the twelve NEAs will
provide a direct probe of the mass distribution in the Suns interior by
measuring changes to the asteroid trajectories. Radar tests of general
relativity (GR) will also be improved by quantifying the perihelion advance of
NEAs that reach deep inside the gravitational well of the Sun. The GR effects
can be separated from the effects of oblateness as they have a different
dependence on the size, eccentricity, and inclination of the NEA orbits. Both GR
and oblateness effects can be separated from the distinct signature of the
Yarkovsky drift. Most of the measurements will be performed with the planetary
radar on the Arecibo telescope. Analysis of the results will make use of orbital
determination software at JPL. High precision measurements in this extreme
dynamical regime will provide unique observational constraints and will test
current models of asteroid physics, solar physics, and fundamental physics.