* 0929836
* California LSAMP Bridge To  The Doctorate Cohort V, UCSB
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Howard Gillman, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* A.  Hicks
* 07/31/2012
* USD 987,000.00

This request for funding for the Bridge to the Doctorate responds to the NSF
Program Solicitation for current senior LSAMP Alliances. The University of
California LSAMP has chosen to alternate BD host sites among the 8
UC&lt;br/&gt;partner campuses, and is prepared to attract students from
different parts of the state and the nation. UC Santa Barbara has been selected
to host Cohort V through a competitive process, including its record for
minority student&lt;br/&gt;B.S. degree completion rates, strong research
infrastructure, faculty and departmental commitment, and long-term support for
the development of minority graduate students beyond the first two years.
Funding requested in this&lt;br/&gt;proposal would provide a $30,000
stipend/student/year plus an allowance of $10,500 per student/year for
educational fees and costs for up to two years. Students will be guaranteed
support to ?stay on the bridge? through&lt;br/&gt;to completion of the Ph.D..
This proposal has the enthusiastic support of all STEM departments and the Deans
of the College of Letters and Science, the College of Engineering, and the
Graduate Division. Our long term objective is to recruit and retain a diverse
group of graduate students who are successful beyond the two-year funding period
of the award by earning their doctorate degrees at UCSB, and becoming
competitive candidates for postdoctoral positions&lt;br/&gt;in STEM disciplines.
We will provide an extensive and comprehensive academic and professional
preparation program that offers BD Scholars access to tools and a supportive
academic network that will foster success in their&lt;br/&gt;graduate programs
and subsequent postdoctoral careers. The BD program will include both formative
and summative evaluation to assess its impact on the diversity of the population
of graduate students and future faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In conjunction
with CA LSAMP leadership, the BD Scholars program of academic and professional
development activities will be coordinated by the California NanoSystems
Institute (CNSI), a research institute that pursues&lt;br/&gt;interdisciplinary
research in nanoscience and engineering. CNSI hosts a portfolio of education
programs aimed at broadening participation in STEM disciplines. In cooperation
with others at UCSB, CNSI has been at the frontier of applied research on
programs that bring underrepresented students from diverse backgrounds to the
highest levels of achievement in STEM. The proposed BD program incorporates best
practices and innovative ideas for recruitment&lt;br/&gt;and retention of
graduate researchers and builds upon lessons learned from programs at other
University of California campuses as well as sister LSAMPs. This proposal
leverages the distinctive strengths of several graduate&lt;br/&gt;and
undergraduate research programs at UCSB to prepare BD scholars to be successful
scientists and role models who can diversify the faculty ranks in research
institutions. Students will receive rigorous academic and
research&lt;br/&gt;training experiences that support completion of the Ph.D. as
well as future contributions to our nation's scientific and engineering
expertise. The developmental workshops, conference participation, and exposure
to STEM career fields will contribute to the professional and personal growth of
minority graduate students and increase the efficacy of existing activities. The
BD will create increased opportunity for talented students who want to make a
difference, locally and globally, while increasing intellectual diversity. To
date, UC-LSAMP has supported 46 URM students in BD activities. The potential is
great: UC Systemwide granted 1,497 B.S. degrees to URM students in
2007-08.&lt;br/&gt;Our talent pool of LSAMP students is strong, and the demand
to enter graduate school is significant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will
foster stronger partnerships within UCSB and between UC and&lt;br/&gt;specific
non-Ph.D. granting institutions having large populations of minority students
enrolled in STEM undergraduate majors, including collaboration with the
California State University LSAMP (reference MOU between CSU and UC LSAMP and
AGEP). UCSB faculty and graduate students will strengthen existing, and create
new, research collaborations with institutions that host LSAMP programs. The
program will create and support the community of students, faculty and staff who
will engaged in a focused program of intensive
mentoring,&lt;br/&gt;communication skills and professional development necessary
to prepare BD fellows for the highly competitive doctoral environment and
ultimately for academic positions. By increasing the success of underrepresented
graduate&lt;br/&gt;students we will create a stronger campuswide research
environment that welcomes diverse approaches to scientific discovery. UCSB will
disseminate the results of this initiative within the University and through a
diverse array of&lt;br/&gt;publications and presentations at national venues in
order to advance the understanding of the necessary components to achieve
success in STEM academic careers. The long-term impact of the BD activity will
be on America?s STEM&lt;br/&gt;workforce, both in academia and in industry
research and development. By nurturing the future professoriate as well as the
scientific workforce, the value added will be seen in the visibility of
minorities in science and&lt;br/&gt;engineering, increasing representation and
providing role models and motivation for the next generation.