* 0929193
* Noble gas studies along the ultraslow spreading Southwest Indian Ridge: Constraining magmatic degassing processes and the origin and lengthscale of mantle hetereogenities
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Sujoy Mukhopadhyay, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 06/30/2013
* USD 369,250.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The inert nature of the noble gases makes them ideally suited to trace the
evolution of the Earth's atmosphere. In particular, the Iodine-Xenon and
Plutonium-Uranium-Xenon radioactive decay systems provide constraints on the
timing and rates of degassing from Earth's mantle during the first few hundred
million years of earth history. This research involves measuring the abundance
of the noble gases and CO2 in a suite of basalt glasses from the ultraslow mid-
ocean ridge spreading center, the Southwest Indian Ridge. Isotopic measurements
of He, Ne, Ar, Kr, Xe will also be carried out. This research is important for
understanding the compositions of the major gases in the early atmosphere. It
will also address first order questions relating to the evolution of volatiles
in Earth's mantle including how tectonic control, mid ocean ridge spreading
rates, and mantle temperature influence planetary degassing. Data from the study
will allow evaluation of the volatile budget of the Earth and provide
fundamental constraints on the early (first 100 million years) outgassing of the
mantle and the origin of the atmosphere. Broader impacts are student training
and support of an early career scientist.