* 0929898
* Acquisition of an FTIR for the Nature Research Center, North Carolina Museum of Natural Sciences
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Robert Tacker, Friends of the North Carolina State Museum of Natural Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Thomas J. Boyd
* 08/31/2010
* USD 130,963.00

0929898&lt;br/&gt;Tacker&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5)." This award
will provide funding to acquire an infrared microscope and Fourier Transform
infrared spectrometer (FTIR). The instruments will be used for measuring apatite
in igneous and metamorphic rocks of various origins. Data will be developed into
process-base models for understanding geochemical processes in the crust,
mantle, and volcanoes. The instrument will be housed on-site at the Museum?s
Nature Research Center. The PI will have overall operational oversight.
Maintenance costs will be supported by the State with full-time laboratory
managers expected to be hired. The PI will use the new instrumentation to survey
water and carbon dioxide in various apatite-based mineralogical samples. Various
forms of apatite [Ca,Cl], [Ca,CO3], [Ca,OH] allow inference to relate apatite
mineral chemistry to environmental conditions (fluid phase, crystallization,
thermodynamics, etc). The FTIR will also be used to study pyrite
oxidation/hydrolysis. Emphasis will be given to clay mineralogy. The PI will
study the kinetic pathways of pyrite-clay interactions in order to understand
long-term elemental and fossil preservation. The instrumentation will not only
support the PI?s research but be applicable to other research foci including
bioceramics, planetary geology, and acid mine drainage. The PI's proximity and
working relationships with nearby colleges and universities will allow him to
make this equipment available to underrepresented students. Scientific projects
will be publically displayed. Exhibits will be tailored to younger students and
are slated to be incorporated into the Museum's PBS programming.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***