* 0929076
* TASELM Phase 2
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* David Pagni, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 08/31/2013
* USD 2,094,045.00

Teachers Assisting Students to Excel in Learning Mathematics Phase II (TASEL-M2)
is a partnership among California State University, Fullerton (CSUF), Santa Ana
Community College (SACC), Garden Grove Unified School District (GGUSD) and the
Orange County Department of Education (OCDE). TASEL-M2 addresses issues of
sustainability and scalability relative to successful practices of Phase
I-TASEL-M, the critical juncture between high school and college, and the issue
of mathematics preparation for post-secondary success in the context of
increased need for remedial mathematics in college. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
TASEL-M2 partners implement and study a district-wide professional development
plan to: strengthen and adapt innovative practices from the TASEL-M project;
take them to scale in all of the district's secondary schools; narrow the
achievement gap in Algebra for targeted subgroups (ELL, Hispanic, low SES, and
Special Education); and increase student enrollment in advanced mathematics
courses. This project researches the causal factors linking Professional
Learning Communities, peer coaching, and increases in student achievement. This
contributes to and informs state initiatives to improve Algebra instruction and
higher education efforts to more effectively address the needs of students
required to take remedial courses in mathematics at the university level.
TASEL-M2 employs a rigorous research agenda that includes a three cohort quasi-
experimental design with a time-delay control group to address the following
questions: &lt;br/&gt;--What are the factors that are necessary to sustain the
successful Professional Learning Community (PLC) model developed in TASEL-M in
participating schools and how can the PLC model be brought to scale in non-
participating schools in the same district? &lt;br/&gt;--What is the added
benefit of in-class support from peer coaches, mathematics specialists, and STEM
faculty in promoting teacher change? &lt;br/&gt;--How do teachers from the
original project continue to change and how do teacher effects accrue to the
students they teach? How do TASEL-M participants compare with non-TASEL-M
teachers in similar schools in terms of their mathematical content knowledge and
pedagogical content knowledge, both in level and rate of
change?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the most innovative ways TASEL-M2 involves
mathematicians in improving STEM education is through pairing educational
researchers with mathematicians who are experts in statistics and modeling.
TASEL-M2 conducts sophisticated analyses on longitudinal achievement data with a
focus on practices that are applicable to educational research more generally,
including methods of computing standard errors that account for non-independence
of students in schools or classrooms, methods of equating achievement change
across years or across different mathematics courses, and innovative use of
algorithms for handling missing data or estimating model
fit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the research agenda, a comprehensive
evaluation design examines the partnership among mathematicians and mathematics
educators at CSUF, instructors of remedial courses at SACC, mathematics teachers
at the participating high schools, educational researchers, and administrators
(principals, department chairs) at the partner schools, as well as tracks
implementation and outputs related to student achievement, course-taking,
reductions in remedial mathematics enrollment, and taking the project to scale.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project affects more than 23,000 students annually,
175 teachers and 31 school administrators, a university, a community college,
and a county office of education. A four-pronged professional development plan
is employed to sustain the gains made from Phase 1-TASEL-M and take the
innovative practices to scale with all district secondary schools. This
professional development model includes: Professional Learning Communities; peer
coaches facilitating a Cycle of Professional Inquiry; an instructional delivery
framework to manage the flow of instruction from teacher modeling to independent
practice; and collaborative development of school action plans to improve
instruction and student achievement designed by teachers, principals, district
personnel and STEM and education faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is
funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (P.L.111-5).