* 0929017
* Importance of Winter Upwelling to California Current Ecosystem Dynamics
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Bryan Black, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2011
* USD 223,705.00

Climate variability on multiple temporal scales is increasingly recognized as a
major factor influencing the structure, functioning, and productivity of the
California Current Ecosystem. Yet despite long-term and integrative studies, a
detailed understanding of climatic impacts is still lacking, compromising our
abilities to interpret ecosystem variability over time and use that information
to assess important concepts such as ecosystem health and resilience. Recent
attempts to better establish the effects of climate have emphasized the
relationship of reproductive and growth strategies of fish and seabirds to
ecosystem phenology, particularly the timing of what is known as the "spring
transition" from wintertime to spring upwelling conditions. However, there no
clear definition of the spring transition has yet been established, and
estimated spring transition dates do not adequately predict ecosystem
productivity. Moreover, an increasing body of evidence suggests that ecosystem
productivity is most sensitive to wintertime ocean variability prior to the
traditional spring transition date. To address the importance of wintertime
ocean conditions, a unique assemblage of rockfish and seabird time series
relating to growth and reproductive success will be collated and analyzed with
respect to environmental variability. All rockfish and seabird time series are
multidecadal in length, annually resolved, and provide a view from the top by
integrating ecosystem productivity after it has cascaded up through multiple
lower trophic levels. This multi-species approach is particularly powerful
considering that rockfish and seabird data independently reinforce one another.
Pilot work shows that rockfish and seabird time series are strongly
interrelated, and that these relationships are driven by shared sensitivities to
wintertime ocean conditions, particularly February upwelling. Thus, the
objectives of this study are to i) quantify the interrelationships among
rockfish and seabird growth and reproduction time series, ii) identify the
climatic variables, with an emphasis on the winter months, that correspond with
covariability in rockfish and seabirds, and iii) evaluate the extent to which
the abundance, distribution, and spatial organization of euphausiid crustaceans,
a key prey item in the ecosystem, covary with seabirds, rockfish, and wintertime
ocean conditions.

This study will establish the times of year under which climate exerts the
greatest influence on key upper-trophic level species, and provide leading
biological and physical indicators of ecosystem productivity in the California
Current Ecosystem. These biophysical indicators will be made available for
integration into fisheries stock assessments and will also be of use for
forecasting fisheries responses under various climatic scenarios. This
information will also provide input to the California Current Integrated
Ecosystem Assessment under development by NOAA-NMFS and others. In addition, the
project will provide postdoctoral training in physical oceanography and
undergraduate training in rockfish otolith growth-increment analysis.