* 0929505
* Albert Einstein Distinguished Educator Fellowship Program
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Vance Ablott, Triangle Coalition for Science and Technology Education
* Standard Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 08/31/2011
* USD 1,680,891.00

The Triangle Coalition (TC) will support fifteen outstanding K-12 science and
mathematics teachers in FY10 for 11-month fellowships at the National Science
Foundation (NSF). The fellowships are being provided via the Albert Einstein
Distinguished Educator Fellowship program through a Congressional mandate to the
U.S. Department of Energy (DOE). The Triangle Coalition manages the Einstein
program on behalf of DOE. NSF is one of the participating federal agencies cited
in the mandate and has supported fellowships since 1994.

The objectives of the program are to: (1) provide outstanding STEM teachers the
opportunity to bring to Congress, and appropriate branches of the Federal
government the insights, extensive knowledge, and practical experience of
classroom teachers; (2) increase the understanding, communication, and
cooperation between Congress and Federal agencies; (3) increase the
understanding, communication and cooperation between the Federal government and
the science, technology and mathematics education community; and (4) gain
insights and an understanding of national educational issues which can then be
transferred back to the classroom.

Each year the Fellows engage in a wealth of STEM and discipline-based activities
within their respective directorates/offices. Internally, these activities will
include regular meetings and discussions about research, discoveries, and
practices; NSB and directorate-wide advisory meetings (as appropriate);
seminars; briefings; "brown bags"; and distinguished lectures of national and
international prominence. Externally, the Fellows will engage in a broad
spectrum of activities, which may include interactions with their respective
members of Congress and their staffs; visits to the Goddard Space Flight Center,
the National Institutes of Health, the Library of Congress, and the National
Academy of Sciences.

In addition to the vast number of activities offered through internal and
external sources, teachers will serve out their tenure in twelve different
directorates/offices at NSF, which include the Directorates of Biological
Sciences, Computer and Information Science and Engineering, Education and Human
Resources, Engineering, Geosciences, and the Offices of Cyberinfrastructure,
Polar Programs, and International Science and Engineering. These teachers
represent twelve states that include California, Connecticut, Florida, Kansas,
Massachusetts, Minnesota, New Jersey, New York, North Carolina, Oregon,
Wisconsin, and Washington, DC. Other agencies participating in the program
include NASA, NOAA, and DOE with Fellows on Capitol Hill; in the Office of
Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy; and Office of Workforce Development for
Teachers and Scientists. Through structured and non-structured opportunities for
networking, these combined activities will significantly broaden the teachers'
understanding of STEM education and policy regarding national educational issues
in STEM that can be transferred to their local districts, schools, and
classrooms.