* 0929541
* International Symposia on Cyberinfrastructure:A Series of 2 Workshops on the Challenges of the Complexities of Cyberinfrastructure for the 21st Century
* CSE,OAC
* 04/15/2009,09/30/2011
* Xiaohui Carol Song, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2011
* USD 35,000.00

OCI 0929541 Purdue University Barbara Fossum Abstract

This proposal requests funding for a two day International Workshop to be held
April 14-15, 2009 at Tsinghua University in Beijing, China. The Co-Chairs for
this workshop are Jun Li, Dean of the Research Institute of Information
Technology and Vice Dean of the School of Information Science and Technology,
Tsinghua University, and Alex Pothen, Director of the Computer Research
Institute, Director of the Combinatorial Scientific Computing and Petascale
Simulations Institute at Purdue University. The program committee consists of
Junwei Cao, and Xiaoge Wang from Tsinghua University and Barbara Fossum and
Carol Song from Purdue University.

The purpose of this workshop is to address some of the major challenges
presented by evolving cyberinfrastructure and to identify one or two areas of
common interest where joint collaboration will bring together an international
team to solve these challenges. The broader impacts of this workshop are to
engage with international colleagues to create a venue for leveraging existing
cyberinfrastructure investments beyond the United States. This workshop offers
the opportunity for the community to create a global cyberinfrastructure
enabling science and engineering between the U.S. and China.

One of the major challenges facing cyberinfrastructure is how to meet the needs
of a rapidly changing and growing global society whose dependence on computing
and information technology is growing exponentially. As we move closer to the
end of the first decade of the 21st century it is essential that
cyberinfrastructure evolve to be ready to meet the needs of all communities in
all areas of research on a global level. To address the issues of building
cyberinfrastructure for the next decade with a view to enabling global science.