* 0929419
* IGMS: Coupling and feedback in the climate system
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2010
* Mary Silber, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 08/31/2010
* USD 99,953.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will spend the academic year
2009-2010 in the Climate Group in the Geophysical Sciences Department at the
University of Chicago. Primary goals of the immersion year include (1) gaining a
scientific overview of key physical components of the climate system, including
how they interact, their characteristic temporal and spatial scales, and how
they are modeled; (2) gaining experience with paleoclimate proxy data, including
how they are obtained, how they are interpreted quantitively, their
uncertainties and their quality; (3) developing research collaborations with
climate scientists at the University of Chicago aimed at understanding the role
of coupling and feedback in climate change. To ensure a broad overview of key
components of the climate system, the PI has identified three research project
areas that interface with the research activities of faculty and their students
in the Geophysical Sciences Department at the University of Chicago. These
projects concern (1) mathematical modeling of the ice component of the climate
system, which is important to understand for predicting sea level rise due to
global warming, (2) mechanisms of abrupt climate change in the last glacial
cycle that are related to thermohaline circulation in the deep Atlantic, which
would be constrained by new paleoclimate proxy records of North Atlantic sea-
surface temperature and salinity changes, and (3) investigations of system level
climate models of extreme glaciation events in earth's distant past including
models of `Snowball Earth'.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Additional
activities include (1) expanding the PI's participation in the Climate Group
journal club, which she joined in January 2009, by leading some of the journal
club discussions and proposing topics of investigation that relate to her
mathematical expertise in dynamical systems and bifurcation theory, (2)
attending weekly departmental seminars to gain a broad perspective on
geophysical sciences research, (3) auditing graduate courses on `Climate
Dynamics' and `Global Climate Models', and (4) attending a number of
professional meetings and workshops related to climate science. Expected
outcomes of the immersion year include (1) developing sustainable
interdisciplinary research collaborations with leading climate scientists, (2)
identifying relevant projects for applied mathematics Ph.D. research, and (3)
developing a seminar course on `Challenges of Modeling the Climate and Climate
Change' aimed at Northwestern University advanced undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;