* 0929527
* US-Egypt Workshop:  Intelligent Decision Support Tools for Prognostics and Health Management
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2009,06/30/2014
* Jay Lee, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 06/30/2014
* USD 31,548.00

This award is to support a US-Egypt workshop on ?Intelligent Decision Support
Tools for Prognostics and Health Management? to be held in Cairo, Egypt in
October 2009. The US coPIs, Jay Lee and Masoud Ghaffari, are from the NSF Center
for Intelligent Maintenance Systems (IMS), Department of Mechanical Engineering
at the University of Cincinnati. The Egyptian organizer, Dr. Mohamed Saleh, is
from the Department of Decision Support, College of Computers and Information,
Cairo University. In addition to the PI and four doctoral researchers, US
workshop participants will include 2 junior scientists, 3 graduate students, 3
undergraduate students. Egyptian graduate and undergraduate students from the
Decision Support department at Cairo University and invited industry
representatives will also participate. The two main goals for holding this
workshop are: (1) to conduct an international forum for information and
knowledge exchange with focus on education and research in the field of
prognostics and health management; (2) to lay the foundation for a long-term
strategic research collaboration on the advances of intelligent decision support
tools for prognostics. The expected outcome of this workshop will be a
comprehensive plan of the steps required to accomplish the collaboration between
students and researchers of the two countries. This affiliation will be building
on the eight-year history of frontiers research and collaboration at the NSF
I/UCRC for Intelligent maintenance systems (IMS) which is a multi-campus center
consisting of three US research sites at the University of Cincinnati,
University of Michigan, and the Missouri University for Science &amp;
Technology. Moreover, the IMS center has partnerships with over 40 global
companies. Such international collaboration would be highly beneficial for
researchers from both countries as it will facilitate the exchange of
educational, research, and cultural knowledge.