* 0929207
* Catalytic Activation, Spillover, and Storage of Hydrogen on Transition-metal/MOFs
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Yun Hu, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* George J. Antos
* 07/31/2012
* USD 302,650.00

0929207 Hu

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) are potential candidates for H2 storage because
they can reversibly absorb hydrogen at low temperatures. The critical issue is
their low hydrogen capacity at room temperature or above, because the
interaction between molecular hydrogen and MOFs is weak. Very recently, however,
it was found that hydrogen capacities of MOFs can be increased by almost 10
times via atomic hydrogen adsorption. Currently, introduction of atomic hydrogen
into MOFs is based on a catalytic method via a secondary spillover approach:
hydrogen molecules are first dissociate into atoms on Pt metal catalyst,
followed by the primary spillover of atomic hydrogen onto the surface of an
activated carbon support. Then, the hydrogen atoms present on activated carbon
migrate via a secondary spillover to the MOF surface. It was demonstrated that
the hydrogen adsorption and desorption kinetics are strongly dependent on the
carbon bridge between the Pt and the MOF, which controls the atomic hydrogen
migration between them. The goal of this project is to accelerate the hydrogen
adsorption and desorption by directly supporting metal catalysts on MOFs without
carbon bridges. The specific hypothesis is that the migration of hydrogen atoms
generated on catalyst directly to the MOF via a primary spillover should be much
faster than that of atomic hydrogen from the catalyst to the MOF with carbon
bridges. We based the hypothesis on the observations that 1) hydrogen adsorption
and dissociation on Pt catalyst are fast, whereas the spillover of hydrogen from
Pt metal to its support is a slow process, 2) when hydrogen concentration on
surface increases, its spillover decreases, and 3) the migration of atomic
hydrogen is faster on MOFs than on carbon materials. Based on these
observations, the experimental focus of this proposal is on the bondings and
spillover of atomic hydrogen on TM/MOF materials (TM=Pt, Pd, Rh, Ru, or Ni). The
specific aims are to: (1) to examine the effects of spillover-steps on kinetics
of hydrogen adsorption and desorption of MOFs; (2) to evaluate the bondings and
migration of atomic hydrogen on MOFs; (3) to examine the effect of atomic
hydrogen adsorption on crystal structures of MOFs; and (4) to evaluate new
TM/MOF materials for hydrogen adsorption and desorption as well as cyclability.

This research has significant intellectual merit. The interaction between the
atomic hydrogen and MOFs has not been studied experimentally, even almost not
theoretically. Such an interaction will be subjected to a comprehensive
assessment in this project, which can provide useful information for designing
MOF-based hydrogen storage materials, separation membranes, adsorbents, and
hydrogenation catalysts. Knowledge about the spillover of adsorbed species at
high pressure is not available, because current information regarding the
spillover on catalysts was obtained from low-pressure experiments. The
evaluation of hydrogen spillover at high pressure by using in-situ FTIR in this
project will provide useful information to understand heterogeneous catalytic
mechanisms of important industrial processes, most of which are based on high
pressure catalytic reactions.

This project can have a broad impact. The highly effective storage materials,
which will be developed here, can lead to the decrease of hydrogen storage cost
and will impact commercial feasibility of fuel cell vehicles, thus reducing
requirement of oil. The knowledge about atomic hydrogen spillover and adsorption
can impact development of catalysts for chemical industries. This project has
also strong impacts on the education of students. A special program "Summer
Institute in Hydrogen Energy" will be created. It will promote the technology of
hydrogen energy into high school science classrooms via training high school
teachers. This would increase female students in science and engineering schools
of colleges, because high school teachers have a tremendous impact on their
students' future interests and pursuits. Furthermore, two graduate and one
undergraduate students will work as important part of a diverse team, and they
will gain hands-on experience designing, building, and running complex
experiments. In addition, this project can increase their abilities to accept
high school students as summer interns for renewable energy studies.