* 0929339
* Reactive iron supply to shelf sediments and surface waters of the California Current System
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* James McManus, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Midson
* 08/31/2012
* USD 581,002.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Coastal upwelling systems are oceanic regions of great importance with regard to
productivity, air-sea carbon dioxide exchange, and carbon sequestration, as well
as economically and ecologically valuable fisheries. In the California Current
System (CCS), an upwelling region off the coast of California, a well-
established poleward increase of phytoplankton biomass and productivity has been
identified. However, the cause of this latitudinal gradient in productivity is
unknown. A scientist from Oregon State University hypothesizes that this
phenomena exists because of the amount of river-derived iron being delivered to
the coastal shelf. As such, the researcher will be conducting experiments to
determine the factors governing the supply of bioavailable iron to surface
waters in the CCS. In addition, whether there is a northward increase in the
supply of bioavailable iron within the CCS and whether it is linked to river
runoff will also be evaluated. These goals will be attained by quantifying the
temporal variability of iron in the Oregon shelf surface water, bottom water,
and surface sediments, as well as the spatial variability in the pool of
sedimentary reactive iron along the west coast gradient in river flow.

Through the development of a better understanding of the magnitude, mechanism,
and latitudinal variability of iron inputs to the CCS, the scientific community
will be better able to predict the impacts of iron supply on coastal
productivity. The educational impacts of this research include support for a
post-doctoral scholar and an undergraduate student, as well as internship
position for a local high school student via the Apprenticeship in Science and
Engineering Program.