* 0929571
* National Workshop on the Future of Education in  Plant Pathology and Related Disciplines to be held on March 19 - 20, 2009 at the Doubletree Hotel Crystal City, Arlington (VA)
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2009,02/28/2010
* James MacDonald, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 02/28/2010
* USD 47,614.00

The ability of university, government and private sector entities to
successfully research and control plant diseases, or to improve crop
productivity, depends upon the ability of agricultural colleges and universities
across the US to prepare students with a strong knowledge of the plant sciences,
including plant pathology, and the ability to apply that knowledge to
agricultural productivity. However, the historic strength of this vital feeder
system is at risk. Recent data documents a decline in the numbers of students
entering the plant sciences and a nationwide loss of faculty numbers and
expertise diversity, particularly those with experience in translational field
research. These trends are occurring against the backdrop of a demographic
profile that portends unusually large numbers of faculty retirements over the
next 10 years. This workshop will bring together leaders of plant science-
related professional societies, educators, government leaders, employers and
students to (1) understand the current and projected status of plant pathology
and plant science education in the US, (2) identify strategies for working
together to strengthen plant science education, and (3) develop action plans for
carrying out the proposed strategies. The American Phytopathological Society
will act as convener of this workshop because the nature of plant pathology, as
a cross-cutting and integrative discipline, makes it well-suited as a "model
system" for national discussion and strategic planning regarding the plant
sciences. Funding provided by NSF will be used to broaden participation of
students, early career individuals, women, and those from underrepresented
groups from the US scientific community. A report that summarizes the outcomes
from the workshop with proposed action items will be distributed to the American
Phytopathological Society and partner societies and presented at a special
symposium to be held at the 2009 Annual American Phytopathological Society
meeting (August 1-5, 2009) in Portland (OR).