* 0929110
* Doctoral Dissertation Research - Isotope Analysis on the Great Hungarian Plain: An Exploration of Mobility and Subsistence Strategies from the Neolithic to the Copper Age
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2009,04/30/2011
* Julia Giblin, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2011
* USD 14,890.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Richard Yerkes, Julia Giblin will analyze stable
isotopes in skeletal material from prehistoric populations in Central Europe to
examine proposed changes in subsistence and mobility from the Neolithic to the
Copper Age. The Neolithic and Copper Age were pivotal periods in European
prehistory when agricultural groups dispersed and abandoned the large villages
and tells that they had inhabited for centuries and established new lifeways.
From the Late Neolithic to the Early Copper Age on the Great Hungarian Plain
(4,500 cal. BC) a transformation in social organization, subsistence strategy
and mobility has been inferred from the archaeological record. This transition
is characterized by material changes in settlements, subsistence, cultural
assemblages, mortuary customs, and trade networks. Geochemical applications in
anthropology, such as stable isotope analysis, provide new ways to directly and
independently test patterns of prehistoric human behavior detected in the
archaeological record. The proposed research will test two specific hypotheses:
(1) mobility increased from the Neolithic to the Copper Age, and (2) diet became
more focused on domesticated plants and animals. Stable strontium isotope ratios
(87Sr/86Sr) in human and animal dental enamel will be used to test the first
hypothesis, and the abundance of stable carbon (ä13C) and nitrogen (ä15N)
isotopes in human and animal bone will be used to test the second.
Intellectually, this project advances our theoretical understanding of
subsistence strategy, mobility and social organization during a critical period
in human history when "modern" European culture emerged from its Neolithic
roots. Neolithic and Copper Age tribes on the Great Hungarian Plain are thought
to have shifted from sedentary, nucleated, and socially integrated farming to
dispersed, mobile, and interactive agropastoralism. This transition was one
episode in a cyclical pattern of integration and interaction or "tribal cycling"
that began with the migration of Early Neolithic tribal societies onto the Plain
and ended with the emergence of ranked societies during the Bronze Age. The
proposed analysis of changes in mobility and subsistence during this transition
is significant because it will examine and evaluate these cycles of integration
and interaction and evaluate some of the ecological, economic, and
sociopolitical models that have been proposed to explain the changes.

More broadly, this research promotes interdisciplinary and international
collaborations that contribute to the holistic and integrative nature of
anthropological research. It is an interdisciplinary, collaborative and
synergistic endeavor between anthropologists, biologists, zoologists,
geologists, chemists, and geographers at several universities and museums in
Hungary and the USA. The database of isotope values generated from this project
will be made available to the scientific community via a website, timely
publication through peer-reviewed journals, edited volumes in the USA and
Hungary, and presentations at meetings of the Society for American Archaeology,
the American Association of Physical Anthropology, the European Association of
Archaeologists and at Hungarian universities, museums and archaeological sites.
These activities will engage the public in local research projects and will also
provide opportunities for undergraduate anthropology students to get training in
biogeochemical techniques used for analyzing archaeological samples.