* 0929061
* Preparing Urban Lakeshore Science Educators (PULSE)
* EDU,DRL
* 01/15/2010,12/31/2012
* Gary Wood, University of Wisconsin-Parkside
* Standard Grant
* Michael Jacobson
* 12/31/2012
* USD 299,976.00

The Preparing Urban Lakeshore Science Educators (PULSE) project brings together
the University of Wisconsin-Parkside as lead institution, and the University of
Wisconsin-Oshkosh and the Racine Unified School District as core partners. These
partners are working with the Kenosha Unified School District and other school
districts and University of Wisconsin campuses to establish a broad partnership
with a shared vision to address the science achievement gap between urban and
suburban students and the challenge of high teacher turnover. The partnership
brings together university science and education faculty, district science
teachers, and administrators from the universities and school districts, to
conduct a thorough review of the literature and resources for science
professional development, particularly for grades 3-8, and a comprehensive needs
analysis of area teachers. The needs analysis includes collecting and analyzing
survey and focus group data on characteristic teacher needs and reviewing
student achievement data, with specific intentions to explore questions about
teacher shortages, attrition and retention, pre-service preparation, in-service
professional development, and barriers to student achievement in science. A
greater understanding of the needs is guiding the development of curricula for
professional development workshops. Infrastructure is being developed to offer
workshop sessions in a variety of venues, including local classrooms, regional
teacher academies, and internet/videoconferences. The central goal of the
project is to develop an empirically-based and replicable plan to reach pre-
service and in-service science teachers of grades 3-8 with professional
development focused on skills and knowledge to teach science, with particular
emphasis on developing an understanding of the challenges and issues faced in
urban educational settings. In the course of building the partnership across
multiple higher education and K-12 institutions, the project team is also
studying the process of partnership-building, with particular focus on studying
how best to support different types of urban school districts. The partners
intend to create an MSP-Targeted proposal designed to empirically investigate
the different needs, challenges, successes, and opportunities of several public
institutions of higher education in collaborative partnership with several K-12
school districts whose demographics, geography, and performance levels differ.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Wisconsin-Parkside is a public,
primarily undergraduate university with the most diverse campus in the
University of Wisconsin system, drawing the majority of its students from an
urban corridor in southeastern Wisconsin with lower income and educational
levels than the rest of the state. The University of Wisconsin-Oshkosh is nearly
three times the size of the Parkside campus, and while primarily undergraduate,
also has master's degree programs. The Racine Unified School District serves
approximately 21,000 students from a mix of urban, suburban, and rural
communities, and includes 21 elementary schools, 7 middle schools, and 3 high
schools. Overall, nearly half of students served are from racial minorities. The
results of this MSP-Start project include collaboration-building activities, the
needs assessment, and the program model. These products are to be shared
publicly through conference and publication venues.