* 0929576
* Robust Information Filtering Techniques for Static and Dynamic State Estimation
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2008,09/30/2010
* Deniz Erdogmus, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 09/30/2010
* USD 42,417.00

Proposal Number: ECS-0524835&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: Robust
Information Filtering Techniques for Static and Dynamic State
Estimation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI Name: Ergodmus, Deniz&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI
Institution: Oregon Health and Science University
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: This project addresses the
well-established challenge of "state estimation," of estimating the current
state of variables in a complex system which are not observed directly. Previous
work in systems theory has developed well-perfected methods for systems whose
variables are all continuous, or all discrete, under conditions where the
dynamics of the system itself are already perfectly known. This team proposes a
fundamental advance, by unifying recent breakthroughs addressing the challenge
of what to do when the dynamical system is not perfectly known, in the general
nonlinear case. The recent work to be drawn upon involves information-theoretic
learning, sigma-point filtering, particle filtering concepts, and the use of
recurrent neural networks and backpropagation through time (which offer major
advantages as universal approximators of nonlinear dynamical
systems).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Benefits: Better state estimation will be
important to all kinds of challenges in managing complex systems more
effectively, whether by neural networks or other components. The testbed to be
used here- the localization of elderly patients in a prototype advanced health
care clinic - was chosen both for its value as a challenge to the basic research
and for its promise as a starting point for large real-world
benefits.&lt;br/&gt;The educational benefits included cross-disciplinary
education (highly credible, given the team and the project) plus more standard
sorts of benefits to education.&lt;br/&gt;