* 0929317
* Sequential Detection and Classification in 3D Computer Vision
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2011
* Louise Hainline, CUNY Brooklyn College
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 08/31/2011
* USD 99,905.00

The problem of quickest detection and classification in the statistical behavior
of sequential observations is a classical one, with numerous applications in
engineering, economics and epidemiology. In today's fast-growing technologies
new areas of applications constantly emerge. In particular, the automatic 3D
image reconstruction and classification of urban scenes is a problem whose
complexity still challenges computer scientists. It has traditionally been
treated through the acquisition of data using laser-scanners, which produce
high-resolution images, but can be very slow. It is thus essential to
concentrate laser scanning only to the areas of interest, which leads to fast
decision-making about areas of interest. This can save significant time and
cost, while still producing high-resolution 3D images. The goal of this project
is to develop and implement real-time algorithms for processing and analyzing 3D
laser range data. The high-dimensional nature of the data is reduced by a clever
innovative selection of a measurement model. Interdependent streams of
observations are then processed by on-line parametric and non-parametric
classification and detection techniques. And finally, new statistical models are
used to capture obstacles in urban scenes. This provides a systematic treatment
of the problems of fast and efficient 3D image classification using high-
resolution laser data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current proposal is expected to
develop and establish a new line of possibilities for the traditional quickest
detection and classification techniques. This project promises to expand the
applications of classical sequential statistics to the area of 3D Computer
vision, thus carving the road for the creation of new synergistic
interdisciplinary research and education teams of computer scientists and
statisticians with well-defined common goals. Combining the expertise of these
two communities is expected to lead to more sophisticated technology and
software for the acquisition and processing of 3D data that comes from laser
scanners. This project creates a stimulating research environment for
undergraduate students, motivating them to seek advanced studies on the
interdisciplinary frontier of mathematics and computer science. It also provides
a framework for innovating the curriculum at Brooklyn College, a minority-
serving institution, through the development of interdisciplinary courses.