* 0929009
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Another Botswana Success Story? People and Park Relations in Chobe National Park, Botswana
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Louise Fortmann, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 08/31/2012
* USD 10,210.00

This project is centered on a case study of the relations between people around
Chobe National Park in northern Botswana, and the Park itself. Here, where forty
years ago the creation of the park dispossessed local people of their access to
nearby forest products and grazing lands, transgression of park boundaries and
policies is low and no visible resistance movement against the park has
developed. This situation is unusual given numerous similar paradigms of
"fortress conservation" that have resulted in high poaching and severe conflict
between local residents and park authorities. What explains this seemingly
anomalous Botswana case? For what reasons and through what mechanisms has a
certain level of acquiescence for the presence of the park and nearby protected
areas emerged amongst Chobe Enclave villagers?

Ph.D. student Clare Gupta, under the supervision of Dr. Louise Fortmann at the
University of California - Berkeley will explore this unique relationship
between the Chobe National Park and Chobe residents. Study of this atypical case
where local people seem to have developed a certain level of consent for the
presence of a wildlife park, a potential measure of the park's "success," this
project seeks to determine some of the enabling conditions for protected area
sustainability. For this study, Africanist anthropological theories of agrarian
resource-use and changing modes of rural production will be applied to
understand how people living on the edges of Chobe National Park have re-worked
their livelihood practices in relation to the park, and its effects within the
context of broader political economic conditions. In addition, recent
considerations of critical human geographers on rural-urban interconnections in
southern Africa will be employed to understand how Chobe National Park has
influenced the economic and social relations that connect the rural Enclave to
other places, and what these changing connections indicate for processes of
livelihood and demographic change in the Chobe region of northern Botswana. The
research will seek to broaden political ecology's line of study by suggesting
that over time, people may be able to re-make their relationship with the
landscape in response to the establishment of parks and protected areas. The
research is comprised of two objectives: first, to examine if and how livelihood
strategies employed by individuals and households in the Enclave have shifted in
response to the presence of the park; and second, to determine the implications
of these altered livelihood strategies for village demographic composition,
household structure and social relations (e.g. roles and responsibilities)
between family members of different ages and gender. To study these changes, a
mixed methods approach will be used that will include surveys, interviews and
reviews of government statistics (e.g. census and land application data) as well
as other relevant secondary literature.

The study site for this research lies in Botswana's Chobe region; however the
societal significance of the work extends beyond these borders. The question of
how to reconcile the goals of wildlife conservation with the needs of local
people living near wilderness areas is a pressing one, particularly in large
parts of the global South today. Given the shortage of long term data on people
and park relations, this research will provide particularly useful information
on how and why human-environment interactions change over time and will suggest
practical implications for the implementation and sustainability of conservation
projects. In examining the key social, economic and political factors that
influence the ways in which people respond to changing environmental conditions,
the research will highlight a complex set of processes often unaccounted for in
static environmental management plans and sustainability initiatives. In this
way, the research will contribute to larger debates on both the nature of
changing society-environment relations and the practical ways in which conflicts
between wildlife preservation and rural livelihoods might be potentially
resolved.