* 0929756
* Acquisition of Inductively Coupled Plasma - Optical Emission Spectrometer (ICP - OES)
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2010
* Delvin DeBoer, South Dakota State University
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2010
* USD 118,944.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). This award will fund the acquisition of an Inductively
Coupled Plasma Optical Emission Spectrometer (ICP-OES) in the HDR Environmental
Engineering Laboratory located at South Dakota State University (SDSU), which
will be used to support research, teaching and outreach activities within the
Water and Environmental Engineering Research Center (WEERC). Analysts have been
using radially viewed ICP-OES and atomic absorption instruments for over 20
years. The improvement in sensitivity with an axially viewed plasma typically
yields a 5- to 10-fold improvement in detection limits while providing near
simultaneous identification of multiple ions at ug/L concentrations. A host of
emerging issues are planned to be researched using the ICP-OES including the
following studies: impact of corrosion on existing and new water storage and
delivery systems; identifying low levels of lead and copper in drinking water
due to changes in disinfection chemicals; quantification of the low level
concentrations anticipated for various metal contaminants which occur naturally
as well as anthropogenically from industrial and mining operations; expansion of
research in the characterization of the airborne deposition of heavy metals,
surface water transport of heavy metals, and analysis of bio-indicators of heavy
metal contamination. This research support will enable South Dakota to attract
and support qualified graduate students and to provide training and research
experience to undergraduate students as well as increased outreach to rural
water systems and to the environmental science program at Oglala Lakota College
(OLC). The mission of the WEERC is to enhance the habitability and economic
development of the Northern Great Plains through multidisciplinary research of
the region's water and related land resources. The center supports this mission
through the conduct of engineering and related research on significant issues
affecting water resources by working to foster interdisciplinary work on the
conservation, development, management and use of water and related land
resources. Finally, the equipment will be used in direct collaborative research
activities between SDSU and OLC researchers involving project-based service
learning in support of land grant missions of both institutions serving under-
represented students in the sciences and engineering.