* 0929165
* Targeted Infusion to develop bio-based technology capability among minority students at Shaw University
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Elvira Williams, Shaw University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 05/31/2013
* USD 149,725.00

ABSTRACT HRD 0929165&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Shaw University is improving the
quality of its undergraduate biology program through infusion of bio-based
technology courses and strategized training programs for both students and
faculty. The specific objectives of this project include the development and
establishment of new bio-technology courses, redesigning of some existing
courses to reflect current bio-advances, training of students in bio-based
techniques and skills development, broad-based training for bio-technology
capability; and training of STEM faculty in bio-technology instruction
conceptual framework and methodologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The State of North
Carolina ranks among the top three biotechnology regions in the United States.
As the industry continues to expand, more trained employees are needed to fill
the jobs created, especially in the nearby Research Triangle Park (RTP).
Currently, participation by underrepresented minorities in this workforce is
very low. Shaw University is enhancing the quality of its Science program with
the intention to increase the participation of African Americans in the
biotechnology industrial revolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project activities
include development and redesigning of courses; faculty training through the
BioTechnology Institute, which trains Bio-technology teachers for more effective
student learning; purchase of basic laboratory materials and supplies for
teaching bio-techniques to students and for student-participatory laboratory
activities for enhanced skills training, and dissemination of results. The
overall comprehensive strategy targets collaboration with high-tech universities
running bio-technology programs at undergraduate (and graduate) levels and
organizing of student and faculty visits to high-tech labs for technology
transfer; enhancement of STEM faculty for teaching of biotechnology courses
through training sessions with the BioTechnology Institute; invitation of
biotechnology experts to Shaw to meet with students; participation at
conferences and organization of an annual in-house Biotechnology Seminar as an
additional forum for training and for dissemination of project results; as well
as regular evaluation of the project activities to ensure that the project plans
are being achieved. &lt;br/&gt;