* 0929551
* U.S.-India Workshop: The Interface of Water Quality Issues and Infectious Diseases, Bengaluru, January 4-8, 2010.
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2011
* Ramesh Goel, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 07/31/2011
* USD 31,295.00

0929551&lt;br/&gt;Ramesh Goel&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the U.S.-India
Workshop: The Interface of Water Quality Issues and Infectious Diseases,
Bengaluru, India, January 4-8, 2010. Professor Ramesh Goel, University of Utah
and Dr. Sekhar Muddu, Indian Institute of Science will convene a 5-day workshop
focused on developing research and education collaborations to study the
environmental and health impacts of excess nutrients in surface waters and cost
effective removal processes. Since India has three of the ten most rapidly
urbanizing cities in the world, this workshop offers an exceptional opportunity
for U.S. and Indian scientists to develop new collaborations in this subject
area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;The PI contends that
current understanding of excess nutrients in surface waters and cost effective
removal processes consists largely of studies that are based in the Western
context, and that there is only preliminary understanding about the removal of
excess nutrients from surface waters in countries such as India. Eutrophication
is a well known environmental problem but its effects on human health are not
well-studied. The goal of this workshop is to examine theoretical,
methodological, and educational applications by comparing U.S. and Indian
approaches to the study of excess nutrients from surface waters in relation to
urban ecosystems and water borne infectious diseases.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Eutrophication, which is a
global environmental problem, will be of high interest to most of the workshop
participants and is expected to attract broad attention. The workshop organizers
anticipate the following outcomes: 1) two to three research proposals studying
surface water and treatment systems in rapidly growing urban cities, 2) research
manuscripts for submission to global change science peer-reviewed journals, 3)
the development of pilot/demonstration curricular modules designed to
internationalize urban water quality and ecology related courses in higher
education, 4) collaborative research activities that will lead to the
establishment of a bilateral community of committed researchers and educators in
the field of surface water and water quality
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;