* 0929760
* ITEST Conference Event: Defining an Afterschool Research Agenda
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2009,04/30/2011
* Anthony Streit, Education Development Center
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia James
* 04/30/2011
* USD 200,000.00

The Education Development Center's (EDC) ITEST Learning Resource Center plans to
implement a 12-month conference grant designed to engage practitioner and
research groups working in afterschool programs. EDC, in partnership with the
National Girls Collaborative Project and MPR Associates, Inc., proposes to
convene a 3-day meeting comprised of NSF-funded ITEST grantees, researchers in
STEM workforce development and informal learning, STEM industry leaders, and
philanthropic organizations. A planning committee of STEM researchers, national
experts on afterschool, and ITEST principal investigators will guide the
planning, organization, and conference follow-up.

The planning process includes a survey of the ITEST community to gather
information on current practices and a literature review on the STEM workforce,
informal science education, and afterschool practices. Additionally, a series of
white papers on topics such as program design, professional development,
partnerships, cultural implications, and sustainability are planned to engage
the community in guided conversations. Project outcomes also include a
cumulative project report which synthesizes the discussion topics, central
research themes and questions, and recommended methodologies. The proposed
research agenda is intended to direct subsequent studies in this important area
of out-of-school programming and will be published on the EDC website. A web
conference, as well as presentations at professional meetings and publications
are planned to share findings broadly with the field.

MPR Associates will conduct a mixed-methods evaluation to determine if the
participant selection process resulted in an effective group of stakeholders who
engaged in useful debate and active dialog. The evaluation will also determine
the impact of the white papers, research agenda, and other products on the
afterschool and STEM education fields. This project bridges research and
practitioner communities while producing a set of white papers to serve as focal
point for conference discussions and a comprehensive research agenda to guide
future studies.