* 0929960
* Early Career: Technician Support - Georgia Institute of Technology Cosmogenic Nuclide Geochronology Laboratory
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Andrew Newman, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2013
* USD 174,594.00

0929960&lt;br/&gt;Frankel&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). This grant
partially funds a full-time laboratory technician for the Georgia Institute of
Technology cosmogenic nuclide geochronology laboratory. Dates and erosion rates
obtained from the concentrations of cosmogenic nuclides in minerals at Earth?s
surface are revolutionizing the fields of geomorphology, Quaternary geology,
paleoclimatology, and tectonics. The ability to measure small concentrations of
isotopes such as 10Be and 26Al by accelerator mass spectrometry is allowing
researchers the ability to date landforms and sedimentary deposits and measure
erosion rates on timescales of hundreds to millions of years, something that has
proven difficult with other forms of geochronology. As a result, cosmogenic
nuclide geochronology has become one of the most widely-used Quaternary dating
techniques and an increasingly large number of researchers are finding novel
applications of cosmogenic nuclides to determine rates of tectonic deformation,
soil formation and weathering, and erosion, along with the timing and extent of
past glaciations and climate change. As the number of researchers applying this
technique continues to grow, so does the demand for facilities where samples can
be processed efficiently. Funds from this proposal directly support the
establishment and operation of the new Georgia Tech sample preparation
laboratory, which is the only facility of its kind in the southeast U.S A full-
time laboratory technician, whose job entails processing samples, training
students, and managing day-to-day laboratory operations, will help maintain
efficiency as well as consistency and safety in sample processing procedures..
Furthermore, the technician position will help continue the already strong
tradition of graduate and undergraduate education and training in the lab. The
mission of the laboratory is to advance research in Earth surface processes,
paleoclimate, and tectonics, while effectively training the next generation of
Earth science students.