* 0929725
* From Learning to Research: Developing Future Earth System Scientists and Professionals
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2010,07/31/2014
* Edward Geary, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Continuing Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 07/31/2014
* USD 1,199,215.00

The University Corporation for Atmospheric Research is collaborating with the
GLOBE program, the University of Colorado, New York University, the Texas
Regional Collaboratives and several other partners to design, implement, and
evaluate an Earth System Science learning experience for teachers and students.
The goals of the From Learning to Research project are to prepare 80 teachers to
engage middle and high school students in Earth System Science research on
local, regional, and national scales, expose teachers and students to Earth
Science careers, and allow students to interact with scientists from around the
world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is providing onsite and virtual
professional development activities for teachers and the GLOBE Student Research
Collaboratory (GSRC) is supporting teacher and student learning about climate
science and research. Teachers and students are learning about climate science
and develop systems thinking, problem-solving, data analysis, communication, and
collaboration skills. The project is (1) producing research findings on teacher
and student use of GIS visualization tools, modeling programs, and social
collaboration technologies; (2) implementing and evaluating GSRC's impact on
motivating and preparing middle and high school students for careers in STEM;
and (3) providing teachers with resources and strategies for ensuring that their
students know about and prepared for STEM careers in earth science-related
careers.&lt;br/&gt;