* 0929978
* Formation of cycloextrin - drug inclusion complexes and scaffolds with the aid of supercritical fluids
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Abby Whittington, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Athanassios Sambanis
* 08/31/2013
* USD 305,937.00

0929978&lt;br/&gt;Kiran&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a research program on
exploration of novel methodologies that aim at using supercritical fluids to
form drug inclusion complexes with cyclodextrins, as well as forming polymer
matrices or scaffolds that are embedded with drug-cyclodextrin complexes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Supercritical fluids are tunable fluids that can reduce or
eliminate the use of organic solvents in synthesis, purification, and post-
processing of biopolymers and drugs to generate particles, membranes or
scaffolds that can be used in drug delivery or other medical devices. For drug
delivery, particle size, shape, morphology and crystal form of the drug
molecules are very important as they influence the rate of dissolution and the
release characteristics of drugs. For scaffolds, porosity along with built-in
drug-release features that incorporate anti-inflammatory drugs and/ or growth
factors are important factors that ensure transport of nutrients, promotion of
cell proliferation, and prevention of infections during organ regeneration.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cyclodextrins have hydrophobic internal cavities in which
drug molecules can be incorporated as guest molecules. A unique aspect of this
research is the exploration of development of novel drug-cyclodextrin complexes
using polymeric forms of cyclodextrins, such as polymers with pendant
cyclodextrin groups, which can be formed and directly transformed into porous
scaffolds in supercritical fluid media. Formation of drug-cyclodextrin inclusion
complexes within a biodegradable polymer matrix such as poly(Ã¥-caprolactone) is
another novel aspect that aims at generation of tissue engineering scaffolds
with a built-in and/or improved drug delivery feature. Dual drug delivery
systems that combine drug-cyclodextrin matrices along with a growth factor
embedded in biodegradable polymer matrices are being considered to generate
novel scaffolds that incorporate in-situ drugs to minimize inflammation and in-
situ growth factors that are critical in promoting organ
regeneration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research involves fundamental studies on
miscibility and phase separation in multicomponent systems involving small
(drug) and large (polymeric) molecules and supercritical fluid mixtures (carbon
dioxide + cosolvent) to understand the overall thermodynamics, and the nano-
scale dynamics of guest-host interactions involving drug molecules, cyclic
compounds and polymers with cavities that can form inclusion complexes. Studies
are directed to understanding the consequences of processing in supercritical
fluid media in terms of morphology, crystallinity, and polymorphism as well as
documentation of drug release dynamics from such multi-component
matrices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research program brings together the
expertise of the PI in supercritical fluids and polymers with the expertise of
the co-PI in natural polymer-based drug release and cellular engineering
systems. The interdisciplinary nature of the program is expected to have a broad
impact in a wide range of other application areas from polymers to sensors, and
create broad educational opportunities to graduate and undergraduate students
with different diversity, gender and backgrounds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;