* 0929484
* EAGER: Rapid Development of the "Rosettazyme" - A Novel Enzyme Sequestration Platform for Cellulosic Substrate Deconstruction
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Ruben Ceballos, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Wyatt
* 07/31/2013
* USD 300,000.00

R. Michael Ceballos&lt;br/&gt;Proposal#0929484&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EAGER: Rapid
Development of the 'Rosettazyme' - A Novel Enzyme Sequestration Platform for
Cellulosic Substrate Deconstruction&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current technology in
bioethanol production is limited by the ability to efficiently breakdown
cellulosic biomass into fermentable sugars. In addition, many pre-treatment
regimens for cellulosic substrate require acidic washes and high temperature
processes that inhibit the catalytic efficiency of cellulose-degrading enzymes
used in bioethanol production processes. Using proteins derived from
hyperthermoacidophilic microbes from volcanic hot springs, the investigators on
this project have developed a temperature- and acid-resistant enzyme
sequestration platform capable of binding multiple cellulose-deconstruction
enzymes to form a 'super-enzyme', called a 'rosettazyme'. In preliminary
studies, it has been shown that these rosettazymes can improve simple sugar
production from cellulosic substrates by more than two-fold. The purpose of this
project is to further develop this novel technology using various combinations
of bound lignocellulosic deconstruction enzymes from several species in order to
generate a 5 to 10-fold increase in cellulose breakdown/conversion efficiency.
This level of improvement in substrate deconstruction efficiency has been
determined to be the threshold for making this technology an economically viable
alternative to current bioethanol production methods. The proposed work will be
a joint effort between several academic institutions and government laboratories
throughout the United States. This project will also serve to provide science
students from underrepresented groups and economically underserved backgrounds
with research experiences in protein biochemistry, microbiology, genetic
engineering, and alternative energy sciences. Within the two years of this
project, the investigators will develop several rosettazyme subtypes using
bacterial, archaeal, and/or fungal enzymes to increase the efficiency of
lignocelluose conversion to simple fermentable sugars.&lt;br/&gt;