* 0929779
* ITEST Research Project: Assessing the Efficacy of Cognitive Training on the Mathematics and Science Performance of Minority Students
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Ehsan Sheybani, Virginia State University
* Standard Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 09/30/2013
* USD 989,747.00

This three year study will support a partnership between Virginia State
University, Virginia Commonwealth University and two local school districts in
central Virginia to help improve STEM education for underrepresented students.
The main goals are to: (1) indirectly develop STEM higher-order cognitive skills
in students using programming language and problem-solving skills in the context
of video games; (2) directly training STEM-related basic-level cognitive skills
(e.g., working memory, processing speed, attention) to enhance the underlying
cognitive architecture in students using the methodology developed by
LearningRx, Inc. and delivered online; and (3) assessing the impact of these
interventions through psychometric tests of change in attitudes and cognitive
abilities of the participants, looking at improvements in performance on school-
based standardized tests of mathematics, and science abilities, and monitoring
cortical changes in students using fMRIs. The study builds on work conducted
through NSF-0714874 (and NSF-0624615 through HBCU-UP in HRD,where the PIs worked
with 400 middle and high school students in a pilot study that focused on
cognitive factors in STEM functioning. Through this proposed project
participating students will be provided 28 weeks of instruction in two-hour
increments for a total of 56 hours in an after school setting.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study is the next step in an attempt to gather more
evidence to determine if results from the pilot study are valid. It will assess
the impact of these interventions at two critical developmental periods--the 6th
and 9th grades. The target audience for this project is 240 underrepresented
students (120 at each grade level). The project will be based on successful
strategies such as dyadic peer relationships; age-appropriate programming
languages such as Python, Scratch, and Small Basics; and emphasis on explanation
and metacognition. It will link cognitive training, programming instruction,
brain imaging, and socialization and will develop pedagogical modules to help
build the capacity of underrepresented students (and teachers) in STEM
coursework. It appears that the leadership, plan, experience, resources, and
implementation strategies are all in place to successfully conduct this
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will strengthen the cognitive skills
of underrepresented students and help them perform better in STEM courses and/or
elect to choose careers in STEM areas. To that end, this project will likely
advance knowledge in the field since few studies of this nature currently exist.
The proposed model developed through this study could be widely adaptable and
easily dissemination to schools and other institutions that support STEM
education. To ensure that the research proceeds successfully, extensive
recruiting of parents and students will be conducted. Further, incentives will
be provided for both students and parents. An interdisciplinary approach will be
used for this work that includes scientists, mathematicians, and other
appropriate experts as collaborators or advisors from the departments of
psychology, biology, engineering, and computer science from Virginia State
University and the Department of Radiology at Virginia Commonwealth University
as collaborators in this research. Key district leaders fully support this
project. The project has a well-defined methodological approach and a strong
evaluation plan. It meets the criteria for emerging research, which is by nature
uncertain, so this high-risk/high-gain proposal could be transformative should
the results identify cognitive skills required for underrepresented students to
do well in STEM fields.