* 0929820
* Houston-Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation: Bridge to the Doctorate
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* John Bear, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* A.  Hicks
* 07/31/2012
* USD 987,000.00

The Houston-Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation Senior Alliance was
assembled for its potential to impact a minority majority population in
southeast Texas. The alliance is comprehensive, including the country?s largest
school district, two community college systems, a comprehensive HBCU and HSI,
and the second most ethnically diverse research university in the country. For
this proposal, the alliance has unanimously selected the University of Houston
to apply for the Bridge to Doctorate Cohort-1. The University of Houston is the
US?s second most ethnically diverse research university, and the 23rd largest in
the United States. The University of Houston currently offers over 108
baccalaureate, 131 master, and 53 doctoral programs.&lt;br/&gt;Though a
combination of a strong leadership team, outstanding faculty and staff, a proven
track-record for success in diversity, using its leverage in the community, and
national standing, the University of Houston plans to use Cohort-1 of the BD
grant to:&lt;br/&gt;Goal 1 Increase the minority representation in graduate STEM
programs at the University of Houston by 25%.&lt;br/&gt;Goal 2 Increase the
number of Underrepresented Minority PhD degrees granted from the University of
Houston by 200-300% (from 2-3 to 6-9) per year at the end of five
years&lt;br/&gt;Goal 3 Promote and motivate more minority students from the UH-
LSAMP program to pursue graduate education&lt;br/&gt;Goal 4 Create a university-
wide enrichment program for graduate education that focuses on the retention of
a diversified graduate student body though the integration of the Next Step
workshop, a Deans? Lecture Series on diversity, and the collaborative learning
community model to serve as an underlying program of
support&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The H-LSAMP-BD program uses a proven
collaborative learning community model, based on over ten years of experience in
implementing such a comprehensive model. This program also uses data drive
methods to promote faculty enhancement. Numerous faculty who will serve as
mentors to students in this program who will also have active collaborations
with several national research centers.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The program
will support students in two colleges, across the departments of Biology,
Biochemistry, Chemistry, Chemical Engineering, Mathematics, Physics, Computer
Science, Earth and Atmospheric Science, Electrical Engineering, Petroleum
Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, and Civil Engineering. Furthermore, the
university is realigning all research into interdisciplinary research clusters,
such as space systems and energy. This program will impact not only a diverse
student population, helping to create well-trained minority researchers for
academic and industrial jobs, but it will have substantial long-term impact on
the US economy. This will happen by providing well-trained minority mentors to
future STEM majors, and providing a well trained workforce to help create a new
and emerging economy.&lt;br/&gt;PROJECT IMPACT This program?s impact is expected
to be substantial, both in terms of short and long term goals. It seeks to
establish a Collaborative Learning Community for graduate education, a
structured mentoring program for undergraduate and graduate students, enhance
faculty understanding of diversity issues, and most importantly lay the
foundation for long-term change within the University.&lt;br/&gt;