* 0929189
* Composite Polymer Membranes for Energy Conversion
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2010
* R. James Kirkpatrick, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 08/31/2010
* USD 99,998.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Selectively permeable separator membranes are central to the development of
highly efficient energy conversion devices.They must be structurally durable,
even at elevated temperatures, and must facilitate the transport of ions of one
charge while inhibiting the transport of opposite charge, thereby minimizing
deleterious reactions by spatially segregating the key reactants. This project
proposes a two-component route to the development of "composite" polymer
electrolyte membranes. We optimize acid group densities by growing polymer
"hairs" from nanoparticles and attaching acidic side chains to the hairs. Mixing
these functionalized nanoparticles in solvent with a structurally robust,
crystallizable polymer and drawing off the solvent in a controlled manner
induces a phase separation which produces a durable pore network which
encapsulates the functionalized nanoparticles within a rigid polymer matrix.
This construction greatly simplifies the material design process by decoupling
the materials requirements related to conductivity from the mechanical
properties required of the membrane.

This project will place the PI for one year in the laboratories of Profs.
Gregory Baker and James McCusker (Michigan State University Chemistry), where he
will be involved in the synthesis, characterization, and modeling of these novel
composite separator membranes. The novel ``L-well'' models that the PI had
developed will be used to greatly expedite the membranes optimization to yield
higher pore connectivity at lower nanoparticle volume fractions. The membranes
will be tested in high temperature Polymer Electrolyte Membrane (PEM) fuel cells
and Dye Sensitized Solar Cells (DSSCs). The impact of more efficient energy
conversion, particularly of PEM fuel cells for automotive applications and DSSCs
for the household market, is potentially profound and could be a transformative
event in the push for a sustainable energy infrastructure.

