* 0929138
* Targeted Infusion Grant to Implement an Emphasis in Statistics within the Existing Mathematics Program
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Ronald Patterson, Winston-Salem State University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2012
* USD 163,221.00

ABSTRACT HRD 0929138&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Winston-Salem State University (WSSU)
is implementing an HBCU-UP targeted infusion project to develop an emphasis area
in statistics within the existing WSSU mathematics program in order to enhance
the undergraduate curriculum in statistical data analysis. The critical need for
statistical knowledge in research design and resulting data analysis creates a
need to offer this statistics emphasis to insure the preparation of our students
and to connect the subject of mathematics to relevant industrial applications.
Part of the reticence to majoring in mathematics by minority students is the
apparent lack of a clear career path aside from teaching or proceeding to
graduate school. This project will create a new opportunity to expand the career
options for mathematics majors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this
targeted infusion project are: (i) to implement a mathematics degree with a
statistics emphasis; (ii) develop interdisciplinary statistics research and
instruction models at WSSU (iii) provide considerable career development
experiences to students to prepare them for the statistics workforce. The B.S.
in Mathematics with an emphasis in Statistics has been approved by the
University effective August 2008. The project is led by the Principal
Investigator who is also the departmental chair, and two statisticians on the
faculty. Currently, we have one statistician on the faculty. A second statistics
position has been approved and advertised. The successful candidate begins
teaching in August 2009. We have established collaborations with the department
of behavioral sciences and the department of life sciences to ensure a ready and
practical source of real-world problems for student research training.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Winston-Salem State University (WSSU) is a historically
black university located in the Piedmont Triad. It enrolls more than 6500
students with more than 81% of the students are underrepresented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;