* 0929191
* Impact of MSP Professional Development on the Quality of Instruction in Middle-School Mathematics Classrooms
* EDU,DRL
* 01/15/2010,03/31/2014
* Kwang Suk Yoon, American Institutes for Research in the Behavioral Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth VanderPutten
* 03/31/2014
* USD 1,656,497.00

The purpose of this Research, Evaluation and Technical Assistance (RETA) study
under the NSF Mathematics and Science Partnership (MSP) Program is to assess the
impact of MSP-supported professional development (PD) on the quality of
instructional practice in middle schools. The American Institutes for Research
(AIR) will be partnering with Eastern Michigan University to conduct the multi-
site study which will be focused on mathematics classrooms. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Focusing on the crucial link between PD and instructional practice,
the three-year study addresses the following research
questions:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. To what extent do professional development
activities supported by MSP exhibit features of high-quality professional
development as identified in prior research? Do teachers in MSP districts
receive higher-quality PD than comparable teachers in non-MSP
districts?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. What are the effects of professional
development activities supported by MSP on the quality of instruction in middle-
school mathematics classrooms?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. To what extent are
features of high-quality professional development identified in prior research
related to the quality of instruction in middle-school mathematics
classrooms?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data for this study will come from multiple
sources: an annual teacher survey (The Professional Development and
Instructional Practice Survey), teacher logs collected through an online program
(Professional Development Activity Log), and samples of teacher assignments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research design is a quasi-experimental design with a
matched comparison group that consists of teachers who are not participating in
MSP-supported PD and who are otherwise similar to a group of teachers
participating in MSP-supported PD, with a goal of reaching 240 teachers in two
MSP sites. The three research questions will be investigated using a variety of
analytic methods: (1) descriptive analyses of data from both the teacher survey
and teacher logs where collected; (2) multilevel analyses to assess the effects
of MSP-supported PD on the quality of instructional practice as measured by the
rigor and relevance of teacher assignments; and (3) multiple regression to
assess the professional development effects on survey-based measures of
instructional practice. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The findings from the study as
well as the rigorous evaluation design and innovative measurement instruments
developed for the study will enrich the knowledge base about the impact of
professional development on instructional practice. To broaden the impact of the
study, the team will employ a variety of strategies, including study reports,
conference presentations, MSP Learning Network meetings, journal articles, and
workshops, to disseminate study findings and products to diverse audiences.