* 0929389
* Student support to attend the Hysteresis and Micromagnetic Modeling Symposium.  To be held May 11-14, 2009 at the NiST Campus in Gaithersburg, MD.
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2009,11/30/2009
* Lawrence Bennett, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 11/30/2009
* USD 0.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The Institute for Magnetics Research of The George
Washington University and the National Institute for Standards and Technology
will host the Eighth International Symposium on Hysteresis Modeling and
Micromagnetism on May 11-14, 2009 at the NIST Gaithersburg Campus. In this
symposium, recent developments in the theory, applications and measurements of
hysteresis, micromagnetics and spin dynamics phenomena will be presented.
Hysteresis is a widespread phenomenon, studied most intensively in magnetism,
but also found in areas outside of magnetics, such as economics, precision
controls, mechanics, and many other fields. Micromagnetics is a nanoscale
model&lt;br/&gt;of ferromagnetic materials, which provides a complementary view
of magnetism, and is important also for its role in modeling electron spin
dynamics, which is the basis for the emerging technology of spintronics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:&lt;br/&gt;The symposium will provide a
special occasion for engineers, mathematicians&lt;br/&gt;and physicists to
present and exchange ideas, methods and results. The support being sought under
this proposal is to support part of the travel expenses of&lt;br/&gt;graduate
students to attend and participate in the Symposium.