* 0929344
* Workshop:  Variable Atmosphere Laboratory (VAL) Workshop 2; Arlington, VA; May 2009
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2010
* Jon Harrison, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Mark R. Brodl
* 04/30/2010
* USD 29,855.00

Key uncertainties remain in understanding the effects of atmospheric and
climatic change on ecosystems and health. Predicting the responses of the earth
and biological systems to rising temperatures and the complex mixture of
increasing gases (carbon dioxide, ozone, methane, nitrogen dioxide, sulfur
dioxide) is challenging as it is difficult to control these multiple parameters
and create replicated experiments, especially on a scale large enough to study
biological communities. How elevations in trace gases will affect the capacity
of communities to remove carbon dioxide from the atmosphere is unknown. Changes
in atmospheric composition over geologic time have been hypothesized to drive
major evolutionary changes, but these hypotheses are difficult to evaluate
without experimental tests of atmospheric composition on organisms. Air
pollutants have been implicated in the dramatic recent elevations in respiratory
diseases like asthma, but facilities for experimentally testing the effect of
atmospheric composition are insufficient. This award, jointly funded by the
National Science Foundation's BIO and GEO directorates, will support a workshop
to discuss the design and implementation of a national facility to study the
effects of atmospheric composition and climate on biological and earth
processes. The workshop participants constitute a diverse group of scientists in
terms of scientific expertise, gender, geographic origin, ethnicity, and career
stages. In addition, representatives from a variety of potential federal funding
agencies will attend the workshop.