* 0929651
* The influence of shelf and offshore processes on the Mississippi River plume dynamics
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Vassiliki Kourafalou, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2014
* USD 537,990.00

Intellectual Merit: River plume dynamics control the fate and transport of low
salinity waters, nutrients, sediments and pollutants associated with river
discharge. The buoyancy driven transport is modified by processes that influence
circulation in coastal seas, especially atmospheric fluxes, wind stress and
topographic effects. These interactions have been studied extensively, in both
idealized and realistic settings. However, most previous studies have
concentrated on estuarine discharges on broad or narrow continental shelves that
have simple geometry near the river mouth and bottom slopes in the cross-shore
direction only. Furthermore, river plume studies have often neglected the effect
of ambient currents, especially slope eddies associated with boundary flows
impinging on the shelf, which can potentially either trap river waters and
transport them great distances away from the freshwater source or promote
retention that can lead to coastal inundation and flooding.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Satellite data and numerical studies in marginal seas have
revealed that topography and boundary currents, fronts and eddies in the
vicinity of large freshwater discharges modify the conventional river plume
behavior and alter the preferred pathways for low salinity waters and associated
materials from land drainage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broad goal of the
proposed study is to advance the understanding of river plume dynamics by
examining the processes that control the transport and fate of river waters in
the presence of complex topography, variable wind forcing and under the
influence of outer shelf, slope and deep processes associated with a boundary
current and the related eddy field. The study methodology addresses both a
conceptual part and a realistic application. Process oriented experiments will
be performed in a realistic model domain setting to analyze the role of
topography and wind-driven currents on the evolution of the Mississippi River
plume. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent advances in numerical studies of shelf
dynamics allow the nesting of high resolution shelf models to a hierarchy of
regional and large scale models that employ data assimilation, are eddy
resolving and can thus enable the realistic representation of coastal to
offshore interactions. Such a model will be employed in this study for a
realistic test case application on the transport of waters discharged at the
Mississippi River delta, one of the greatest world rivers, where a combination
of complex topography and strong ambient flows are in place. Satellite products
will by employed to identify prominent events of interaction between Mississippi
waters and ambient shelf and deep sea flows. In-situ measurements near the
shelf-break will be employed for a quantitative evaluation of model results.
Numerical experiments with realistic, high frequency forcing will be executed to
study characteristic events of plume/boundary current interaction in detail and
analyze the mechanisms that control cross-marginal transport. Analysis of the
distribution, transport and residence time of river waters based on model
results and validated against unassimilated data will verify the study
hypotheses and enhance the capability to predict transport pathways in complex
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Large river discharges, due to
their high volume and high content in nutrients, sediments and pollutants, play
a prominent role in fisheries, ocean health, coastal development and wetland
conservation; impacts are amplified at areas subject to extreme storm conditions
and hypoxia events. The potential connectivity to remote ecosystems allowed by
coastal to offshore interactions has pronounced scientific and socioeconomic
impacts. These associations make the study results unique for education and
outreach, as they relate to problems familiar to students, young scientists and
the general public. Extensive relevant activities have already been planned and
they will be strengthened by ancillary projects. The PI and the research
scientist are women, an under-represented group in oceanography.