* 0929967
* Partnerships for Adaptation, Implementation, and Dissemination (PAID):  Collaborative Research - The CCAS ADVANCE Initiative
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Anne-Marie McCartan, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Beth Mitchneck
* 08/31/2013
* USD 40,224.00

This ADVANCE-PAID project will adapt best practices from an existing ADVANCE-
supported leadership development program in order to transform a national
association of academic deans, the Council of Colleges of Arts and Sciences
(CCAS). Specifically, CCAS will partner with the University of Washington's (UW)
Leadership Excellence for Academic Diversity (LEAD), a national professional
development workshop of documented effectiveness, to infuse STEM gender equity
content into CCAS's existing professional development programs for deans and
department chairs. The objectives of the CCAS ADVANCE Initiative are to: 1)
infuse gender equity content and activities into CCAS's professional development
programs in a sustainable way; 2) maximize opportunities for positive impacts of
the initiative on individuals underrepresented in STEM disciplines; and 3)
develop, utilize, and make widely available a set of robust case studies that
incorporate gender equity elements. The CCAS professional development programs
and activities that will be targeted for infusion of STEM gender equity content
are the New Deans' Seminar, Department Chairs' Seminar, Annual Meeting, selected
Topical Seminars, and Pre-/Post-conference Workshops. LEAD program personnel
will facilitate CCAS's adaptation and dissemination of successful practices from
LEAD's workshops for chairs, deans, and emerging faculty leaders. Strategic
efforts will be undertaken to increase the participation in CCAS workshops of
individuals from minority-serving institutions (MSIs). Case studies are an
important learning tool used in CCAS's current professional development
programs. Multiple cases addressing gender equity scenarios commonly encountered
by STEM deans and chairs will be developed and implemented throughout CCAS's
programming. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The initiative's intellectual merit derives
from its innovative and multitiered approach of transforming an association of
academic administrators as a means of promoting change among its member
institutions. As well, because this project will effect lasting changes to a
well-established and self-supporting professional development infrastructure, it
will be sustainable. The project offers high potential for broad impact, in that
CCAS membership includes nearly 500 higher education institutions ranging from
baccalaureate liberal arts through major research universities whose
representatives include approximately 1,600 deans, associate deans, and
assistant deans. CCAS's professional development activities also reach 80-120
department chairs annually. Educating these key populations - individuals who
play pivotal roles in the recruitment, mentoring, development, and advancement
of STEM faculty - will cultivate academic leaders who are more knowledgeable
about STEM gender equity issues, more able and motivated to address those
issues, and thus better positioned to effect positive transformational change in
their own colleges and departments. Further, with a membership that includes 48
MSIs and targeted efforts to solicit project participation by MSI
representatives, there is substantial potential for impacts on populations
underrepresented in STEM disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;