* 0929023
* Planning for a Math and Science Institute Partnership for the San Joaquin Valley of California
* EHR,DRL
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2011
* Ron Hughes, California State University-Bakersfield
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 05/31/2011
* USD 295,848.00

The Great Valley Math and Science Partnership is bringing together the largest
9-12 high school district in California with the local university to promote a
common goal of improving math and science education and ultimately increasing
the size of math and science-literate workforce in the region. To accomplish
these goals, California State University, Bakersfield (CSUB) and the Kern High
School District (KHSD) are partnering in an effort to create an institute with a
focus on structured and guided authentic research participation experiences for
teachers to develop a group of master teachers in math and science content,
pedagogy and leadership. Collaborative community partners in the effort include
the Kern County Superintendent of Schools, science museums, industry, and non-
profits which together serve on the Community Advisory Panel to provide support
in the planning of the institute.

The planning process of the Start Partnership is being conducted by a Core
Planning Team consisting of CSUB disciplinary faculty in the sciences and math,
education faculty, higher education administrators, and KHSD teachers and key
administrators. The planning team is working closely with its supporting partner
organizations through a Community Advisory Panel. The core partners and their
community partners share a deep commitment for improving science education in
the region and to creating a successful science partnership that is sustainable
in the long term.

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).