* 0929752
* Development of a Programmed-temperature Pyrolysis/Combustion Reactor System for Radiocarbon Applications
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Brad Rosenheim, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2013
* USD 215,153.00

0929752&lt;br/&gt;Rosenheim&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will lead to the
development of an instrument to separate and age date components of acid
insoluble organic material (AIOM) in sediments. Diagenetically-stable or pre-
aged AIOM may be more resistant to complete pyrolysis than fresh AIOM. While
sediment chronologies can be assessed by a suite of measurements, in certain
instances, age dating AIOM may be the only option. The proposed instrument would
use both pyrolysis and combustion to generate sufficient quantities of carbon
dioxide for radiocarbon dating. The broad applications are to geochronology and
carbon cycling. Pyrolysis at varying temperatures differentially "removes"
organic matter from a complex matrix. In order to capture pyrolysis-generated
carbon dioxide, a prototype flowthrough pyrolysis system has been developed.
Thermograms reveal differential temperature-related carbon dioxide evolution
based on sample type and location. The PI proposes to develop a trapping system
to collect carbon dioxide "fractions." The system differs from any existing
design in that it has a flowthrough configuration and a gradual temperature ramp
capability. The flowthrough system "ends" in a platinum catalyst oxidation
furnace to combust pyrolyzed moieties into carbon dioxide. These carbon dioxide
fractions are cryogenically purified, frozen onto copper oxide and granulized
silver and sealed for a redundant combustion at 525 Â°C. This step obviates any
incomplete combustion and removes any interfering sulfur compounds before AMS
analysis. Basic science questions to be addressed with successful development of
this instrumentation include understanding the history of the Ross and Wedell
Sea ice sheets will be estimated using pyrolized AIOM which can distinguish
between "fresh" autochthonous and diagenetic carbon. The device will also be
employed to better understand the oxidation of Amazon-deposited OM in Guianas
mud banks. The PI intends to determine which proportions of OM are refractory -
even under re-oxidized conditions (sediment turnover). Methods will also be
applied to Eel River and Mississippi River sediments. The system will be used to
assess the characteristics of kerogen-rich Ganges/Brahmupatra river system
deposits. Preliminary data show different ages amongst components of riverine vs
shelf environments. Mississippi delta deposits including areas associated with
levees will be analyzed in order to age date deposition events. Sediment and
organic matter delivery to wetlands will also be assessed. The system will be
built and maintained at Tulane. Funds are sought for reactor components and 3
external reactor housings (for maintenance and reducing downtime). An IR carbon
dioxide analyzer is requested for "real-time" carbon dioxide quantization. A
muffle furnace is requested for system cleaning. Funds are requested for valves,
LabView, DAQ hardware, relays, vacuum solenoids and a vacuum pump. Funds are
also sought for radiocarbon analysis. This effort will fund a female PhD
graduate student assistantship. The instrument development will allow the
student to gain valuable instrumentation and electronics skills. The PI
participates in NolaSMILE (New Orleans, LA, Science and Mathematics Inquiry,
Learning, and Exploring) which is a vehicle for training and educating local
teachers. The project will include a volunteer undergraduate from Xavier
University (historically black college).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***