* 0929383
* What are the sources and mechanisms of iron enrichments during oceanic anoxic event 2?  - Evidence from iron stable isotopes
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Silke Severmann, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 08/31/2011
* USD 149,707.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate the paleo-
geological history of Ocean Anoxic Event II (OAEII, ~94 Ma) by iron isotopic
analyses (d56Fe) of total iron in archived sediment cores from the proto North
Atlantic and bordering Western Interior Seaway, including several from DSDP and
ODP. OAEII sediments are characterized by concentrations of high organic carbon
(OC) which might have resulted either from 1) increased preservation of OC
resulting from more anoxic conditions globally, or 2) increased surface ocean
productivity. The effects of iron on ocean productivity and the overall carbon
cycle during OAEII is a major aim of this research. To this end, the research
will investigate the relative inputs of Fe to euxinic sediments from
hydrothermal inputs versus that remobilized from shelf sediments that should
carry a distinctly lower d56Fe value than the hydrothermal source. The d56Fe
values and FeT/Al ratios of sedimentary iron in euxinic sediments of OAEII will
reflect the relative contribution from hydrothermal sources. This research will
try to constrain the overall mass balance of iron in the ocean during OAEII and
thus expand the use of Fe isotopic analyses for paleo-environmental
assessment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The research supports an
undergraduate student, a postdoc, and an early career female scientist. As part
of the Center for Ocean Science Education Excellence at Rutgers University, the
PI will work with the Center?s Director to incorporate the research results into
online educational materials directed at K-12 teachers, K -16 students, and
coastal managers.