* 0929736
* Collaborative Research - Model My Watershed: Developing a Cyberlearning Application and Curricula to Enhance Interest in STEM Careers
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Charles Tomlin, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 08/31/2013
* USD 209,303.00

Model My Watershed is a three year project to develop, test and disseminate a
watershed-modeling tool set for secondary students. It is designed to build on
GoogleEarth and provide a dynamic interface where students can import as well as
add data, modify both environmental conditions and underlying algorithms, work
in a collaborative online learning environment, and be exposed to STEM careers.
The design is based on the belief that students should have an authentic,
exciting, intuitive and interactive tool set that allows them to investigate
their own neighborhoods. The investigations challenge students to make real
world decisions based on scientific knowledge and models.

The project uses the complexity of environmental science to engage and excite
students about the diverse STEM careers that are necessary to study and address
environmental issues. Using existing scientific data in an authentic, hydrologic
modeling toolset, students learn to predict how environmental changes to the
ecosystem affect the hydrologic cycle in their local watersheds. In addition to
being able to modify the underlying environmental conditions and model
algorithms, the students can modify their watershed by drawing new surfaces or
structures on the landscape using tools such as Google SketchUp. A collaborative
web-based communication platform is used to network teams of students and
schools to pose questions or challenges and communicate their findings. The
project will directly impact 25 teachers and 1000 students in the Philadelphia
area with plans for national dissemination.