* 0929543
* Scale-Up:  Scaling up STEM Learning with the VCL
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Henry Schaffer, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Margret Hjalmarson
* 08/31/2014
* USD 1,759,514.00

The purpose of this project is to increase students' achievement and interest in
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) or information and
communication technology (ICT) careers. The project is working with four rural
school districts to provide teacher professional development and implement
research-based curriculum modules for two mathematics educational software
packages in geometry (Geometer's Sketchpad) and statistics and probability
(Fathom). The project uses a computing laboratory so that the software packages
are hosted centrally by the university and accessible on-demand for teachers and
students--reducing schools' expenses for technology staff and software licenses.
The project takes advantage of a North Carolina initiative to provide 1:1
computers. Approximately 50 teachers and up to 5,000 students in rural North
Carolina will be impacted by this project. Additionally, the project has
identified and will continue to recruit STEM/ICT professionals from local
businesses to visit and mentor participating students and teachers. The study's
research and evaluation uses a combination of qualitative and quantitative
methods in a delayed-treatment design. Qualitative data sources include teacher
interviews and classroom observations. Quantitative data sources include
measures of teachers' content knowledge and students' content knowledge,
classroom engagement, and career interest. External evaluation is provided by
the SERVE Center at the University of North Carolina, Greensboro.