* 0929531
* Greater Philadelphia Region LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate (Cohort VII) Project
* EHR,HRD
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Stephen Cox, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* A.  Hicks
* 07/31/2012
* USD 987,000.00

The 2009-2011 Bridge to the Doctorate Program of the Greater Philadelphia Region
Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (Philadelphia AMP)will expand
and intensify the alliance's on-going efforts to substantially increase the
number of qualified African American, Hispanic and Native American students
entering graduate study in science, technology, engineering and mathematics
(STEM), attaining doctoral degrees, and moving into the professoriate.

The Philadelphia AMP represents a diverse alliance of nine institutions
consisting of public and private, 2- and 4-year research and non-research,
Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) and majority institutions.
Delaware State University is the site for the 2009-2011 Bridge to the Doctorate
program.

The goals of Philadelphia AMP's Bridge to the Doctorate project are to: (1)
recruit twelve students into masters degree programs at Delaware State
University; (2) retain these students through the completion of the Masters
program providing them with full qualifications for admission into a highly
regarded Ph.D. program in their chosen STEM specialty with full financial
support; (3) enable their admission and smooth transition into a Ph.D. program;
and (4) monitor their progress through Ph.D. completion into employment. We aim
to have 100% of these students successfully complete their graduate study and
enter a STEM career, with many progressing into the professoriate at
institutions of higher education. The students will be able to matriculate into
10 STEM M.S. programs (chemistry, applied chemistry, applied mathematics,
mathematics, physics, applied optics, natural resources, biology, neuroscience,
and plant science), many of which are underrepresented by minorities.