* 0929691
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Factors Affecting the Nature and Strength of Indirect Effects: A Modeling and Empirical Approach
* GEO,OCE
* 08/16/2008,08/31/2012
* Barney Luttbeg, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2012
* USD 143,595.00

The trophic cascade exemplifies the importance of indirect effects to the
dynamics and structure of ecological communities. Classical views of trophic
cascades emphasize the positive indirect effect that predators have on basal
resources through their consumption of prey. Yet growing evidence indicates that
we must refine our view of how different trophic levels are dynamically linked
because trophic cascades can also be caused by predator-induced changes in prey
behavior such as foraging activity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite abundant
theory we have a limited empirical understanding of the factors that shape
individual foraging decisions that, in turn, dictate the nature and strength of
indirect effects in natural communities. Drs. Trussell and Luttbeg will use a
model comparison and null hypothesis approach to explore the relative importance
of density (DMIIs) and trait-mediated indirect interactions (TMIIs) to trophic
cascades on rocky intertidal shores. Using a tri-trophic food chain as a model
system, they will manipulate factors predicted to influence prey behavior and
thus the relative strength of TMIIs in trophic cascades.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will achieve these objectives by
addressing the following questions: &lt;br/&gt;1. How do resource levels, prey
state, and predation risk shape prey foraging and growth functions?
&lt;br/&gt;2. How do resource levels, prey state, and predation intensity shape
prey mortality functions? &lt;br/&gt;3. What model best describes the short-term
influence of these factors on prey foraging behavior and the strength of
emergent indirect effects? 4. Do models supported by short-term data accurately
predict longer-term prey behavior and the strength of emergent indirect effects?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will make significant intellectual
contributions to ecology by exploring whether attention to individual behavior
improves our ability to predict the nature and strength of indirect effects in
natural systems. By evaluating alternative models with empirical data, our
research is novel and will build a stronger connection between ecological theory
and its empirical base. Moreover, because species interactions are central to
major issues in ecology, such as the use of trophic cascade theory to manage
natural systems, it is critical that we understand how behavior is modified by
environmental context. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts are considerable.
The research will allow students at all educational levels to pursue their
interests in ecology. Graduate and undergraduate training will occur during all
phases of the research. As part of Northeastern?s Young Scholars Program they
also will offer a summer research internship each year to a high school student
from the Coastal Ocean Science Academy (COSA) that is taught by the Marine
Science Center?s Outreach staff. These students are largely members of under-
represented groups from Boston area public high schools. In addition to
providing these students with plenty of field experience, they also will teach
them how to (1) conduct basic statistical analyses, (2) write a scientific
paper, and (3) develop and deliver an oral presentation on their internship
experience to the Marine Science Center community.