* 0929281
* STEM STARS
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2011
* Mary Shaw, New Mexico Highlands University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 12/31/2011
* USD 199,476.00

STEM STARS is an enrichment project that will advance the field?s knowledge of
how Hispanic and Native American undergraduate students with disabilities
successfully complete gateway Algebra, Pre-Calculus and Biology course given
access to a unique group of student interventions and faculty training. NMHU is
located in a rural, agricultural region of the state with nearly 70% students
from Hispanic or Native American demographic backgrounds. The STEM STARS project
is a proposal to implement evidence-based learning strategies for students with
disabilities to double the percentage of minority students with disabilities in
STEM majors from 4.8% to 9.6% at NMHU. This increase will be accomplished by
implementing the following evidenced-based strategies for students with
disabilities in two introductory Math and two introductory Biology courses:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Employ Universal Design for Learning (UDL) principles.
UDL will be used in redesigning course syllabi.&lt;br/&gt;2. Training and
support of faculty in the use of UDL in higher education STEM
courses.&lt;br/&gt;3. Co-teaching and co-facilitating by Biology, Math and
Special Education graduate student assistants serving as teaching assistants in
the targeted Math and Biology courses.&lt;br/&gt;4. Peer assisted learning and
mentoring.&lt;br/&gt;5. Career and internship advising by Accessibility Services
Coordinator and Career Services staff.&lt;br/&gt;6. Assistive technology to
enhance STEM courses and laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project
has the potential of benefitting a wide range of students who are currently
underrepresented in STEM fields. It is expected to bring about systemic changes
in teaching and learning at NMHU. The dissemination of the lessons learned will
be useful not only to NMHU faculty and administrators but also to other
minority-serving institutions. The proposed techniques and strategies are
applicable to pre-college, community college, and university level students with
disabilities at all types of institutions. The project will yield invaluable
information on bridging the gap between teaching and learning. In summary,
implementation of the proposed teaching and learning strategies enhances the
educational experiences of STEM faculty and provides students with learning
opportunities not previously available in STEM courses at
NMHU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Christiane Herber-Valdez is the external
evaluator for the project. Dr. Herber-Valdez has extensive experience evaluating
the design, development and implementation of large scale federally funded
grants, including initiatives funded by NSF and NIH. The project information and
findings will be disseminated to the public via professional conference
presentations, journal publications, and a project website.