* 0929619
* U.S.-Malaysia Planning Visit:  Collaborative Research on the Micromechanics of Cubic Stone Materials for Pavements
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Zhanping You, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Sung
* 08/31/2012
* USD 12,760.00

0929619&lt;br/&gt;You&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: U.S.-Malaysia Planning Visit:
Collaborative Research on the Micromechanics of Cubic Stone Materials for
Pavements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the participation of an
American researcher, graduate student and undergraduate students in the planning
visit which will take place in Malaysia. The visit will enable Professor
Zhanping You in the Civil Engineering Department at Michigan Technology
University to meet with Professor Meor Othman Hamzah in the School of Civil
Engineering at the University Sains Malaysia (USM) in Penang. Their proposed
project will involve: 1) increasing multidisciplinary collaboration among
researchers in Michigan and Malaysia at their leading institutions; and 2)
discovering the mechanism of rutting and fatigue distresses by using advanced
micromechanics based discrete element models through the collaborative effort.
The team will visit USM?s Asphalt Laboratory to work with the Malaysian
professors and students to study and evaluate the feasibility of using cubical
aggregated in pavement to reduce rutting potential. The students will also have
an opportunity to participate in the testing of samples with/without cubic-stone
materials on dynamic modulus and resilient modulus testing. The U.S. students
will receive the testing results in order to use the data for discrete element
modeling. The discrete element model will be further refined to study the
various material phases (aggregates and mastic/asphalt) of pavement materials in
order to determine the rutting and fatigue performance of asphalt pavements.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is sufficient overlap of interests between
researchers at the two universities to indicate that the researchers can
successfully pursue the activities proposed, and the interaction will benefit
both sides. This collaboration will advance discovery and understanding of
cubic-stone materials micromechanics, while promoting teaching, training, and
learning through the specific activities planned for the students. It is
anticipated that the inclusion of the students in this visit will provide them
unique training and educational opportunities by providing them a global
research experience. These early collaborations between the scientists and
students from each country will likely lead to long-term collaborations that
will benefit both institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;