* 0929435
* FGLSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate
* EHR,HRD
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Ralph Turner, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* A.  Hicks
* 07/31/2012
* USD 987,000.00

University of South Florida will serve as the 2009-2011 Bridge to the Doctorate
(BD) Project site for the Florida-Georgia Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority
Participation (FGLSAMP) Program. In accordance with the goal of the National
Science Foundation and FGLSAMP?s commitment to providing experiential exposure
opportunities, the new FGLSAMP USF BD Program extends the successful outcomes
and ?best practices? of nine previous training grant awards (BD, IGERT and GK-12
and Sloan) to all STEM fields, ? mathematics, earth system sciences, biological
& physical sciences and engineering/computer Science. This proposal extends a
successful mentoring and training model used in the previous cohorts to the
entire USF.

A unique feature of this program is that it leverages extensive institutional
commitment from across USF, Sloan Foundation and McKnight Foundation with
commitment from companies in the Tampa bay community and collaborators all over
the world are all committed to ensuring success of both, the trainees and the
program. This commitment will result in 7 additional two-year fellowships awards
(supplementing the 12 NSF-funded BD Fellowships for a total of 19 two-year BD
Fellowships) as BD Fellows. Additionally, the non-USF commitments secured for
this proposal will enable institutionalization of funding packages averaging
$30,000 per year in years 3-5 of the traineeship, from endowed fellowships and
external programs. This has been complemented with national and international
internship opportunities.

The program leverages NSF dollars with $900,000 in student and program support
(fellowships tuition waivers, administration) from USF; $600,000 in Sloan
Doctoral Fellowships for students continuing towards their Ph.D., and $900,000
from the Florida Education Fund. Thus, this program is leveraged by $2,500,000
of non NSF funds. Every dollar from NSF will result in at-least $2.5 in matching
support.

Our goal for this cohort is to ensure that 100% of the students complete their
Ph.D, with transformative mentoring, retention and community building
strategies. Additionally, the USF BD Project will serve as a national model for
the synergistic and formal connection of LSAMP BD fellows with other NSF
supported programs (GRFP, IGERT, GK-12, CREST, AGEP, LSAMP, etc.), enable
students to gain an international level research perspective via didactic
coursework and research experiences, receive research training at national labs
(Brookhaven, NIST) that will provide a ?bridging? mechanism for postdoctoral
appointments and permanent employment; and develop technical, communication and
research skills.

The cost of education allowance provided by the NSF supplement will be utilized
to: 1) facilitate the BD Fellows' research and training activities; 2) conduct
professional development activities and special BD course-related activities; 3)
co-sponsor an annual FGLSAMP BD and GK-12 research symposium for graduate
fellows from the respective programs to present their research; 4) cover travel
costs for the BD Fellows to present at NSF LSAMP/AGEP research conferences; 5)
support travel for extended research experiences at national labs; 6) cover
costs associated with sponsoring the BD Fellows' participation in GRE exam
preparation courses and retaking the GRE exam (this should result in their
increased competitiveness for national external and internal USF fellowships);
7) foster international research-training for BD fellows with international
partners and collaborators; and 8) provide health insurance coverage for all BD
Fellows.

With a goal towards institutionalization of minority graduate STEM fellowship
opportunities, USF has already established two Alfred P. Sloan Minority
Fellowship programs in eight different academic programs, two endowment funds in
College of Marine Science for minority BD students to which more than $900,000
has already been committed.