* 0929563
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Religion and Social Relations: A case study of Quaker Ideology and the Practice of Caribbean Slavery
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2010
* Laurie Wilkie, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2010
* USD 15,000.00

Under the direction of Dr. Laurie Wilkie, Mr. John Chenoweth will collect data
for his doctoral dissertation thesis. Religion is a cultural phenomenon through
which other aspects of social identity can be articulated, are negotiated,
contested, and made explicit.If daily life has an effect on cultural change and
ethnogenesis, as most archaeologists would argue, then the degree to which
religious ideology affected daily life is an important variable. This project
will evaluate the strength of religion as a structuring principle in social
relations through the study of an 18th century Caribbean plantation which was
home to the white landowning family, members of the Quaker religious group, and
at least 7 enslaved Africans. The study site is a now uninhabited, 155 acre
island near Tortola, in the British Virgin Island, ten acres of which have been
identified as containing heavy 18th century habitation with excellent
preservation. The study hypothesizes that religious ideology of Quakerism will
alter social relations, producing observable material differences from sites
where that ideology is absent, even at the expense of economic rationality.
Because of the contradictions between Quaker ideology and the practice of
slavery, it is predicted that religion will be most clearly identifiable
archaeologically in the relationship between the Quaker owners and the enslaved
Africans they held. The project will employ surface survey and focused
excavations of the homes of the enslaved and the owners in order to address this
question.

The research will serve as an integral part of Mr. Chenoweth's academic training
and to the development of his expertise as a researcher.