* 0929398
* Acquisition of a tunable diode laser absorption spectroscopic isotope analyzer and peripheral induction furnace
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Joseph Galewsky, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2010
* USD 69,115.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). This award will fund the acquisition of a new tunable diode
laser absorption spectroscopy isotope analyzer (TDLAS) and a tabletop induction
furnace. We intend to: 1) Calibration the system in a controlled glove box,
followed by a continuation of atmospheric water vapor studies in New Mexico and
at the Mauna Loa site; 2) undertake controlled laboratory studies of evaporation
and condensation in order to better understand controls on the composition of
atmospheric water vapor, particularly the deuterium-excess parameter; 3) Develop
an extraction procedure for analysis of H and O isotopes from fluid inclusions;
4) Develop an extraction procedure for H isotope analysis for hydrous minerals,
nominally anhydrous minerals and extraterrestrial materials; 5) Develop a step-
heating extraction procedure for H and O isotopes from clay minerals; 6) Study H
and O isotope ratios related to evapo-transpiration in the Rio Grande Valley
ecosystem; and 7) Measure H and O isotope values of soil gas (soil water). In
the course of this work, we will provide an accurate calibration of the system
at low atmospheric p(H2O), and develop analytical procedures that will benefit
the overall geological community by providing novel 'front-end' applications to
the TDLAS system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The TDLAS will become an integral part of
research and teaching at the University of New Mexico (UNM). UNM is one of only
three Universities in the country that is designated as both a Hispanic-serving
institution and a Carnegie Doctoral/Research Extensive University, and this
laboratory routinely hires minority and/or women undergraduate students to work
in the laboratory or as part of a undergraduate honors research project. The
TDLAS will be an important part of our ongoing program to involve undergraduates
in research because it is easy to use, and they can be active participants in
the projects outlined in this proposal. The instrument will also be used for
teaching in environmental studies and stable isotope courses, as it can be used
with only minimal instruction.