* 0929788
* Project Opening Doors: An AP mathematics and science strategy to prepare underrepresented studetns for college success and STEM careers
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Lauren Kaufman, CBIA Education Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Reed
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,200,000.00

The Education Foundation of the Connecticut Business &amp; Industry Association
(CBIA)is partnering with the Connecticut Science Center, Connecticut College of
Technology, EASTCONN (a Regional Education Service Center), and CBIA member
companies on an ITEST strategies project to encourage and prepare 9th and 10th
grade minority and low-income, first-generation college students for enrollment
in Advanced Placement courses in math, science and English in Project Opening
Doors (POD) schools in Connecticut. POD, Connecticut's National Math and Science
Initiative, is designed to increase enrollment of underserved and minority
students in 11th and 12th grade AP classes and improve their educational
performance, success in post-secondary education, and eventual employment in
science and technology based companies. The ITEST project is a pre-AP initiative
designed to excite and motivate students in the sciences and technology and
prepare them for the rigor of AP coursework in POD project schools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the three-year grant period, 1,020 9th and 10th grade
students and 30 teachers from eight to ten POD schools participate in exciting
cyberlearning activities designed to stimulate student interest in AP STEM
subjects. Activities include the year-long the "How Cool is This? Cyber-
Challenge," with companies including Pfizer, United Technologies, General
Electric, and Northeast Utilities, providing thought-provoking, relevant
challenges to student industry teams. The teams, made up of 9th and 10th grade
students from different schools, collaborate virtually to solve their challenge
using 2.0 tools including online conferencing and chat tools (Bridgit, Skype,
ooVoo) email, wikis, collaborative documents and other related emerging
technologies. The Cyber-Challenge culminates with student industry teams
presenting their solutions in a multi-media format to peers and industry
representatives in the Connecticut Science Center's IMAX Theater. Finished
projects are posted on the program's social networking
website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the year, teams take part in a variety of
supplemental activities to underscore the relevance of STEM courses, including
college programs such as Engineering Challenge, State Scholars presentations by
industry representatives, and field trips to companies. Accompanying teacher
professional development includes industry externships and training on 2.0 tools
needed to oversee student progress and bolster their technology
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An external evaluator will assess student interest
in STEM subjects and perceptions of STEM careers using pre- and post-test
surveys for each activity; program staff will track student enrollment in AP
courses. The project advisory board includes industry representatives,
educators, and education experts.