* 0929423
* Arabidopsis 2010:  Phylogenetic and Functional Analysis of Nuclear-encoded Editing Factors and their Chloroplast RNA Targets
* BIO,MCB
* 12/01/2009,11/30/2014
* Maureen Hanson, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 11/30/2014
* USD 1,510,401.00

Intellectual Merit. RNA editing modifies specific cytidines in angiosperm
chloroplast transcripts to uridine. C-to-U editing is thought to function to
correct detrimental T-to-C mutations in the chloroplast genome. Evolutionary
processes have shaped the occurrence and molecular mechanism of RNA editing in
chloroplasts since the phenomenon arose in an ancestor to extant seed plants.
Genomic information available from Arabidopsis thaliana will provide a
foundation for a phylogenetic analysis of chloroplast targets of editing and the
members of the large nuclear-encoded pentatricopeptide motif-containing protein
family that are required for editing site conversion. Additional editing factors
will be identified in A. thaliana to gain a more comprehensive picture of the
nuclear-encoded machinery devoted to chloroplast RNA editing. C-to-U editing
events in members of the Brassicaceae will be identified for comparison to those
occurring in A. thaliana. The loss and acquisition of C targets as well as
nucleotide changes in the sequences surrounding them will be traced within the
Brassicaceae. Sequences of three editing trans-factors will be analyzed in
detail to understand how the rapidly evolving nuclear genes coevolve with the
more slowly evolving chloroplast genes. Knowledge of nucleotide diversity in
both the RNA editing targets and the corresponding trans-acting proteins will be
used for functional tests of the consequences of evolutionary change in nuclear
proteins and editing of chloroplast RNAs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts.
Efficient capture of solar energy by chloroplasts is essential for optimal plant
growth to provide biomass and other agricultural products. The project will
provide fundamental information about an important molecular mechanism that
corrects defects in the chloroplast genome that would otherwise impair
photosynthetic activity. The project will provide multidisciplinary training for
postdoctoral associates and a graduate student and 10-12 undergraduates at both
Cornell University and University of California-Irvine (UCI). Topics related to
project content will be developed by the co-P.I. and NSF GK-12 graduate student
participants at UCI. Materials will be developed that K-12 classroom teachers
will be able to implement in grade 7, 9 or AP biology classrooms and will be
available through the UCI GK-12 web site (http://port.bio.uci.edu/NSF-
GK-12/default.htm). The P.I. will assist the Cornell Institute for Biology
Teachers in incorporating these materials into the comparable workshops that are
periodically held at Cornell for K-12 teacher training.