* 0929864
* IDR - Digital luminescent particle image barometry thermometry and velocimetry - DLPIBTV
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2015
* Younan Xia, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Song-Charng Kong
* 08/31/2015
* USD 850,038.00

0929864 Dabiri

Turbulent fluid flow is ubiquitous and important in a wide array of
technological, environmental and biological situations. Our understanding of
and, in turn, our ability to analyze and predict such flow is limited. This
research seeks to develop new experimental techniques that will allow
simultaneous measurement of local and instantaneous fluid velocities, pressures,
and temperatures in turbulent convective flows; key elements in advancing our
ability to understand and manipulate this complex phenomena.

Intellectual Merit: The proposed technique involves fabrication of particles
that are loaded with pressure- and temperature-sensitive dyes. The particles are
sufficiently small as to follow the instantaneous velocities of the fluid into
which they are introduced, and are simultaneously illuminated with appropriate
optical sources to excite the various dyes. The fluorescent responses of the
dyes will be monitored, and related to the instantaneous temperatures and
pressures of the particles. Simultaneously, instantaneous fluid velocities will
be determined using a laser particle image velocimetry technique. The data
collected are expected to be particularly relevant to the future development of
predictive models for turbulent, single phase, nonisothermal fluid flow. A
multidisciplinary team of investigators with backgrounds in Chemistry, Materials
Engineering, and Fluid Dynamics will be involved in the design of the pertinent
dyes, the particle synthesis, and the construction of the associated laser-based
measurement methodologies. Broader Impact: This research addresses longstanding
challenges in fluid dynamics and, as such, will address related issues in
environmental, energy, transportation, biomedical, and biological applications.
The research will be integrated into the core curricula at the PIs institutions.
A new graduate level experimental methods class will be developed at the
University of Washington, based in large part upon the proposed research.
Recruitment of graduate students from underrepresented groups will be included,
leveraging existing programs.