* 0929511
* U.S. Colombia Planning Workshop; Knowledge Sharing and Collaboration in Volcanic Risk Mitigation at Galeras Volcano, Narino, Colombia
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2010
* Eliza Calder, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Carmina Londono
* 06/30/2010
* USD 33,403.00

Abstract Proposal: OISE-0929511 &lt;br/&gt;PI/Institution: Michael Sheridan,
State University of New York (SUNY) at Buffalo&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
U.S.-Colombia planning workshop organized by U.S. PI Dr. Michael Sheridan from
SUNY at Buffalo with colleagues from Colombia (Dr. Gustavo Cordoba, Univ. of
Nariño), Mexico (Dr. Jose Macias, Univ. Nacional Autónoma de Mexico -UNAM), and
the U.K. (Steve Sparks, Bristol Univ.) aims to improve communication and risk
perception among all of the parties involved in the Galeras volcanic activity in
Colombia. Volcanic mitigation is an important issue for active volcano sites
around the world. Participants will analyze existing hazard maps and safety
plans for the Galeras volcano based on current models and methods for analyzing
volcanic hazards. Workshop participants will be introduced to the use of an
"event tree methodology" designed to optimize communication between scientists,
decision makers, and populations in areas affected by hazardous natural
phenomena. Expected outcomes of this workshop include: information transfer;
workforce development of U.S. and Colombian scientists and students; testing of
new tools useful to decision makers; development of new models that incorporate
physical processes and social parameters, and future collaborations in this
important area.