* 0929846
* The POD Project: Harnessing the Power of Data
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2009,12/31/2013
* James Sample, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Evan Heit
* 12/31/2013
* USD 928,004.00

DRL-0929846&lt;br/&gt;Title: The PID Project: Harnessing the Power of
Data&lt;br/&gt;PO: Robert Gibbs&lt;br/&gt;PI: James Sample&lt;br/&gt;Program:
Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and
Teachers&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project increases (STEM) skills through
problem-based learning modules in which 9-12 grade students solve problems
through data collection and analysis utilizing geospatial technologies.
Professional development is provided for 40 secondary teachers in Career and
Technical Education (CTE), mathematics, and science. Participants and
researchers then examine the effectiveness of the modules on the learning and
science and technology efficacy of 800 secondary
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has five objectives.&lt;br/&gt;1.
Increase higher-level technology integration, database use and management,
spatial thinking, and web interface skills of teacher participants.&lt;br/&gt;2.
Increase teacher participant pedagogical content knowledge in science, data
analysis, and spatial thinking skills.&lt;br/&gt;3. Provide an opportunity for
teachers to develop and implement their own problem-based teaching modules in
their classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;4. Increase data analysis, critical thinking, and
spatial thinking skills of students in grades 9-12.&lt;br/&gt;5. Expose 9-12
grade students to STEM content and careers and encourage students to participate
in STEM classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will utilize the facilities of
Northern Arizona University, especially the Geospatial Research and Information
Laboratory (GRAIL). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Deliverables include three modules
created using the Legacy Cycle (Schwarz and Bransford) on analysis of
temperature data. Each of the 40 teachers will create a curriculum module that
can be shared. Research on the educational model will be disseminated through
professional meetings and journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Evaluation will be
carried out by Carol L. Henderson-Dahms of Southwest Evaluation Research. The
evaluation team will include NAU graduate students who represent a traditionally
underserved population of Native Americans. Qualitative and quantitative methods
will be used to evaluate the objectives of the project. The evaluation will
attempt to establish the following.&lt;br/&gt;1. The elements of a high-quality
STEM education professional development program;&lt;br/&gt;2. How GIS-based
learning affects spatial thinking;&lt;br/&gt;3. The affect that GIS-based
learning has on student uses and analysis of database information;
and&lt;br/&gt;4. The affect the GIS-based learning has on how students view the
integration of science, math and technology and their interest in STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;