* 0929819
* Acquisition of a gas source isotope ratio mass spectrometer and high temperature elemental analyzer
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Peter Larson, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2010
* USD 290,600.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). With this award we will purchase a modern gas source isotope
ratio mass spectrometer with a high temperature elemental analyzer. The mass
spectrometer will replace the aging Delta S that is currently operating and
aging in the Stable Isotope Lab in the GeoAnalytical Laboratory at Washington
State University. The manufacturer has recently informed us that our 16 year-old
Delta S will no longer be supported. The laboratory has seen extensive use by
graduate students and has collaborated with researchers from WSU, the University
of Idaho, and other institutions and government laboratories across the country.
The lab has made significant contributions to scientific investigations of
igneous petrogenesis, hydrothermal systems, groundwater, and paleoclimate, and
other scientific areas. It will continue to contribute to these and other
research programs. The laboratory has been supported by grants and contracts
from the National Science Foundation, The National Geographic Society, and
federal research laboratories, among other sources. We anticipate continued
support from these and other sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The laboratory has
contributed to important broader impacts. It has fostered scientific
collaboration across disciplinary boundaries and among scientists from different
institutions. The lab has contributed to helping establish the careers of young
academic scientists. Many graduate and undergraduate students have received
important training in the lab. We consider this to be a critical function for
providing capable and competent future scientists. The lab encourages women,
minority, and international students to make use of the facilities, and has been
and will continue to be successful in doing so. One of the labs current major
projects is investigating the older hydrothermal alteration in the Grand Canyon
of the Yellowstone River, Yellowstone Park, Wyoming. Some of our scientific
results have already been transmitted to the Park Rangers who use to enhance the
experience of Park visitors. &lt;br/&gt;