* 0929881
* Collaborative Research: Rapid Response to a Submarine Eruption at W. Mata Volcano
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2011
* James Cowen, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 03/31/2011
* USD 95,484.00

This research is a time critical (RAPID) response cruise by a coalition of
investigators to examine a newly discovered explosively erupting undersea
volcano (Mata) in the Western Pacific Ocean. The discovery of actively erupting
undersea volcanoes is a rarity and data that addresses many fundamental
geological, hydrothermal, volcanic, and biological issues will be collected. The
volcano being investigated is presently erupting unusual lavas of compositions
indicative of the initial stages of arc formation. As such they have an unusual
chemistry and are thought to be associated with hydrothermal fluids of exotic
and extreme compositions. The likelihood that novel and previously undiscovered
microbiological life forms associated with these fluids is a study target. Short
lived radiogenic isotopes in lava samples from the volcanic vent will be
measured to obtain an eruptive timeline. Coexisting hydrothermal fluids and
erupted lava samples will be examined to elucidate the relationship between
volatile and element partitioning between solid and fluid phases during this
type of magmatism. Broader impacts of the work include graduate student
training, support of a PI whose gender is under-represented in the sciences,
support of PIs from an institution in an EPSCoR state, and public outreach.
Outreach to the Tongan people in terms of presentations on research activities
and results will also be carried out.