* 0929775
* U.S.-India Workshop: Security and Privacy in Global Information Systems.
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2010
* Shambhu Upadhyaya, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 09/30/2010
* USD 15,246.00

0929775&lt;br/&gt;H. Raghav Rao&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the U.S.-India
Workshop on Cyber Security and Privacy in Global Information Systems to be
convened in Kochi, India, August 19-21, 2009. Professor Raghav Rao, State
University of New York (SUNY)- Buffalo and Indian host, Venkat Rangan, Vice
Chancellor Amrita University are co-organizing the workshop. Dr. Rangan is an
active researcher and internationally recognized as a pioneer of Multimedia and
Internet &amp; Wireless Networks research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The upcoming
workshop is the First International Conference and Workshop on Cyber Security,
Cyber Crime and Cyber Forensics. It will bring eminent researchers from academia
and industry together to discuss and deliberate on the best technologies to
effectively thwart increasing threats of global cyber crime and initiate cyber
security defenses. The conference is co-located with the workshop, which has the
objective to develop U.S.- India collaborative research and education
partnerships directed toward cyber security and privacy in global information
systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This activity is an opportunity to bring together
academicians, business professionals, and government entities to effectively
thwart global cyber crime and the increasing threats to cyber security. The
award supports the participation of 4 senior and 3 U.S. young scientists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;