* 0929154
* Assessing the potential for downstream release of contaminated sediments associated with a recent fly ash spill
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Roy Sidle, Appalachian State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 07/31/2011
* USD 79,959.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the
early morning of December 22, 2008, a breach in the retaining pond at Tennessee
Valley Authority?s (TVA) Kingston Power Plant near Harriman, Tennessee, released
about 4.13 million m3 of coal fly ash slurry, about 20% of which directly
entered the Emory River. Within about 3.2 km the Emory River discharges into the
Clinch River, which in turn flows into the Tennessee River after several
kilometers. Our objects are to evaluate the downstream impacts of this fly ash
spill with emphasis on: (1) spatial characterization of fly ash within the
downstream river sediments and waters and changes with time; (2)
characterization of the total and labile heavy metals in the fly ash in these
sediments; (3) predictions of changes in changes in fly ash sediment transport
and associated heavy metals; and (4) development of effective strategies for
remediation in consultation with TVA. Given the background data TVA has
collected on river bathymetry, will we conduct two surveys (one immediately and
one about 4 months later following the hurricane season) with the Edge Tech
3100-P portable sub-bottom profiling system to estimate the amount of fly ash
deposited on the bed of downstream reaches. Concurrent river bed sediment
samples will be collected for particle size and heavy metals analysis. These
data will provide the basis for dynamic sediment and geochemical budgets for the
affected reaches of the river systems. To further extrapolate these data, we
will conduct 3-D modeling that couples flow and sediment transport, including
bedload, suspended load, and dissolved solids transport. As such, reasonable
predictions of fly ash transported both as bedload and suspended sediment, along
with associated heavy metals, can be obtained within the impacted reach of the
Emory River and, if necessary, into the Clinch-Tennessee fluvial systems without
making unnecessary assumptions about the hydraulics and geophysical/geochemical
history of the system. Findings from this rapid response investigation will help
guide rehabilitation efforts at the affected site and assist with priority
setting of these efforts.&lt;br/&gt;