* 0929837
* US-Cameroon Intenational Workshop:  Collaborative Research and Education on E-medicine at University of Buea, Cameroon, Dec. 3-4, 2009
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/2009,11/30/2010
* Carlos Thomas, Southern University
* Standard Grant
* DeAndra Beck
* 11/30/2010
* USD 40,779.00

Dr. Victor Mbarika of Southern University proposes to conduct an International
Workshop in Buea, Cameroon, whose purpose is to establish an interdisciplinary
collaborative international program that: 1) promotes integrated research in
information technology and medicine, and 2) prepares future graduates with
certifications and practical experience in e-medicine for jobs in related health
and information technology professions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: This project lays the foundation for a systematic continuation of the
PI?s prior NSF and NASA funded research in e-medicine (for sub-Saharan Africa)
and multimedia instructional technologies. Using these funding sources, the PI
and his team have implemented and assessed e-medicine technologies in developing
nations in sub-Saharan Africa, and rural Louisiana. Further, they have been
funded to develop multimedia instructional technologies to bring real world
information technology issues to the classroom. The project completion depends
on disciplines relying on one another, and the collaboration of US and
Cameroonian universities and medical institutions. The two-day workshop will
focus on two measurable objectives: (i) To bring together a suite of
international collaborators who are engaged in student learning and research,
and to use the dynamic of our interaction to develop the human capacity of all
participants and that of participating institutions; (ii) To establish specific
practical steps towards active research collaborations, in terms of journal and
conference publications, collaborations between students and faculty from
participating institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Cameroon
demonstrates the relative resource poverty, and characteristic uncertainties as
with all developing countries in sub-Saharan Africa. The need for affordable and
accessible health care services in the country is critical. However, the primary
challenge is lack of well-trained medical health professionals, and exodus of
new graduates to richer countries. The projects to be discussed at the proposed
workshop will lay the foundation for a several publications and certifications
in e-medicine for participating institutions as well as broader dissemination of
existing funded grants. There will also be discussion of collaboration to
publish a textbook with multimedia cases on
e-medicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project represents a collaboration between
scientists in the US and Cameroon. The US team will be lead by the PI, Dr.
Victor Mbarika. Dr. Mbarika has authored three books and his research on ICT
diffusion in developing countries and on multimedia learning has appeared in
numerous peer reviewed journals and book chapters. The Cameroon team will be
lead by Dr. Enoh Tanjong (University of Buea, Cameroon) and Dr. Samuel Kingue
(University of Yaoundé, Cameroon). Dr. Kingue is the head of the Cardiology Unit
at the Yaoundé Reference Hospital. He has published numerous scientific papers,
book chapters, and national and international conference abstracts.&lt;br/&gt;