* 0929664
* A Proposal for a Workshop on Global Environmental Change & Biological Evolution in the Ocean
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2011
* Gretchen Hofmann, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* David L. Garrison
* 04/30/2011
* USD 19,619.00

How the biology of the ocean will react to and modify the ongoing comprehensive
global change-driven alterations in the marine environment is presently
virtually unknown. To what extent will present day organisms and communities be
able to adapt to and evolve in response to rapid regime shifts? Are the
responses of currently dominant groups a good predictor of the way that future
biological communities will react to anthropogenic change stressors? How can we
accurately model the future effects of simultaneous multiple environmental
changes, when coupled with potential organismal-, population- and ecosystem-
level adaptation? How do the timescales of evolutionary change in ecologically
critical functional groups of planktonic organisms compare to the timescales
that are relevant for major global change processes? And finally, what
implications do evolutionary biology and multi-variate regime scale shifts have
for the ability of the ocean to support healthy food webs and store
anthropogenic CO2?

The investigators will convene an NSF-supported catalysis workshop of about 12
invited participants, to be held at the National Evolutionary Synthesis Center,
Durham, North Carolina. This small selected group, comprised of ocean ecologists
and evolutionary biologist, will address the following questions:

What are the most compelling questions that are best addressed by an integrative
approach combining oceanography and evolutionary biology to address biological
responses to rapid environmental change in the ocean?

How can studies of present-day organisms and communities be used to predict
long-term adaptations and biological responses to rapid regime shifts?

Can accurate models be developed to predict future effects of multiple
environmental changes on organismal, population, and ecosystem-level
adaptations?

Assuming experimental evolution experiments are tractable, what are the best
strategies (microcosms, mesocosms, and choices of organism?

Participants from this initial catalysis meeting will form a steering committee
that will outline plans for a larger community workshop to address these issues
in a meeting to be held at USC Wrigley Institute conference facility on Catalina
Island in the summer of 2009.

Broader Impacts

The primary broader impact of this activity is the effort to bring the
evolutionary community together with the marine ecology community to plan a
robust scientific approach to the problem of make long term predictions about
how climate and environmental change will affect ocean organisms, populations
and communities. The information will be communicated to the greater scientific
community in a workshop as a follow-on activity.