* 0929635
* Research:  Transforming Interests in STEM Careers (TISC)
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Barbara Schneider, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Edith Gummer
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,198,391.00

The proposed study, Transforming Interests into STEM Careers (TISC), will test a
model for promoting a STEM college-going culture in two high schools. The main
goal of the intervention model is to encourage adolescents to pursue STEM majors
in college and occupations in these fields. The study's focus is upon
understanding the various factors that determine young students' interests in
STEM disciplines and their entry into actual STEM careers. The study design
includes four schools (two rural and two urban), all of which have lower than
expected college going rates. One rural and one urban school will be the
treatment group, the other two, the control group. The main purpose of the TISC
intervention is to promote a school-wide college-going culture in which all
students in a school are encouraged to perceive themselves as college applicants
in the STEM fields, with their teachers, administrators, and parents sharing
these expectations. The research study will undertake: (1) to implement the TISC
intervention in two schools; and (2) to evaluate the effectiveness of the
overall intervention, as well as each specific component (e.g., multi-tiered
mentoring, course planning and sequencing, creating a school-wide college-going
culture, financial aid planning, exposure to STEM careers, and teacher
professional development in mathematics and science classes).

The key research questions are: (1) to what extent is TISC effective at
increasing engagement with STEM fields at the high school level? Which
components of TISC are most effective at increasing engagement? (2) How
effective is TISC at increasing entry into STEM postsecondary fields? (3) How
effective is TISC in increasing persistence in STEM fields? Data will be
collected using five instruments: (1) Teenage Life Questionnaire; (2) Career
Orientation Survey; (3) "College Culture" interviews; 4) Experience Sampling
Method on the subjective perceptions; and (5) Young Adult Follow-Up Survey.
These data will be analyzed using a variety of quantitative data analysis
methods, including regression models and Hierarchical Linear Models to answer
the research questions.