* 0929415
* Facilities Support: Amino Acid Geochronology Laboratory
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Darrell Kaufman, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2012
* USD 279,914.00

0929415&lt;br/&gt;Kaufman&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). Granted funds
will support continued operation of the Amino Acid Racemization Geochronology
Laboratory (AAGL) at Northern Arizona University. Racemization of amino acids
following the death of an organism is proportional to time elapsed since death
and the temperature of the reaction environment. AAR geochronology therefore
provides a tool to date fossil remains for which the temperature history of the
environment can be inferred or for paleothermometry if the age of the sample is
determined independently (e.g., radiocarbon dating). Sample analysis is rapid
and inexpensive and sample size requirements are minimal, allowing for dating of
individual microfossils, for example. Research applications of AAR dating range
from paleoceanographic investigations to studies of invertebrate evolution. AAR
fills an important niche in our ability to date sediments beyond the 45 ka limit
or radiocarbon dating (AAR can used back to ca. 150 ka). In addition, the
technique can be used to date, in a relative sense, individual microfossils in
mixed assemblages and therefore assist in unraveling the paleoenvironmental
history of bioturbated marine and lacustrine sediments. Results from research
that employs AAR dating provides constraints on the timing of major shifts in
Earth?s climate and thus helps us to better understand the potential
consequences of human activities on Earth?s climate system. Support for this
facility will result in the continued employment of a full time technician at
Northern Arizona University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;