* 0929947
* Collaborative Research: DDDAS-TMRP: MIPS: A Real-Time Measurement Inversion Prediction Steering Framework for Hazardous Events
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2009,09/30/2010
* George Biros, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Krishna Kant
* 09/30/2010
* USD 84,975.00

The project will develop a multiscale, data-driven, high performance
computational framework for real-time reconstruction of hazardous events from
sparse measurements, and consequent probabilistic prediction of the evolution of
the hazard. The framework is distinguished by four phases that are performed
continually with dynamically-obtained data over the lifetime of the hazardous
event. (1) Measurement: Distributed sensors provide dynamic measurements over a
specified time horizon that will be used to reconstruct the initial conditions
of the event. (2) Inversion: Driven by the sparse measurements, an inverse
problem is solved to estimate the initial conditions for the equations governing
the evolution of the hazard. (3) Prediction: Statistical analysis of the
inversion results permits estimation of the uncertainty in the initial
conditions, which is propagated into a prediction of the evolution of the hazard
and its uncertainty. (4) Steering: Sensors are steered to new locations based on
an effectivity index that incorporates sensitivities of the inversion with
respect to sensor location, estimated uncertainty in the prediction, and
population density factors. Continual application of the measure-invert-predict-
steer (MIPS) framework described above results in updated predictions of the
evolving hazard with built-in uncertainty estimates, as well as revised sensor
deployment strategies that refine the predictions to reduce their uncertainty.
The methods developed consider two time scales of decision making at which the
MIPS framework must execute. The seconds-to-minutes decision-making scale is
required by first responders to begin immediate response efforts. For such time
scales, high-fidelity models in the form of partial differential equations
(PDEs) are too formidable. Instead, the proposed methods will construct reduced-
order models of the PDEs to facilitate realtime execution of the MIPS framework.
The minutes-to-hours decision-making scale permits more careful and measured
response by emergency officials using high-fidelity, high-resolution PDE models.
To enable rapid execution of the MIPS cycle for such models, the project will
develop fast, scalable, parallel algorithms for inversion and prediction. To
demonstrate, assess, harden, robustify, and the resulting framework, will be
validated on a specific application testbed: prediction of the urban/regional
dispersion of intentionally- or accidentally-released atmospheric contaminants
from sparse measurements.