* 0929079
* Pacific Alliance for Supporting Individuals with Disabilities in STEM Fields Partnership (Pacific Alliance)
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2017
* Robert Stodden, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 09/30/2017
* USD 1,522,636.00

The "Pacific Alliance" for Students with Disabilities in Science, Technology,
Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) project will increase the numbers of
individuals with disabilities (IWD) in STEM postsecondary education programs and
ultimately the STEM workforce in Hawai`i. The Pacific Alliance will employ a
Community of Practice (COP) model as they provide students with disabilities
(SWDs) STEM mentoring, academic skill interventions, research experiences, and
internships. The primary institution, the University of Hawai`i at Manoa (UHM),
will engage SWDs in feeder high schools on Oahu and Hawai`i Islands, SWDs at
Honolulu Community College, Windward Community College and Hawai`i Community
College, and SWDs at UHM and the University of Hawai`i at Hilo. The partnership
team will employ evidence-based practices and promising interventions to advance
students through critical junctures to degree completion and into the workforce
or graduate STEM degree programs. The following objectives will be addressed by
the Pacific Alliance:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1: Increase the recruitment of IWD in
high schools on Oahu and Hawai`i Island who enroll in STEM degree programs at
partnering 2 and 4 year institutes of higher education (IHE) by 20% per year (on
Oahu, from 170 to 423 over 5 years; on Hawai`i Island, from 40 to 58 over 2
years).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2a. Increase the graduation rates (associate,
baccalaureate, and graduate degrees) for STEM students with disabilities in Oahu
based community colleges and university partner institutions by 10% per year
from 10 graduates with Associates degree in STEM to 16; from 60 graduates with
Bachelors degree to 97; from 12 graduates with Master?s or higher degrees in
STEM to 19 over 5 years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2b. Increase the graduation rates
(associate, baccalaureate, and graduate degrees) for STEM students with
disabilities in Hawai`i Island community colleges and university partner
institution by 25% per year, from 5 graduates with Associates degree in STEM to
8; from 3 graduates with Bachelors degree to 5; and from 0 graduate with Masters
or higher degrees in STEM to 1 over 2 years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3: Increase
successful entry (employed) rates of Alliance graduates (high school, associate,
baccalaureate, and graduate) into STEM employment by 5% (from a baseline of 150
graduates to 191 over 5 years).