* 0929540
* ITEST Scale-Up:  Innovative Technology for Science Inquiry Scale-Up  Project (ITSI-SU)
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Carolyn Staudt, Concord Consortium
* Continuing Grant
* Julio Lopez-Ferrao
* 08/31/2015
* USD 2,492,874.00

The goal of this ITEST scale-up project (ITSI-SU) is to address the need for
research-based science materials and teaching techniques that generate
demonstrable improvements in student science achievement in grades 3-12. The
project will reach 264 teachers directly and 10,000 students in four states and
has the capacity to reach another 1,500 teachers and 50,000 students nationwide
in a dissemination phase, and still more if teachers and trainers adopt project-
generated resources. ITSI-SU is designed to improve standards-based science
instruction through a focus on guided student inquiry using probeware,
computational models, and other interactive materials.

ITSI-SU represents a national scale-up of the Information Technology in Science
Instruction (ITSI) project at the Concord Consortium that serves 90 teachers in
Massachusetts, Kansas, Pennsylvania, and California. ITSI-SU will offer 77 hours
of research-based professional development over two summers and the intervening
year. Participants will have access to a large online collection of
sophisticated free materials based on open source software that includes
hundreds of activities that use models and tools. Teachers will learn the
content, technology use, and pedagogy by customizing the activities, developing
standards-based units from the activities, and testing in their classrooms.
Participants then report on their customizations, observations, and their
students' learning gains. The customized materials and reports are contributed
in turn to a growing online materials library. Workforce issues are addressed
throughout by exploiting the many connections between careers in STEM fields and
the technologies that students use in the ITSI-SU units.

The ITSI project that is being scaled up has already created one of the largest
collections of high-quality, online, technology-enabled science learning
materials in existence. Its approach to collaborative materials development
represents a new way of developing, sharing, and supporting STEM educational
materials. ITSI-SU could spearhead a redefinition of STEM curriculum, how
teaching is done, and what educational research can measure. The materials are
fluid and easy to adapt to new developments, resources, and needs. Exploiting
this fluidity to customize the materials is a key strategy ITSI uses for
professional development. ITSI-SU will expand this approach by engaging the
expertise of a virtual community to evaluate continually and improve the
materials based on inputs from scientists, teachers, and researchers. The
materials include automatic logging that records and analyzes student
interactions with the software, providing detailed data that has the potential
to increase teacher efficacy and to answer important research questions. The
project research addresses how the ITSI-SU program impacts student learning,
inquiry skills, and attitudes toward STEM content and careers.