* 0929349
* Arabidopsis 2010:  Next Generation Cellular Resolution Profiling of the Transcriptome and Epigenome
* BIO,MCB
* 12/15/2009,11/30/2011
* Elliot Meyerowitz, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 11/30/2011
* USD 640,000.00

The purpose of the project is to develop and apply methods to sequence
translating messenger RNA from specific cell types. An important deficit in
current experiments that obtain the list of active genes in plant tissue is that
the tissue used comes from a mixture of different cell types, for example, it
uses whole flowers or whole seedlings, each of which is made up of many
different types of cells. The resulting data on active genes is useful, but is
information on the activity of genes from many cells that have different
collections of active genes. As cell-type-specific data are necessary to infer
gene regulatory networks, current types of data are inadequate to understand a
complex organ like a leaf, shoot, or flower. The research will use developing
flowers as a system, will adapt existing methods and develop new methods to
isolate cell-type specific RNA, and to perform detailed sequencing of the RNA
from individual cell types of the developing flower. The result will be a set of
tested methods that allow researchers to isolate messenger RNA from single cell
types found in complex tissues, and therefore to record patterns and changing
patterns of gene activity from each of the single cell types found in developing
organs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of
the project are in three areas. First, the completion of the proposed research
will result in new technologies for the entire plant science community to study
RNA and gene activity at cellular resolution in virtually any cell type, which
is expected to be crucial for the understanding of various questions from
development to energy capture and response to the environment. All the methods
and lines generated through this project, which will enable cell-type specific
analysis in other laboratories, including those of young and starting
researchers who would have to spend considerable time to make such lines, will
be made freely available to the research community. Second, by being partly
established within the environment of a much larger group of undergraduate
students, graduate students, postdoctoral fellows and technical staff that are
engaged in different research projects on Arabidopsis and animal development
(the Meyerowitz laboratory and the personnel of the Caltech Jacobs Center for
Genetics and Genomics), the project will provide familiarity with a variety of
genomic technologies and approaches to a substantial pool of future independent
investigators. This pool will include undergraduate summer researchers and
students from underrepresented minorities recruited through established programs
at Caltech. Finally, public outreach and training activities will include
provision of the materials generated (especially images) for the "Grounding in
Botany" program, a collaboration between the Meyerowitz lab and the Huntington
Botanical Gardens, in which laboratory exercises using plants are developed by
teachers for high school classrooms; and for a program in which graduate
students and postdoctoral scholars from Caltech spend up to six weeks at the
Exploratorium in San Francisco, teaching high school and elementary science
teachers in a summer teacher training program.