* 0929341
* US-Mauritius International Workshop: Biomaterials: Perspectives and Possibilities, at the University of Mauritius, Nov. 30 - Dec. 4, 2009
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* David Kaplan, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* DeAndra Beck
* 06/30/2010
* USD 38,122.00

Dr. David Kaplan of Tufts University, in collaboration with Dr. Dhanjay Jhurry
of the University of Mauritius, will conduct an International Workshop entitled:
Biomaterials: Perspectives and Possibilities will be held at the University of
Mauritius, Reduit, Mauritius, from November 30th, 2009 through December 4th,
2009&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The objective of the Workshop is
to initiate the establishment of an integrated interdisciplinary research,
education and training program with a focus on the engineering of biomaterials
for application in the biomedical field, including aspects of biomaterials, drug
delivery, regenerative medicine and biosensors. The Workshop will be a first
step in the process, with a goal to bring together 10 faculty from the U.S. to
Mauritius in an environment focused on the current state of the art in the
field, detailed discussions of the future needs and opportunities in the Indian
ocean region for such initiatives, and a detailed planning document to guide the
next steps. While the focus of the meeting will be on the fundamental and
applied science and engineering, government officials and commercial entities in
the region will also participate to gain additional perspectives on future
needs, opportunities and guidance. Participants will be invited from surrounding
regions, including Africa, Southeast Asia, India, Australia and related
environs, with a total of 75 faculty, students, government and industrial
professionals as a goal. The outcome of the workshop will be three fold: a.
detailed planning document prepared over the five days to guide next steps for
the region and for a report back to the NSF, b. specific planning for a follow
on, more detailed conference as a hub for growth in the region in the
biomaterials discipline, and c. initiation of collaborative research projects
out of the meeting. An accomplished group of faculty has been recruited to run
the workshop in December and the government, infrastructure and planning in
Mauritius is in place to facilitate a productive meeting and long term impact.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts ? The conference/workshop will provide
participants the opportunity to learn more about the current global state of
biomaterials and future directions, with particular relevance to the needs,
opportunities and future plans for Mauritius and the broader region. The under
tapped personnel resources, raw materials and new venues for insight and growth
in the biomaterials world will be facilitated by the meeting. Further, faculty
and students from the region will be able to establish new collaborative
projects through the workshop to initiate new opportunities, new outreach and
new impact. The participants are also committed to building a long standing
impact for this initiative through follow on planning and programs so that a
sustainable set of opportunities for the region emerges over time. For example,
the focus on biomaterials, regenerative medicine, drug delivery and nanomedicine
will provide a basis for initiating a Masters-level course at the university as
a direct outcome from the meeting.