* 0929063
* Collaborative Research: The North Anatolian Fault in the Marmara Sea, Turkey: The Growth of Continental Transform Basins
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,11/30/2012
* Christopher Sorlien, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 11/30/2012
* USD 49,999.00

Recent international focus on the Marmara Sea has led to shallow, very high-
resolution seismic surveys that mapped the surface and near-surface traces of
faults and sediment failures as well as deep-penetration, low-resolution
multichannel seismic surveys that image the deep basin and crustal structure. In
July 2008, the proponents acquired >2700 km of high-resolution MCS reflection
data throughout Marmara that fills the resolution gap between those datasets.
The current proposed study will support the continuation of analysis and
interpretation of the available data to reconstruct the tectonic evolution of
Marmara in the last ~1 million years. Reprocessing and detailed stratigraphic
and structural interpretations will be undertaken to determine the times at
which different fault systems were active, slip rates on major faults, and the
stratigraphic response to tectonics and climate. Pre-stack depth migration will
also be applied to selected profiles from the deep-penetration Seismarmara
survey to obtain better estimates of fault geometry. The Marmara is an ideal
setting in which to address the following fundamental questions regarding
transform basins: 1) What are the patterns of basin growth in space and time,
and how do they relate to the deformation at depth? 2) Can the recent tectonic
regime be extrapolated back to the onset of the sedimentary basins (i.e.,
steady-state tectonics), or have tectonics changed through time? 3) What are the
geometries of major faults, and how is plate motion partitioned between them? 4)
How are faults in Marmara influenced by pre-existing structures?

Study of earthquake hazards, international cooperation and student training are
some of the broader impacts.