* 0929900
* RUI: Changes in Baseline Conditions in Gulf of Maine Coastal Ecosystems Over the Last 4000 Years
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Bruce Bourque, Bates College
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 09/30/2013
* USD 392,803.00

Predicting the responses of marine ecosystems to natural and anthropogenic
perturbation remains one of the greatest challenges to oceanography. In order to
assess the significance of current changes in these systems and to predict
possible future changes, oceanographers need to understand the ecological
history of the ecosystem. The aim of this study is to create long-term records
for the Gulf of Maine (GoM), a marginal shelf basin in the northwest Atlantic.
Current knowledge of the resilience of the GoM ecosystem is based largely on
studies focused on the last 70+ years. In this project, investigators will
develop an understanding of ecosystem processes in the GoM extending back 4000
years by analyzing stable carbon (C), nitrogen (N) and sulfur (S) isotopes
preserved in tissues of modern and ancient marine organisms to assess long-term
trends in nearshore primary production, trophic connectivity, and food web
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will employ a combination of
field, analytical, and modeling techniques to: (1) determine the spatial scale
over which organic matter derived from seagrasses, microalgae, and macroalgae is
currently transferred into coastal food webs, and (2) determine the timing,
magnitude, and spatial extent of changes in nearshore primary production and
trophic connectivity among organisms living in the GoM through the last 4000
years. Tissue samples will be obtained from different coastal settings, museum
collections, and three coastal archaeological sites in the GoM. The bulk organic
fractions of primary producers and consumers will be analyzed for C and N
isotopes at Bates College and S isotopes at the University of Southern Denmark.
The C isotope composition of essential amino acids (e.g., phenylalanine) will be
measured, allowing for determination of the carbon source at the base of the
food web. Nearshore food web interactions will be modeled by using the C, N and
S isotope data and non-steady state equations that include competition-dependant
changes in the consumers prey choice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Broader Impacts
of the project include: providing long-term datasets documenting the resiliency
in the GoM coastal system which will enable development of better resource
management strategies for the GoM, an international collaboration with Danish
colleagues, and support for undergraduate students. Bates College is an
undergraduate liberal arts institution with a strong commitment to supporting
student research. In addition to thesis projects, students will assist with
building and maintaining a relational database and interactive website to
disseminate and manage the data generated from the project.