* 0929294
* Plant Root Templated GeoTextiles
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Valerie Sponsel, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/2013
* USD 354,478.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
&lt;br/&gt;(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this
project are to acquire the fundamental knowledge necessary to create in situ
root based stabilization structures suitable for use in subsurface environments,
and to test these structures for efficacy. Intact, in place root structures are
to be chemically treated through polymer injections. Once created, these
structures can be used in slope stabilization and erosion control applications
without keeping the plants alive. Furthermore, these structures can be created
without top soil removal. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Root polymerization, imaging and
soil stability testing activities will be used to answer key questions which
include: (1) What chemical modifications are necessary to convert in situ living
plant root tissues into functional non biodegradable soil stabilization
structures? (2) What types of roots will work best for this application? And (3)
How much stabilization benefit can be achieved with these types of structures?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research deals with biomimetic engineering.
Biomimetics is the field of science that investigates biological structures for
use in artificial systems. This is the first fundamental biomimetic study to
focus on utilizing the benefits of the macro structure of modified roots for
engineering applications. This work will have a major impact on applications
that can benefit from adopting natural structures that have evolved to contact
and stabilize soils. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this study are
significant for educating historically underserved students. The research will
be conducted at The University of Texas at San Antonio (UTSA), one of the
largest Hispanic Serving Institutions in the nation offering undergraduate and
graduate degrees to more than 28,500 mostly first generation college students
from San Antonio and south Texas. UTSA has been one of the country?s fastest
growing public universities for much of the last decade, providing access and
opportunities for large numbers of historically underserved students.