* 0929182
* EARLY CAREER INVESTIGATOR SUPPORT:  Development of a Regional Stable Isotope Laboratory for Earth Science Research
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Daniel Bain, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2013
* USD 185,000.00

0929182&lt;br/&gt;Elliott&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). Granted funds
will support a new laboratory technician position in the stable isotope
laboratory of the Department of Geology and Planetary Science, University of
Pittsburgh over a three year period. The technician will be responsible for the
maintenance, operation and student training on two existing stable isotope ratio
mass spectrometers (SIRMS) in the laboratory. With technical assistance in the
lab, the PIs will be freed to focus their efforts on: 1) research on the
interaction of the hydrosphere, biosphere and atmosphere using innovative stable
isotope tracers (ä15N, ä18O, Ä17O, ä13C, ä34S); 2) development of new methods
for using mass independent Ä17O-NO3 analyses to examine the influence of
atmospheric nitrate on water quality, forest and estuarine health; 3)
development of high throughput water isotope (ä18O, äD) capabilities to support
and streamline hydrologic investigations of natural and human-impacted
catchments and contemporary lake systems; and 4) utilization of stable isotope
proxies (carbonate ä18O and ä13C, organic matter ä15N and ä13C) for high
resolution Holocene climate reconstructions and investigations of the role of
environmental change in cultural development and human-environment
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;