* 0929135
* LSAMP: Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation Bridge to the Doctorate
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Gordon Emslie, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* A.  Hicks
* 07/31/2013
* USD 987,000.00

The Oklahoma Louis Stokes Alliance for Miniority Participation (OK-LSAMP) under
the leadeship of Oklahoma State University will sponsor as fifth cohort of
Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) students at the University of Oklahoma. The program
will focus on the recruitment, retention, mentoring, and graduation of the
students from STEM fields pursuing M. S. and Ph.D. degrees in science,
technology, engineering, and technology (STEM) fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
program objectives for this cohort are: (i) recruitment of 12 LSAMP graduates to
the BD program by the start of the grant period, (ii) completion of coursework
by each BD Fellow within the first two years of the graduate study, (iii)
identification of a research mentor by the start of the 2nd year in the program,
(iv) at least 80% of the fellows earning Ph.D. degrees, and (v) each BD fellow
earning at least one graduate degree in a STEM field. The program has also
identified four key educational outcomes that each BD fellow must achieve prior
to graduation. These outcomes are: (i) knowledge of learning methods and
effective teaching strategies, (ii) ability to communicate effectively, (iii)
ability to perform research independently, and (iv) an understanding of the
importance of life-long learning. To achieve these&lt;br/&gt;objectives and
outcomes, the program has developed a strong and ambitious plan which includes
workshops, seminars, socials, meetings, international research experiences,
conference activities for the BD fellows and research
mentors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The BD Fellows of Cohort III will serve as mentors
for the new&lt;br/&gt;fellows. Reciprocal exchanges identified between OU and
Oklahoma State University?s (OSU) BD programs will benefit all BD students at
both universities. The evaluation of the program objectives and&lt;br/&gt;the
assessment of the achievement of educational outcomes include input from
students, external program evaluator, and the BD Council. BD Council consists of
members from OU and OSU including the PI of the Oklahoma
Alliance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed activity involves the furthering the
research on what constitutes best practices for the recruitment, retention, and
graduation of underrepresented minority students with doctoral degrees in STEM
fields. There are several other research initiatives at the University of
Oklahoma which are targeted at the success of females and underrepresented
minorities in STEM fields such as ADVANCE, IGERT, GAANN programs and Sooner
Engineering Education (SEED) Research Center. Collaboration between the BD
program and these other programs in the university will not only benefit the BD
Fellows but also the faculty engaged in research targeted towards promoting
diversity in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential impacts of the
proposed activity are multidimensional. At the institutional level, success of
the BD program will positively impact institutionalization of the best
practices. Diversity in the graduate STEM programs will promote diversity in the
undergraduate programs and vice versa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Institutional
commitment to diversity as evidenced by a diverse student population will
undoubtedly support the efforts of diversifying STEM faculty. For Oklahoma, it
will lead to stronger relationships between K-12 schools including tribal
establishments and STEM programs, diversification of the pipeline for STEM
education, and further stimulating economic development in the state. At the
national level, graduation of at least 10 BD Fellows with Ph.D. degrees who have
achieved the four key outcomes stated for the program will have a significant
impact on the gender and ethnic profiles of STEM faculty in academia, as well as
industry and other government agencies employing Ph.D. graduates. Dissemination
of best practices through archival paper publications and presentations at
professional conferences will&lt;br/&gt;broaden the impact as more institutional
will implement the best practices which will in turn transform the ethnic and
gender distribution of the STEM workforce and also increase the number of
graduates from STEM disciplines.