* 0929395
* Arabidopsis 2010: An Isotope-Assisted Quantitative Phosphoproteomics Approach to AtHK1-Mediated Osmosignaling in Arabidopsis thaliana
* BIO,MCB
* 12/15/2009,11/30/2014
* C. David Page, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 11/30/2014
* USD 1,200,000.00

INTELLECTUAL MERIT As sessile organisms plants have evolved multiple mechanisms
to sense and respond to many different environmental inputs, including abiotic
conditions (eg. light, water availability) and biotic factors (eg. insects,
pathogens). This project will advance our understanding of plant response
mechanisms by defining the specific molecular steps involved in transmitting
environmental signals to plant cells. Using the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana
and advanced techniques in mass spectrometry (isotope-assisted quantitative
phosphoproteomics) this project will identify proteins that are modified by
phosphorylation as part of important signaling pathways. The initial emphasis
will be on AtHK1, a plasma membrane histidine kinase that acts as a receptor for
sensing and responding to changes in water availability (drought) to plant
cells. This protein is one of a family of several dozen histidine kinases that
initiate short- and long-term responses to changes in plant hormones and
environmental parameters. Histidine kinases act, at least in part, by a series
of phosphotransfers between histidine and aspartyl residues within three
different proteins. These modifications (phosphorylations) ultimately result in
large-scale changes in transcription, metabolism, cell division and
differentiation. In addition to histidine and aspartate phosphorylation, genetic
studies of drought responses have implicated a calcium-dependent signaling
cascade that includes a serine/threonine protein kinase. No clear model has
emerged for integrating these chemically distinct protein phosphorylation
systems in the overall response to water availability. In this project,
quantitative phosphoproteome measurements via in planta metabolic labeling with
non-radioactive heavy isotopes and tandem mass spectrometry will be used,
together with mutants displaying various drought-related phenotypes, to
comprehensively delineate components of the drought signaling pathway in
Arabidopsis thaliana. Previously supported research has developed and refined
robust quantitative proteomics technologies using isotope-assisted quantitation
by mass spectrometry. These advanced methods will enable identification of
groups of phosphoproteins that act in concert in response to important
environmental changes, such as drought. The quantitative proteomic measurements
will simultaneously provide insights into the response specific for water
sensing as well as define a useful paradigm for applying this technology by
members of the plant community.

BROADER IMPACTS It is well recognized that drought represents the most severe
limitation to providing an adequate supply of food for the world population.
This project will identify key protein modifications that plants use to sense
and respond to changes in water availability, and further develop and make
available sophisticated mass spectrometry technology. In order to educate the
public and our future leaders on why such expensive equipment and technology are
required for research, the PI, Director of the UW Biotechnology Center, and an
outreach staff have an established record of providing educational opportunities
and activities for the community at large. In the current grant period, a new
program will be developed aimed at the general area of "Measuring Molecules".
The goal is to demystify mass spectrometers and demonstrate how they provide
amazing sensitivity and power for detecting small amounts of good and bad
compounds in our environment. The program will start with a discussion of the
familiar uses for these instruments, such as at airports to screen for
explosives, and on the planet Mars, for reporting on extraterrestrial molecules.
The intention is to also develop and use classroom exercises at the high school
and undergraduate level, for hands on experience with a new generation of mass
spectrometer microscopes, including a MALDI-TOF/TOF that was obtained previously
with an NSF MRI grant. Ultimately, through these activities there is hope to
instill in the public a better appreciation for the theory and application of
advanced technologies that are becoming ingrained in daily life.