* 0929546
* The Bridge-to-the-Doctorate Initiative:  Building a Highly Competitive STEM Education and Research Enterprise
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Ana-Rita Mayol, University of Puerto Rico
* Standard Grant
* A.  Hicks
* 07/31/2011
* USD 987,000.00

The University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras is the host site for the Louis Stokes
Alliance for Minority Participation (PR-LSAMP) Bridge to the Doctorate Program
for academic years 209-2011. A seventh cohort of 12 students will be supported
during the first two years of graduate studies in a STEM field at UPR, bringing
the total number of BD fellowship recipients to 82 since the start of the
program in 2003.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Fellows will participate in the Support
Program that was successfully implemented with the six previous Cohorts, to
enhance their academic preparation. A tracking system, designed by PR-LSAMP and
in use, will document participant progress, including completion of degree and
entering into the workforce, including the professoriate.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The BD Program is designed to: 1) prepare the next
generation of scientists for careers in research and/or university teaching in
Puerto Rico or the Mainland US and, 2) increase the nation?s pool of well-
prepared, competent scientists with diverse views. Increasing the pool of STEM
faculty members with Ph.D. degrees in Puerto Rico?s undergraduate institutions
will have a long-term impact, particularly when taking into consideration the
cumulative effect of graduates? life careers in academia and the thousands of
students whose learning will be impacted.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;