* 0929402
* Arabidopsis 2010: 1,001 Genomes Project
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Joseph Ecker, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 07/31/2011
* USD 1,600,000.00

Plant biologists need many completely sequenced and functionally annotated
genomes within each species in order to fully exploit the power of evolution to
understand how an organism functions and adapts to its environment. Researchers
interested in natural variation in Arabidopsis propose to generate genomic DNA
sequences from over 1000 inbred strains, driving technology developments in both
hardware for the DNA sequencing itself and in software development to make sense
of the DNA sequence data. The goal of this research project is to record the
genetic variation in the entire genome of many strains of the reference plant
Arabidopsis thaliana. We will develop and apply cutting edge DNA sequencing
approaches using the reference plant A. thaliana to address questions of
fundamental importance about plant evolution and gene function. The complete
genome sequences for 200 accessions, produced as a result of this project, will
provide the first complete view of haplotype structure for Arabidopsis thaliana
and will allow future studies of epigenetic variation among different
individuals in a population or within a species, a potential source of
phenotypic diversity. The patterns of sequence and structural variation will
reveal important insights into the dynamics of genome change and pinpoint
potentially functionally important sources of genetic and epigenetic variation.
Moreover, these data will enable subsequent mechanistic studies through
experimental manipulation of Arabidopsis strains. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 1001
Arabidopsis Genomes Project (http://1001genomes.org) will provide detailed
genotyping data of wild strains that will complement the efforts of individual
investigators to phenotype these same accessions for thousands of traits of
interest. For example, this research has the potential for rapid advancement
toward the mechanisms by which plants adapt to various climates, utilize soil
nutrients and resist pathogen infection. The knowledgebase produced from the
1,001 Arabidopsis Genomes Project will yield direct and measurable outcomes for
deployment of similar traits in economically important crops for a changing
global environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts of the Proposed
Research&lt;br/&gt;The impact of this project will be in two broad areas. First,
the completion of the planned research will result in important new resources
for the plant biology community: large-scale information on genetic variation
among closely related genotypes. The very limited availability of whole genome
sequence variation information has negatively impacted a variety of research
endeavors such as the understanding of adaptive evolution or the development of
association mapping. All of the DNA sequence data will be made freely and easily
accessible to the research community. The long-term impact of these enabling
tools and technologies on agriculture and forestry is expected to be profound,
providing fundamental knowledge for the construction of new plant varieties with
superior agronomic traits. An equally important aspect of this program is
training, which will be provided at a variety of levels, including outreach to
high school and undergraduate students as well as postdoctoral mentoring.