* 0929991
* Development of Electronic Systems for Noble Gas Mass Spectrometers
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Willis Hames, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 09/30/2013
* USD 148,505.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary purpose of this project is
to derive a modular, interchangeable set of electronic control devices for mass
spectrometers dedicated to measurements of noble gases. The light noble gases
(helium, neon, and argon) provide powerful tools for determining the ages of
earth materials and monitoring environmental processes that are important in
university and federal research laboratories of the United States. Strategies to
meet the increasing demands of noble gas research must include the maintenance
of investments in existing high-quality instrumentation and the promotion of new
and cost-effective instrumentation to provide access for a greater number of
researchers. These strategies have common solutions in the area of electronic
control design and the integration of electronic systems with computer control.
The electronic devices created in this two-year project will be developed,
retrofitted and tested on a novel mass spectrometer recently constructed in the
Auburn Noble Isotope Mass Analysis Laboratory at Auburn University, and also on
a spectrometer constructed in 1990 and recently acquired by the Berkeley
Geochronology Center. We intend to create two sets of electronics for these two
instruments that are relatively interchangeable, thus demonstrating a broader
applicability to instruments commonly in use in the United States. The goal for
these upgrade electronics is to improve system performance and reliability
commensurate with state-of-the-art scientific research, including the 40Ar/39Ar
analysis of extremely young materials, laser spot analyses of very small masses
of material, and also the acquisition of very large datasets. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses important national goals in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematical instruction, and this is especially
relevant for the state of Alabama. Outreach support in this project will enable
talented high-school students to participate in laboratory design and research.
Instruments developed through this project will stimulate further innovation and
manufacture of relatively inexpensive mass spectrometers in America, and enhance
the investments made in noble gas mass spectrometer facilities over the past
three decades. This project will have an influence to lower the typical costs of
noble gas analysis, and increase the number of viable mass spectrometry
facilities. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The devices developed in this project will
place all critical variables for mass spectrometer operation (the
electromagnetic analyzer, source, and detector) under computer control and
enable real-time monitoring and archival record keeping of system processes. To
the maximum extent possible, the devices constructed will utilize industry
standard components that are widely available today and represent the greatest
economy in use (balancing factors including the ease of service, physical size,
management of heat production, etc.) The products of this proposed research will
include electronics schematics and discussions of principles of operation for
the devices that would be suitable to allow service and/or construction by a
qualified electrical technician or engineer (as would be found in the research
equipment support group of a typical university). Products derived from this
project can help enable a private-industry partner to fabricate and provide such
devices as a service to the noble gas community. &lt;br/&gt;