* 0929394
* Structure-function relationships of metal ion-binding in the spliceosomal U2-U6 snRNA complex
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Nancy Greenbaum, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 08/31/2014
* USD 680,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt; Intellectual Merit: The long-range objective of
this project is to achieve a more fundamental understanding of how functional
RNA (ribonucleic acid) molecules perform their biological activities, and the
role of metal ions in these processes. Whereas the sole biological role of DNA
(deoxyribonucleic acid) is to encode a cell's genetic information, the
biochemical properties of RNA, its chemical cousin, enable it to mediate
critical roles in numerous steps in gene expression, including regulation and
catalysis. The power of RNA to perform its wide range of activities stems both
from chemical differences (specifically, an oxygen atom missing from the sugar
component of DNA) and from the ability of single-stranded RNA to fold into
myriad conformations, each capable of a specific function. An additional feature
of functional RNA molecules is the ability to bind certain metal ions in
specific locations, which extend the structural and catalytic properties of the
folded RNA. The aims of this research are to examine the metal ion binding
properties of the small nuclear (sn)RNA molecules that, together with numerous
proteins, form the spliceosome. The eukaryotic spliceosome mediates a pivotal
activity that removes noncoding regions from precursor messenger (pre-m)RNA
molecules prior to their translation into protein. Specific interaction with
metal ions by snRNAs is essential for spliceosome assembly and catalytic
activity, yet little is known about the detailed structure of individual binding
sites and the role of these metal ions in catalytic activity. The significance
of this research lies in its potential to achieve a more detailed understanding
of the interrelationship between structural and chemical properties of RNA-metal
ion complexes. These data will greatly enhance fundamental understanding of the
processes involved in RNA-mediated catalysis and will generate new methods.
&lt;br/&gt; The broader impact of this work includes: 1) education of graduate
and undergraduate students in a laboratory that provides them with
interdisciplinary training in molecular biochemistry, RNA structural biology,
and spectroscopic techniques; 2) contributions to the PI's strength as a
classroom teacher (for which she won an undergraduate Teaching Award in 2004),
and expansion of a research-based course in Nucleic Acid Structure &amp;
Function developed by the PI; 3) recruiting visits to small liberal arts
undergraduate colleges, targeting women's and historically black schools; 4)
encouragement of women and minority students to pursue careers in science. This
latter area takes the form of bringing minority undergraduates into the
laboratory and department for summer research internships, sponsoring minority
students and postdoctoral fellows for fellowships to do research in her
laboratory. The PI has recently moved her laboratory from Florida State
University to Hunter College of the City University of New York (CUNY), where
her group will have access to outstanding research facilities, specifically a
new nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometer in a completely renovated NMR
facility. Hunter is a minority serving institution with 65% women students that
graduates 5% of the nation's Ph.D.s in the physical sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is being co-funded by the Genes &amp;
Genomes Systems Cluster and the Biomolecular Systems Cluster.