* 0929119
* Killer Seaweeds:  Allelopathy against Fijian Corals
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Mark Hay, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2014
* USD 1,204,987.00

Coral reefs are in dramatic global decline, with reefs commonly converting from
species-rich and topographically-complex communities dominated by corals to
species- poor and topographically-simplified communities dominated by seaweeds.
These phase-shifts result in fundamental loss of ecosystem function. Despite
debate about whether coral-to-algal transitions are commonly a primary cause, or
simply a consequence, of coral mortality, rigorous field investigation of
seaweed-coral competition has received limited attention. There is limited
information on how the outcome of seaweed-coral competition varies among species
or the relative importance of different competitive mechanisms in facilitating
seaweed dominance. In an effort to address this topic, the PI will conduct field
experiments in the tropical South Pacific (Fiji) to determine the effects of
seaweeds on corals when in direct contact, which seaweeds are most damaging to
corals, the role allelopathic lipids that are transferred via contact in
producing these effects, the identity and surface concentrations of these
metabolites, and the dynamic nature of seaweed metabolite production and coral
response following contact. The herbivorous fishes most responsible for
controlling allelopathic seaweeds will be identified, the roles of seaweed
metabolites in allelopathy vs herbivore deterrence will be studied, and the
potential for better managing and conserving critical reef herbivores so as to
slow or reverse conversion of coral reef to seaweed meadows will be examined.

Preliminary results indicate that seaweeds may commonly damage corals via lipid-
soluble allelochemicals. Such chemically-mediated interactions could kill or
damage adult corals and produce the suppression of coral fecundity and
recruitment noted by previous investigators and could precipitate positive
feedback mechanisms making reef recovery increasingly unlikely as seaweed
abundance increases. Chemically-mediated seaweed-coral competition may play a
critical role in the degradation of present-day coral reefs. Increasing
information on which seaweeds are most aggressive to corals and which herbivores
best limit these seaweeds may prove useful in better managing reefs to
facilitate resilience and possible recovery despite threats of global-scale
stresses. Fiji is well positioned to rapidly use findings from this project for
better management of reef resources because it has already erected >260 MPAs,
Fijian villagers have already bought-in to the value of MPAs, and the Fiji
Locally-Managed Marine Area (FLMMA) Network is well organized to get information
to villagers in a culturally sensitive and useful manner.

The broader impacts of this project are far reaching. The project provides
training opportunities for 2-2.5 Ph.D students and 1 undergraduate student each
year in the interdisciplinary areas of marine ecology, marine conservation, and
marine chemical ecology. Findings from this project will be immediately
integrated into classes at Ga Tech and made available throughout Fiji via a
foundation and web site that have already set-up to support marine conservation
efforts in Fiji and marine education efforts both within Fiji and
internationally. Business and community leaders from Atlanta (via Rotary
International Service efforts) have been recruited to help organize and fund
community service and outreach projects in Fiji -- several of which are likely
to involve marine conservation and education based in part on these efforts
there. Media outlets (National Geographic, NPR, Animal Planet, Audubon Magazine,
etc.) and local Rotary clubs will be used to better disseminate these
discoveries to the public.