* 0929081
* Collaborative Research: Iron limitation, carbon metabolism and siderophore production in marine bacteria - a systems biology approach
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Eric Stabb, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 07/31/2012
* USD 134,382.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Iron limitation of heterotrophic bacteria has substantial biogeochemical
implications, including lower assimilation efficiencies and reduced
incorporation of CO2 into biomass. Marine bacterioplankton also have a large
impact on iron speciation in seawater through their production of siderophores,
ligands with a high affinity for iron. Over 99.9% of the dissolved iron in
seawater is strongly bound to organic ligands, which are likely to include
siderophores since they have functional groups and conditional stability
constants for iron that are similar to chelators detected in situ. Iron
limitation and siderophore synthesis are linked since these ligands are produced
specifically in response to low intracellular iron concentrations. Neither
process is completely understood in marine bacteria. For instance, the
production of iron binding ligands in seawater unexpectedly increases, not
decreases when iron is added to HNLC regions. One possible explanation is the
role of carbon, which complicates studies of both iron limitation and
siderophore synthesis. The extent to which low iron concentrations reduce
bacterioplankton growth efficiencies or productivity in situ is not well-
quantified because of the rapid stimulation of primary production that occurs
after iron limitation of phytoplankton is relieved. The resulting increase in
available carbon makes it is difficult to distinguish between direct and
indirect iron (i.e. carbon) limitation of marine bacteria. Carbon source and
availability may also play a secondary but important role in regulating
siderophore production, which can be either stimulated or repressed by the
addition of glucose. The objective of this project is to model the interacting
gene regulatory networks that control iron acquisition and carbon metabolism in
gamma -proteobacteria, specifically Vibrio fischeri. Iron and carbon regulatory
pathways are tightly linked in a complex web of relationships mediated by global
transcriptional regulators (Fur and CRP) and the small RNA RyhB. In order to
construct a gene regulatory network model, the PIs will use an integrated
systems biology approach that combines computational, bioinformatics based
research and laboratory experimentation. Predictions of gene expression,
siderophore production and the flux of iron with changing environmental
conditions will be validated by quantifying gene expression using qRT-PCR and
global transcriptome analyses, as well as determining iron quotas and iron
uptake rates.

Intellectual Merit: This study will contribute to the general understanding of
iron speciation in the upper ocean by elucidating the interactions between iron
and carbon limitation, carbon source and siderophore production. The gene
regulatory network model will be capable of identifying environmental variables
critical to siderophore production and evaluating potential biomarkers for iron
limitation. This project will facilitate the discovery of new genes and control
mechanisms involved in iron metabolism and shed light on other processes such as
virulence and luminescence, which utilize the same or similar interactions and
transcription factors. Finally, this approach also provides a framework for
synthesizing information on the genetic level and using it to make predictions
about processes such as siderophore production that are ecologically important.

Broader Impacts: This project will enhance infrastructure for scientific
research and education by mentoring young scientists and supporting both
outreach programs and course development at several educational levels. Support
is requested for graduate students to participate in the proposed research and
all three PIs will recruit undergraduates for summer internships, often
targeting underrepresented groups. Research Experiences for Teachers supplements
are requested to allow two high school science educators to participate in our
research at the Skidaway Institute of Oceanography and design a laboratory
exercise that will illustrate how microbes respond to nutrient limitation. The
aim is to provide a research experience that will strengthen collaborations
among educators at both the local and national levels.