* 0929410
* Arabidopsis 2010:    Mechanisms of NB-LRR disease resistance protein function
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Jeffery Dangl, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 08/31/2014
* USD 1,799,378.00

Plants have a sophisticated immune system that is very different in molecular
terms from that of humans, but serves the same general purpose: recognize and
respond to pathogen infection. Plant pathogens cause diseases that result in the
loss of up to 30% of crops annually, and this is often after the required fresh
water has been added to the crops, and despite the use of chemicals to control
infections. Thus, learning about how the plant immune system works, in order to
'help plants help themselves' will result in saving lots of fresh water and lead
to environmentally sustainable agronomic practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project fits the 2009 call for the NSF Arabidopsis 2010 Programs heading (2)
Adaptation to the environment. The research will "determine the function of
Arabidopsis genes and gene networks involved in plant responses to the
environment and in adaptation to biotic or abiotic conditions." The project
concerns the control of intracellular receptors of the plant immune system. A
multi-disciplinary approach combining genetics (forward and reverse),
biochemistry and cell biology will be used to understand how these receptors,
called NB-LRR proteins, are assembled into a pre-activation, signal competent
state and to define how they are specifically activated after infection.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: An increasingly detailed view of how the
plant immune system functions to mitigate losses is emerging from a community
focus on the application of Arabidopsis to important problems in plant
pathology. The reference plant species, Arabidopsis thaliana, is useful for
studies of nearly all classes of pathogens that are agronomically relevant.
Hence, a broader impact of this project is that the results will significantly
inform translation to crop species. This has already begun with the cloning and
utilization of genes from crops originally identified in Arabidopsis. The use of
genetics, molecular biology, biochemistry, and cell biology makes this project
an excellent training ground for scientists from undergraduate to post-doctoral
levels. Topics investigated are incorporated into a course taught by the PI on
'Strategies of Host-Microbe Interactions'. The PI's lab actively seeks to engage
undergraduates in research projects and the PI is involved in public policy and
public debates directly related to the topics of this proposal.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Learn more about this project
at:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;http://www.bio.unc.edu/dangl/lab/projects/index.htm