* 0929557
* CincySTEM Urban Initiatuve
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Rebecca Ruckel, Cincinnati Public Schools
* Standard Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 08/31/2013
* USD 731,641.00

Project CincySTEM will enhance cutting-edge science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics (STEM) education for minority students enrolled in the new
Hughes STEM High School in Cincinnati, Ohio. Over a three-year period, the
project will directly impact more than 900 minority students through CincySTEM
activities (around big ideas such as energy) that focus on increasing the
knowledge and skills of students in STEM and about STEM careers, particularly in
science. These activities will follow an interdisciplinary approach, use the 5E
learning cycle instructional model, and adhere to the Ohio Academic Content
Standards Benchmarks and Grade Level Indicators. CincySTEM will enhance teaching
and learning through inquiry-based labs using high-tech tools such as digital
video cameras, hand-held iPod touches, TI Inspire Graphing calculators, Water
Quality LabPro Starter Kits, Davis Wireless Weather Stations, and ProScope HR
digital microscopes. These devices will enable students to shoot and edit video,
calculate and analyze live data, and design and present information via a
website from any location, including real-world STEM work environments in
partner institutions and agencies.

To prepare teachers for this STEM-based technology-rich curriculum, ongoing
professional development will be provided through the FUSION Professional
Practice and Demonstration Laboratory, housed at the STEM high school, which
bridges pre- and in-service teacher education activities in a real school
setting. The leadership team has a wealth of experiences in science and
mathematics, STEM education and education research, urban education, teachers
and teaching, classroom dynamics, partnerships, and curriculum and instruction.
Four experienced lead teachers will work with the 18 science teachers to
implement the CincySTEM activities. Two of lead teachers have been released
full-time by the district to work on this project.

The research will explore what ways, if any, does the CincySTEM initiative in
the context of a new STEM high school have a positive impact on the development
of STEM knowledge, skills, and interest in STEM careers for students
participating in the project. Assessment and evaluation will involve qualitative
and quantitative methods, measures, and modes of analysis, including classroom
observations; interviews (teachers, students, and partners); student work;
lesson plans and e-portfolios; and descriptive statistics (Chi-square, pre-post
t-tests, ANOVA). Since all teachers and students will be impacted by this
project, standardized test scores from other district high schools will be used
for comparison.

CincySTEM will advance discovery and understanding in the field while promoting,
teaching, training, and learning through its rich curriculum. It targets
underserved students, provides access to a rigorous course of study, and links
STEM activities to workforce development through multiple STEM expert partners
(e.g., Environmental Engineering Technology and Energy Efficiency and Renewable
Energy departments at Cincinnati State Technical and Community College; science
and mathematics education, chemistry, biology, engineering, and mathematics
schools and departments at the University of Cincinnati; the Vice President for
Educational Solutions at the The Primax Group; and the Cincinnati Youth
Collaborative). Dissemination will be addressed through school and state
affiliations (e.g., Ohio STEM Learning Network), print and electronic media, and
professional outlets.