* 0929617
* EAGER: A Novel Approach to Study Earth's Oldest Environments and Biosphere:  Tidal, Shelf, and Deep Ocean Habitats in the &amp;gt;3.7 Ga Isua Greenstone Belt, Greenland
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2010,05/31/2011
* Nora Noffke, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 05/31/2011
* USD 58,026.00

EAGER: A novel approach to study Earth's oldest environments and biosphere:
Tidal, shelf, and deep ocean habitats in the &gt;3.7 Ga Isua Greenstone Belt,
Greenland&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nora Noffke, Old Dominion
University&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0929617&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;The Isua
Greenstone Belt (IGB), Greenland, comprises the oldest, &gt;3.7 Ga sediments
preserved in Earth history. Until now the firm dogma is that all IGB rocks would
be highly metamorphosed and therefore information on Earth?s oldest
paleoenvironment and the origin of life would be erased or so strongly masked
that no firm conclusions can be drawn. This proposed project would open a new
perspective by demonstrating that the IGB constitutes a valuable archive on
Earth?s deepest time, and that it requires only newly developed methods to read
this unique information.&lt;br/&gt;Indeed, the preliminary work of the PI?s
working group points to the possibility that in the IGB already diverse marine
paleoenvironments including a tidal, a shelf, and a deep ocean setting, existed.
The team has developed a new method to distinguish any type of primary cyclicity
in the meta-sediments (tidal and Milancovic cyclicity). Based on those
preliminary yet stunning results, PI would like to conduct an exploratory study
on those unique rock successions, and to gain appropriate data to confirm our
initial observations on photos. The results are not conforming to the current
status quo of knowledge of the scientific community. &lt;br/&gt;Noffke would
travel from Washington, DC to Copenhagen and from there to Nuuk, Greenland. From
here, they would be transported by helicopter to the study area itself. The trip
should take place from mid of July to mid of August 2010. This is the best
window with respect to the local weather in Greenland (the arctic summer).
&lt;br/&gt;PI would visit three outcrops in the IGB. The locations are known
exactly from GPS data. She would measure the rock successions with respect to
the tidal and Milancovic cyclicities that she has detected in photo scans. In
addition, she would conduct structural geological measurements in the field to
gain an overview into the tectonic frame of each setting. This would allow her
to later understand textural structures in thin-sections, and to diagnose, if
apparent bedding, sedimentary structures such as ripple cross stratification,
are of tectonic, metamorphic or indeed primary origin. &lt;br/&gt;The team would
camp for 2 weeks in the field close to the inland ice. The rock samples would be
shipped by GEUS from Isua to Norfolk, Virginia. They would return again by
helicopter via the Survey base camp, and then travel back to the USA. The field
data on the type and thickness of the bedding at all 3 locations will be used
for spectral analyses.