* 0929989
* WORKSHOP: VL/HCC'09 Doctoral Consortium: Democratizing Access to Computational Tools
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2010
* Amy Ko, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 05/31/2010
* USD 14,880.00

This is funding to support a Doctoral Consortium (workshop) for about 10-14
promising graduate students, along with a panel of 4-5 distinguished research
faculty mentors, which will take place in conjunction with the 2009 IEEE
Symposium on Visual Languages and Human-Centric Computing (VL/HCC 2009), to be
held September 20-24, 2009, in Corvallis, Oregon, and sponsored by the IEEE
Computer Society. The long-running VL/HCC series occupies a unique niche among
HCI and Programming Language conferences, in that it focuses specifically on how
to help humans successfully develop and use software. The diversity and ubiquity
of people's goals, interactions, and concerns with information systems is
continually increasing. Not only does interactive computer software permeate
many individuals' working lives, people commonly rely on computing and
information systems for leisure and home activities as well. As a result, end
users now expect considerable flexibility and control in their interactions with
computer software. For many, it is no longer sufficient to consume the packaged
software and scripted tasks developed by the professional software industry;
they now must produce their own computational solutions to a wide variety of
problems, including spreadsheet models, web sites, educational media and
simulations, automated business procedures, and visualizations. To produce such
software, even for domain-specific problems, end users must look beyond surface-
level interaction with computers and acquire the conceptual models and skills of
computational thinking. But current advances toward computational thinking by
end users are not evenly distributed across all segments of the population.
Thus, this year's VL/HCC Doctoral Consortium, the seventh to be funded by NSF in
this series, will focus on expanding the benefits of computational thinking to
diverse populations. Ensuring that designers of computational languages and
tools consider the needs of populations historically overlooked in information
technology will increase the chance that these individuals/groups are able to
learn and use the more powerful tools that are fast becoming essential to
information literacy. At the same time, such efforts may lead researchers to
identify new software construction metaphors and techniques that increase the
usability of their languages and environments more generally. The workshop's
primary goal is to stimulate graduate students' and other researchers' thinking
about how varying communication media, representations, and problem-solving
support affect end users' willingness and ability to access, manipulate, and
program solutions to their work or everyday problems. What are the special needs
of disadvantaged populations? How can computational problem-solving tools and
devices be designed to meet these needs? The workshop will bring together and
build community among young researchers working on different aspects of these
problems from the perspectives of diverse fields including computer science, the
social sciences, and education. It will guide the work of these new researchers
by providing an opportunity for experts in the research field (as well as their
peers) to give them advice, in that student participants will make formal
presentations of their work during the workshop and will receive feedback from a
faculty panel. The feedback is geared to helping students understand and
articulate how their work is positioned relative to other human-computer
interaction research, whether their topics are adequately focused for thesis
research projects, whether their methods are correctly chosen and applied, and
whether the results are appropriately analyzed and presented. As in prior years
the VL/HCC 2009 Doctoral Consortium will be part of the regular conference
program. A 2-page extended abstract of each participant's work will be published
in the conference proceedings.

Broader Impacts: The workshop will help shape ongoing and future research
projects aimed at alleviating a pressing problem of relevance to a great many
people within our society. This event will promote discovery and learning, by
encouraging the student researchers to explore a difficult and challenging open
problem, through involvement of a panel of well-known researchers whose task is
to provide constructive feedback, and through inclusion of other conference
participants who will also learn from and provide additional feedback to the
students and to each other. The PI and the members of the organizing committee
will make special efforts to attract a diverse and interdisciplinary group of
student participants, with special attention paid to recruitment of minorities
and females. The PI expects that most of the students supported by this award
will come from U.S. universities but as in past years, due to the highly
international make-up of the research community, a few non-U.S. students may be
invited to participate as well.