* 0929167
* Collaborative Research: Function, activity, and adaptation of microbial communities in geochemically diverse subseafloor habitats
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Allison Beauregard Schwartz, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2013
* USD 470,582.00

The integration of both laboratory and field-based chemical and microbiological
measurements into a quantitative predictive framework is crucial to
understanding the microbial ecology of marine systems. This project work will
provide a quantitative assessment of the functional diversity, activity, and
physiological adaptation of microbial communities in geochemically diverse
subseafloor habitats. Results will guide development of models for linking
biogeochemical processes with particular microbial communities at deep-sea
hydrothermal vents, with implications for other marine habitats as well. The
focus of the effort is at Axial Seamount, a well-studied, active, deep-sea
hydrothermal seamount in the NE Pacific Ocean. Samples already collected from
Axial, along with a field program in Year 2, will serve as the foundation for
the three objectives, which are to: &lt;br/&gt;1. Determine and quantify the
functional diversity and activity (expression) of key subseafloor microbial
lineages at Axial Seamount. &lt;br/&gt;2. Determine physiological adaptations to
the subseafloor habitat by quantifying the growth response of Axial Seamount
isolates to in-situ geochemical parameters. &lt;br/&gt;3. Develop a quantitative
predictive framework for linking particular types of geochemical vent conditions
with specific microbial functional groups and activities at Axial Seamount.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific outcomes of this project include the creation of
a comprehensive quantitative microbiological and chemical dataset on diffuse and
adjacent high-temperature vents within Axial Seamount. This database will
include chemical measurements (gases, nutrients, metals, isotopes, and
calculated Gibbs free energies) relevant to microbial metabolic processes that
can be compared to microbiological data (abundance and activity of microbial
lineages and functional genes, growth rates of subseafloor isolates at relevant
environmental conditions) using statistical analysis to identify how specific
microbial activity is linked to the geochemical environment. This project builds
on previous studies of microbial population structure and geochemical
measurements at Axial Seamount and addresses critical gaps in current knowledge
and understanding that are impeding progress of modeling hydrothermal systems.
Results will increase understanding of deep-sea hydrothermal ecosystems as well
as provide new insights into controls on the distribution and activity of marine
microbial communities throughout the world's oceans.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project is interdisciplinary in
nature, at the interface of microbial ecology and deep-sea oceanography with
direct links to international and national research and educational
organizations. Methods development and results from this work will complement
current subseafloor investigations at ridge flanks and active hydrothermal
systems, including the NSF-Microbial Observatory on the Juan de Fuca Ridge in
the North Pacific and the upcoming Integrated Ocean Drilling Program's North
Pond expedition in the North Atlantic, as well as integrate with the newly
developed NSF Research Coordination Network focused on the deep biosphere.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate and graduate students will be involved in
curriculum development and laboratory and field research, allowing for one-on-
one mentoring opportunities at the Marine Biological Laboratory (MBL) and
Northwest Florida State College (NWF). In addition, the project includes a
unique education and outreach effort that links MBL, a research institution,
with NWF, a community college, in order to impact a group traditionally far
removed from research science. During the three-year project, four community
college students from NWF will actively participate in a research program at MBL
through an internship opportunity. In addition, a classroom module incorporating
real scientific data from this research program will be developed to greatly
expand the number of community college students impacted by the work. Through
the partnership, real cutting-edge science will be accessible to NWF students.
Dissemination of the developed module to other community college instructors
will facilitate an even broader impact, and this novel education and outreach
effort will serve as a model to promote other researcher-community college
teacher partnership programs.