* 0929575
* Studying Technology-based Strategies for Enhancing Student Interest in STEM Careers through Algebra Curricula in Grades 5-9
* EHR,DRL
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2013
* Christopher Dede, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen King
* 12/31/2013
* USD 1,463,660.00

DRL - 0929575 Studying Technology-based Strategies for Enhancing Student
Interest in STEM Careers through Algebra Curricula in Grades 5-9 Dede,
Christopher J. Harvard University

The investigators seek are examining the relationship between specific
technology-based motivational activities and grade 5 to 9 student interest in
STEM careers through a variety of classroom-based experiences. Students will be
exposed to the work of STEM professionals, take a scripted two-day mathematics
lesson, solve problems in algebra, and respond to questionnaires immediately
after and six months after the experience. The study will vary the technological
context of the induction experiences and hold constant the instructional
component. They will test a series of specific hypotheses relating motivation,
self-efficacy, STEM career interest, and mathematics learning to activity
assignment. Student induction activities will involve watching career-related
videos that provide the context of the to-be-solved problems; assuming the
identity of a STEM professional in a multi-user virtual environment (MUVE); or
receiving a narrative description of the problem-solving context from the
teacher using PowerPoint-like presentation media.

Students will be provided opportunities to explore, represent, and analyze real-
life situations which involve varying quantities based on a model of how
professionals use algebra. They expect students to find such activities more
motivating and have longer lasting effects than found in typical instruction.