* 0929075
* Feeding and food limitation in copepod nauplii, the neglected life stage
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* William Kimmerer, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2014
* USD 540,702.00

This project will investigate feeding by copepod nauplius larvae, the most
abundant metazoans in the sea. It will answer three questions: 1) How does food
selection by adults and nauplii differ when they are fed multiple prey species
in the laboratory? 2) How does food selection by adults and nauplii differ when
they are feeding on natural prey assemblages? and, 3) How do growth,
development, and survival differ between copepodites and nauplii when their
growth is food limited? Comparative experiments and field-based measurements
will contrast the food consumed, and the effects of food limitation, between
nauplii and later life stages. This contrast will include attributes of food
such as size, taxon, and motility, and will include experiments with cultured
prey offered singly or in a mixture, and natural prey, and apply genetic
techniques to determine prey consumption by a predatory copepod. Copepods will
be collected from the San Francisco Estuary, with four species selected for
experiments to span taxonomic groups, sizes, salinity ranges, and general
feeding behavior. A variety of techniques will be applied to account for the
inevitable biases and limitations of each; all but one have previously been
applied in our laboratories. These will include laboratory feeding experiments
using cultured prey individually and in mixtures, and experiments using natural
prey. Consumption of prey in experimental bottles will be measured as
chlorophyll concentration and through particle counts by microscopy and flow
cytometry. Radioactively labeled prey will be used in short incubations to
determine feeding on particular prey types. Samples from the field will be
examined for gut fluorescence. Separate experiments will determine how nauplii
and copepodites survive and grow at different concentrations of food.
Investigations of feeding by a predatory copepod (Tortanus dextrilobatus) will
use molecular techniques to identify mitochondrial and nuclear DNA from diverse
suspected prey species. Specific primers will be developed for common
zooplankton species consumed by T. dextrilobatus in the laboratory. General
primers and screening protocols developed here will be useful for identifying
food web interactions in other estuarine communities.

Copepod nauplii are important both in their diverse trophic roles in ocean
foodwebs and in the population dynamics of copepods. Nauplii have a completely
different feeding apparatus from later stages, and the first feeding stage can
be very sensitive to starvation, making these life stages critical to population
dynamics. Yet extant copepod population models treat nauplii as miniature
adults. This work will provide valuable input to the growing efforts at modeling
ocean ecosystems. This project will also support two Master's theses at San
Francisco State University, a minority-serving institution. The project will
provide continuing opportunities for training undergraduates, including URM
students, in genetics and field ecology at the Romberg Tiburon Center for
Environmental studies, an NSF FSML-supported field station on San Francisco Bay.