* 0929263
* AIChE Student Western Regional Conference April 3-4, 2009 in Davis, CA
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2009,06/30/2009
* Tonya Kuhl, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 06/30/2009
* USD 2,000.00

CBET-0929263&lt;br/&gt;Kuhl&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Western Regional Student Conference has been
long standing tradition where students join in networking, professional
development, design competitions, and make presentations on their research. The
event provides students opportunities to showcase their engineering talent,
innovative thought, and communication skills. Students who participate in
undergrad research are able to compete in the Paper Competition, which entails
presenting their research in front of judicators from industries and academia.
Students may also demonstrate their engineering skills by partaking in the
Chem-E Car Competition. This popular competition allows students to work in
teams to design, build, and operate cars the size of shoe boxes which run on
alternative fuel sources. The main goal of this competition is to be the most
accurate in reaching the required distance specified one hour before the
competition. Months prior to the competition students are required to use
engineering fundamentals to design and construct their vehicles and establish
baseline operation through testing and safety assurances. Along with running the
car, the teams need to present their design and demonstrate safe engineering
practice in the Poster Competition to judges as well as students and conference
sponsors. Besides opportunities to compete and present their research, the
conference offers a venue for networking with industry representatives at the
career and graduate school fair. Another opportunity for students to interact
with industry representatives is through professional development
workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is
expected that more than 100 chemical engineering students will attend this event
from as many as 14 universities from the California-Nevada region. Currently, it
is confirmed that students will be coming from the following institutions: UC
Davis, UC Berkeley. UC Santa Barbara, UC San Diego, UCLA, Stanford, University
of Nevada Reno, California State University Long Beach, and Cal Poly San Luis
Obispo. The event is also open to the general public and presents a broad means
to engage a diverse spectrum of chemical engineering students. Our key note
speaker, Bryan Yeh, will give an in depth presentation on alternative fuel
sources and technology of the future. Bryan is Vice President of SAIC, an
alternative fuels science and technology company in the Bay Area. NSF funding
will provide support to ensure that all students, regardless of financial
ability, are able to participate in this opportunity that goes beyond normal
classroom learning, builds community, and encourages creative behavior.