* 0929516
* Quantum Control of Light and Matter - Gordon Research Conference
* MPS,PHY
* 04/15/2009,03/31/2010
* Yaron Silberberg, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Wendell Talbot Hill
* 03/31/2010
* USD 5,000.00

This award supports registration and/or travel support of graduate students
and/or postdocs attending &lt;br/&gt;The Quantum Control of Light and Matter
Gordon Research Conference for 2009 which is the sixth in a series, established
in 1999. The conference was created to foster and encourage the new and rapidly
growing subfield of physical science known as Quantum Control (or Coherent
Control). The early work in this field was devoted primarily to the physics and
chemistry of phase-controlled optical fields to control unimolecular processes
such as dissociation and ionization in the gas phase. In the intervening decade,
the field has grown much larger, encompassing quantum coherence aspects in sub-
femtosecond laser physics, ultrafast x-ray physics and materials science,
quantum information science, as well as gas and liquid phase coherent control of
chemical reactions. The conference includes people from several sub-disciplines
of AMO Physics and Physical Chemistry, including those working with cold
degenerate atomic gases, femtosecond and attosecond pulses, ultra-high laser
fields, high harmonics, solid state physics, ultrafast x-rays, and applied
mathematics for control problems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the
conference is to bring together internationally leading scientists as well as
young researchers and students active (or particularly interested) in the field
of quantum control. As such, it has an impact far beyond the scholarly benefit
to the participants. The conference has become the most important world forum
for new research results and trends in this rapidly expanding field. The
interdisciplinary character of the field contributes to this broad impact, and
this will be emphasized.