* 0929852
* Workshop on Sustainable Air and Water Quality in the Middle East
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2010
* Charles Kolb, Columbia College
* Standard Grant
* Carleen Maitland
* 06/30/2010
* USD 49,595.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
OISE-0929852&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Zafra
Lerman&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Columbia
College&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Workshop on Sustainable Air and Water
Quality in the Middle East&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will conduct a workshop
on Sustainable Air and Water Quality in the Middle East. The workshop will be
held in conjunction with the fourth conference ?Frontiers of Chemical Science
IV: Research and Education in the Middle East ? A bridge to Peace and
International Development,? that is planned to be held in Amman, Jordan on
November 14-19, 2009. Scientists from developing and developed nations will
discuss and define the issues critical to urban and regional air and water
quality in the Middle East. They will develop new approaches to ensure
sustainable levels of potable water for the region. In the Middle East, regional
action requires cooperation across multiple national boundaries and
collaboration among peoples currently divided by a range of ethnic, religious,
political, and economic differences. Scientists from a range of Middle Eastern
nations, aided by knowledgeable and experienced scientists from developed
nations, will meet to define the environmental challenges facing the region,
develop monitoring strategies to characterize and track pollution levels and
allow sustainable economic growth coupled with improved environmental quality.
In terms of the broader impacts, the ultimate goal of the workshop is to
stimulate the needed multinational collaborative energy and spirit to solve
important regional problems and to develop collaborative research proposals for
international funding agencies and regional governments. US scientists involved
in this effort will advance their professionalism through international
experience and exposure beyond the nation's borders. Their effort will help
solve regional, if not global, air and water quality problems and promote
collaborations in a region vital to US national interests. This workshop is co-
funded by the Atmospheric Chemistry program in the Geosciences Directorate, by
the Analytical and Surface Chemistry program in the Mathematical and Physical
Sciences Directorate, and by the Environmental Remediation program in the
Engineering Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;