* 0929216
* Implementation Grant Academic Enhancement of the STEM College at Johnson C. Smith University
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Magdy Attia, Johnson C. Smith University
* Continuing Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2014
* USD 2,032,727.00

Johnson C. Smith University is a private historically-black college located in
Charlotte, North Carolina. The university enrolls 1500 full-time students, of
which approximately 300 are declared science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) majors. Within the newly established STEM College, the
university awards Bachelor of Science degrees in Biology, Chemistry, General
Science, Mathematics, Mathematics Education, Computer Science/Information
Systems, Computer Engineering, and Information Systems Engineering. Johnson C.
Smith University proposes to build on the successes of the previous HBCU-UP
project. This project entitled "Academic Enhancement of the STEM College at
Johnson C. Smith University" adds the promise of sustainable impacts from new
and exciting activities arising from "lessons learned" during the initial
implementation project. These activities include establishing a Faculty/Student
Undergraduate Research Community designed to revise, enrich and create
transformative STEM courses and programs; establishing and developing
faculty/student collaborations and partnerships with STEM related industries,
research centers, laboratories and other higher education institutions;
providing STEM faculty "Market-Driven Re-Tooling" opportunities in pedagogy and
discipline specific development; and enhancing STEM student retention,
graduation and critical transitioning to graduate studies and/or the STEM
workplace.