* 0929758
* EAGER Collaborative Research:  Developing Transformation Technologies for  Porphyra
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2012
* Arthur Grossman, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 12/31/2012
* USD 26,805.00

The genome of the marine red alga Porphyra umbilicalis is being sequenced by the
Joint Genome Institute. The sequence information will help scientists address
many fundamental questions, because Porphyra spp. belong to an ancient
eukaryotic lineage, are important human foods ("nori"), have complex life
histories, and---even compared to other intertidal organisms--- possess an
unusually stress-tolerant metabolism. Computer-based analyses of the new genomic
data will be sufficient to address some research questions, but most studies
(e.g., the basis of Porphyra's tolerance to extreme drying or high light) will
require experimental approaches based upon bioinformatics analyses. This project
will develop the essential technology of stable genetic transformation in
Porphyra to make such experimental work possible. The investigators will focus
on transforming neutral spores of P. umbilicalis because these abundantly-
produced spores lack a cell wall. This should make it possible to transform the
cell by electroporation, among other approaches. Native Porphyra promoters of
Porphyra genes will be used, based on information provided by the JGI sequencing
project, and codon-optimized reporter genes will be synthesized. Spores will be
treated with selective antibiotics to recover transformed sporelings, and the
stability of the transformation will be assessed as sporelings mature to adults.
The PIs and a postdoctoral associate will work across both participating
laboratories to develop transformation technologies. The postdoctoral associate
will investigate reproductive pathways or stress physiology during the
development of transformation techniques. S/he will be well-prepared to make
individual and collaborative advances with the Porphyra model system due to the
comprehensive postdoctoral training and participation in the Porphyra NSF
Research Coordination Network. This project will allow the scientific community
to use the data from the whole genome sequencing project in experimental
research on Porphyra, leading to fundamental advances in the areas of
metabolism, evolution, and developmental biology.