* 0929981
* Development of New Instrumention (Early Career): Laser Decomposition Isotope Interface (LADII)- Total Isotope Analysis of Nanomolar Amounts of Sulfate and Nitrate
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Greg Michalski, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2012
* USD 83,171.00

0929981 Michalski

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This award will fund developing a Laser Decomposition Isotope Interface (LADII)
for preparing very small (nanomolar) quantities of compounds for oxygen isotope
analysis in sulfate and nitrate. The system to be developed will use a carbon
dioxide laser to produce sufficient gas from nonamolar samples to also perform
delta 34S, delta 15N and Delta 33S analysis. In addition, triple oxygen isotope
analysis will be possible at ~0.2 permil precision. The enhanced precision and
smaller sample size will allow oxygen isotope analysis in perchlorate, phosphate
and oxalate, which are common contaminants. The PI will also analyze
precipitation samples to better understand isotopic distributions which will, in
turn, assist in constraining atmospheric chemical transport models. Atmospheric
deposition and soil biogeochemistry will be assessed from central Chinese
speleothem analysis. Watershed samples from the desert southwest and the central
US will be analyzed for sulfate and nitrate isotope ratios. The LADII interface
is expected to have broad applicability due to its capability for rapid, precise
sample processing and its ability to process extremely limited sample
quantities. Studies heretofore hindered by sample size will be open to isotopic
investigations. The instrument development will involve three PhD, one MS, and
three undergraduate students working in the PI?s laboratory. The semi-automated
system will also reduce the person-hours needed for analysis - releasing time
for additional scientific directions and efforts.

***