* 0929004
* RUI:  Investigating Natural Seepage of Light Alkanes from Oil and Natural Gas Deposits
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Lambert Doezema, Loyola Marymount University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 08/31/2012
* USD 152,102.00

Because of the importance of hydrocarbons in various facets of atmospheric
chemistry, determining where the hydrocarbons come from (sources) and the
various pathways by which they are removed from the atmosphere (sinks) is of
considerable importance. The total source strength for a particular hydrocarbon
over a finite time period (usually a year) can be determined for geographical
areas of various sizes - for individual cities, regions, countries, and the
planet. One potentially underreported source of methane that has recently
attracted attention is geologic emissions, including thermogenically derived
seepage. Natural seepage is categorized as macroseepage, which involves
outgassing from large vents, or microseepage, which is not visible. Although
macroseepage is estimated to be a larger source of methane, microseepage has
recently been estimated to be a relatively significant methane source (between
10 and 25 Tg annually). However, this estimation is rough, as the majority of
microseepage studies have focused on sites in Europe and a handful of western
states. The studies have found a wide range in microseepage fluxes that depend
on a variety of factors including season, coastal influence, and a wide variety
of geological factors such as soil type, depth of deposit, and proximity of
nearby faults. This project will lead to a better understanding of the regional,
national, and global budgets of methane and six light alkanes (ethane, propane,
n-butane, i-butane, n-pentane, and i-pentane). Specifically, the contribution of
oil and natural gas emissions via natural seepage will be quantified using flux
chamber measurements for the seven gases.

The work on this project is well suited to undergraduates. The students who help
build the methane analytical system will learn a great deal about gas
chromatography to supplement their knowledge gained in an Instrumental Analysis
course. Students that work on the data collection will gain an insight into
Atmospheric Chemistry field work and learn how to analyze samples using highly
specialized analytical systems. This work will also allow students to learn some
aspects of Atmospheric Chemistry, a subject that they are not currently taught
at LMU. Students will also work on data analysis, which will include
identifying, integrating, and quantifying chromatography peaks and calculating
flux rates of different light alkanes. Students will also be fully involved in
the dissemination of data including presentations at conferences and writing
journal articles.