* 0929362
* USA-Tunisia-France Cooperation for Next Generation Material Model Development
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2010
* Tasnim Hassan, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 08/31/2010
* USD 4,950.00

This proposed planning visit is to further develop research collaboration
between Dr. Tasmin Hassan from North Carolina State University, Dr. Prof. Kacem
Sai from Ecole Nationale d'Ing√©nieurs de Sfax (ENIS) in Tunisia, and Dr. George
Cailletaudat from the Ecole de Mines des Paris (PariTech) in France on the topic
of next generation material models. The anticipated outcomes of the planning
visit are future collaborative research proposals on this topic.

Operating loads, pressure and temperature levels of chemical and power
generation plants are gradually increasing in order to achieve higher efficiency
and to enhance sustainability, thereby reducing environmental impact. Modern
alloys and steels are being developed by material scientists to sustain this
extreme load environment. However, many low cycle fatigue (LCF) failure
phenomena (e.g., influence of dynamic strain aging on LCF life at various load
rates and temperatures) demonstrated by these materials cannot be simulated
using existing material models. Hence, use of new materials in structures and
machines requires a new material model for design and analysis. It is
anticipated that the desired material model improvement can be achieved by
overcoming deficiencies of the material models developed by Hassan, Sai and
Cailletaud and incorporating modeling features such as grain size and boundary,
dislocation type and density.

Using the proposed travel grant, Hassan and a graduate student from North
Carolina State University will visit Sai's research group in Tunisia and
Cailletaud's research group in France. This trilateral cooperation provides the
US scientific community with access to facilities and expertise that will
enhance research efforts currently underway at North Carolina State University.