* 0929983
* Acquisition of a continuous flow isotope ratio mass analyzer for tropical paleoclimatology
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Michael Evans, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2011
* USD 173,181.00

0929983&lt;br/&gt;Evans&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5)." This award
will facilitate the purchase of a continuous flow isotope ratio mass
spectrometer. Requested is a Thermo Delta V with Conflo-IV interface. This
instrument is being requested to increase sample sensitivity (and thereby
decrease necessary sample size) and because current departmental instrument
resources are fully committed. The instrument will be interfaced with existing
peripherals These include a Gasbench-II and PAL-80 autosampler allowing
carbonate and water prep, and a Costech High Temperature Generator/Elemental
Combustion System (HTG/ECS). The PI will assume overall operation, maintenance
and oversight responsibility. A half-time laboratory manager will be hired on
grant support to assist with instrument operation, maintenance and training.
Students will also play a major role. UMd will contribute funds towards the
purchase of this instrument. In addition, the University will renovate space to
include an IRMS and wet lab within the Department of Geology. The PI will use
this instrument for research in two broad themes, Tropical isotope
dendroclimatology, and Coral chronologies of interdecadal ocean/atmosphere
climate variability. Under the first theme, the PI intends to better understand
seasonality in tropical climate regions through oxygen isotopic compositions in
trees lacking annual rings. Oxygen isotopes can be used as a proxy for
convective rainfall. The in-house developed system allows high sample throughput
and rapid analyses so that very high resolution isotope proxy data can be
generated. Preliminary results show good correlation between isotope climate
reconstructions and ENSO events. Under the second theme (coral chronologies),
enhanced sample processing techniques offer precision comparable to dual-inlet
measurements in a continuous flow mode. This allows high-resolution carbon and
oxygen isotope measurements from coral samples at a rate of ~120 per day. Multi-
decadal proxy measurements can thus be made to better understand past climates
(and model current and future ones). While forming the basis of the PI?s
analytical laboratory at UMd, this instrument will be the foundation of a
climate science curriculum offering broad student training. The laboratory will
sponsor high school students and provide analytical possibilities for the senior
capstone research program and "Earth, Life and Time" Scholars program. The PI
will promote women and minorities in his program (of which he has been very
successful in the past). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***