* 0929129
* 2009 Enzymes, Co-enzymes and Metabolic Pathways Gordon Research Conference to be held July 5-10, 2009 in Waterville, New Hampshire
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2010
* Joseph Bollinger, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 05/31/2010
* USD 5,000.00

The 2009 Enzymes, Co-enzymes and Metabolic Pathways Gordon Research Conference
will be held at the Waterville Valley Resort in Waterville, New Hampshire from
July 5-10th, 2009. This conference will bring together leading academic,
industrial, and government scientists who study enzyme reactions, the principles
by which enzymes function, their de novo design and discovery, and the
biological pathways in which they participate. The research is highly
interdisciplinary, using the tools of biology, biochemistry, chemistry, physics,
biophysics, engineering, and computer science. The program includes major topics
at the frontier of the field with an excellent balance of leading senior and
younger investigators. Current, unpublished results will be disseminated by the
presentation of lectures and posters and by informal discussions, to which ample
time has been allocated. The efficient sharing of cutting-edge results and
thinking will accelerate the pace of research toward catalyst design, bioenergy,
and metabolic engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. &lt;br/&gt; The
meeting will foster professional networking and enhanced diversity in the field
of enzymology and metabolic pathways. Special efforts have been made to
encourage the participation of women and underrepresented scientists as well as
investigators from smaller colleges and universities, many of whom are included
among the session leaders and speakers. An impressive number of the attendees
will be Ph.D. students and postdoctoral scholars who will have opportunities to
interact with prominent scientists to enhance their growth and development.
&lt;br/&gt;