* 0929591
* LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Felix Okojie, Jackson State University
* Standard Grant
* A.  Hicks
* 07/31/2011
* USD 987,000.00

Jackson State University (JSU) and the Mississippi Louis Stokes Alliance for
Minority Participation (LS-MAMP) partners continue to focus their collective
resources on the rich nationwide pool of LSAMP graduates, with over 25,000
produced annually, to recruit for the LS-MAMP Bridge to the Doctorate Program
(BD). The synergy resulting from these interactions continues to transform the
instructional, research and administrative aspects of cooperation among these
institutions in ways never before envisioned. STEM disciplines targeted for BD
include: chemistry, mathematics, biology, environmental science, computer
science, and engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The requested support for the
expansion of the LS-MAMP BD prgram will continue to accelerate and increase the
numbers of minority students entering the Ph.D. pipeline. The success of the
program is based upon the theory that minority students who pursue the M.S.
degree have the potential to complete the Ph.D. degree in STEM areas if provided
sufficient financial support, rigorous curricula, committed mentoring and
national and international extensive research
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The addition of a seventh Cohort to the LS-
MAMP BD program will increase the number of students who have been supported by
the program to 82. &lt;br/&gt;The program is highly interactive covering the
first two years of the students? graduate tenure leading to the M.S. degree.
Students are expected to continue their work through to the doctorate.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the first year the students satisfy the required
core courses of their degree program and select their research advisor. During
the first summer, the students are exposed to scientific and technical workforce
environments through short term visits and internships at national or
international laboratories, corporations and universities. During this time,
students and their faculty advisors continually interact on the learning
experiences and initiation of research projects. The second year is dedicated to
research, writing the M.S. thesis, taking specialized courses and applying for
admission to doctoral programs and fellowships.&lt;br/&gt;