* 0929596
* US-Israel Workshop:  Mathematical Methods in Systems Biology, Tel Aviv, Israel, January 4-7, 2010
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Urszula Ledzewicz, Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville
* Standard Grant
* Carleen Maitland
* 08/31/2010
* USD 49,830.00

&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: OISE-0929596&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Urszula Ledzewicz&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Southern
Illinois University at Edwardsville&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: US-Israel
Workshop: Mathematical Methods in Systems Biology, Tel Aviv, Israel, January
4-7, 2010&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI is organizing a workshop ?Mathematical
Methods in Systems Biology,? which will take place January 4-7, 2010, at Tel
Aviv University in Tel Aviv, Israel. The workshop goals are to bring together
applied mathematicians and researchers working in various fields of systems
biology in order to exchange ideas and initiate and promote collaborations
motivated by problems arising in fields such as cancer modeling, detection and
treatment, epidemiology and infectious diseases, computer-assisted diagnosis,
and medical imaging. Systems biology is an actively growing field at the
interface of biology and medicine and part of its recent progress attests to the
application of mathematical methods. The motivation behind organizing this
workshop is to increase the awareness of mathematical tools that have proven
useful in analyzing and understanding biological phenomena. Pioneering work in
this direction has been performed in the United States and Israel and continues
to evolve in these two countries. The planned workshop will provide an
opportunity for contacts between US and Israeli mathematicians and biologists
and thus facilitate the establishment of more prolonged relationships between
research groups. This workshop also provides a much needed platform for close
interactions between applied mathematicians, biological and medical researchers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The organizing committee feels strongly that mathematics
has much to offer to the medical and biological communities and that methods and
techniques from mathematics can deepen the understanding of many problems in
systems biology. This workshop will introduce applied mathematicians to
challenging and open problems from systems biology that can benefit from an
application of mathematical tools and, at the same time, show system biologists
new options that mathematical methods can bring to the solution of their
problems. The workshop is expected to initiate new collaborations and strengthen
existing collaborations while at the same time bringing new mathematicians and
scientists into this exciting interdisciplinary field. The results of the
workshop will be disseminated by publishing proceedings as a special issue in
the journal ?Mathematical Biosciences and Engineering? and further research
contacts and collaborations will be fostered through the workshop web site. This
project was co-funded by the Computational Mathematics and Mathematical Biology
program in the Mathematical Sciences division.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;