* 0929676
* Animando a Estudiantes con Technologia - Encouraging students in the field of information technology
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Jill Denner, ETR Associates
* Standard Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 08/31/2013
* USD 924,882.00

Animando a Estudiantes con Technolog√≠a (Encouraging Students in the Field of
Information Technology or AET) is an ITEST Strategies project targeting
elementary, middle, and high school Latino students in Watsonville, CA. Project
partners include the Pajaro Valley Unified School District and the Math
Engineering Science Achievement Program (MESA) at the University of California,
Santa Cruz. AET builds on the work of several successful NSF-funded initiatives
including Girls Creating Games (HRD 02-17221) and Math and Parent Partners in
the Southwest (ESI 99-01275) by testing a model of parent engagement and
leadership (PEAL) in combination with an out-of-school youth IT education
program. The PEAL model creates a strong network of community support for IT
learning while enhancing parent capacity to understand and utilize
cyberinfrastructure and cyberlearning. A Parent Leadership Committee will be
formed to assess community IT resources and needs, while parent workshops and
family activities provide an understanding of IT tools and career paths.

The project uses structured, hands-on, seven-week, out-of-school IT education
modules (Intensives) in conjunction with bridging activities to maintain youth
engagement in IT and in the AET community of learners. The IT Intensive Program
offered to 5th graders increases IT literacy through a project-based urvey
course of various computer applications taught by high school near-peer
educators. Topics include computer basics, electronic communication, web
navigation, multi-media presentations, and virtual reality. Intensives at the
middle school level increase IT fluency through digital game design and 3D
animation (both of which teach basic programming concepts and project
management), support the development of academic fundamentals, and teach youth
to apply math and engineering concepts. Both middle and high school students
participate in MESA activities designed to build teamwork, leadership, and
academic success. Successful navigation of these transitions, along with support
for IT interests, development of IT fluency and awareness of careers will
contribute significantly to realizing career options in IT for Latino youth.
Additionally, a Summer Teacher Colloquium provides educators with embedded
teacher training in IT skills, content, and pedagogy.

AET is projected to reach 175 youth participants each year. The project
evaluation will be conducted by SRI International. A mixed-methods approach will
be used to assess the feasibility of combining the PEAL model and Bridged
Intensives to increase the IT interest and readiness of Latino students,
families and the local community.