* 0929057
* Reproductive pairing, conflict and offspring size in a marine snail.
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Richard Grosberg, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2014
* USD 744,849.00

All organisms face two allocation trade-offs: one between many small versus a
few large offspring; and the second between present and future reproduction.
Nowhere are these allocation trade-offs more apparent than in the vast range of
variation in egg, offspring, and clutch size exhibited among species of marine
invertebrates. It has become increasingly clear that, in many taxa of marine and
terrestrial organisms, there is substantial intraspecific variation for egg and
hatching size. This project focuses on a rarely considered, but potentially
widespread, source of variation in egg and offspring size, namely, the
inevitable conflicts of interest that arise over the optimal distribution of
parental resources among siblings. The reproductive pairing system - because of
its effects on the relatedness of interacting siblings - can have a decisive
impact on the magnitude and resolution of these conflicts. This research
characterizes how variation in the pairing system of a marine snail (Nucella
ostrina) accounts for variation in maternal provisioning and offspring size. The
work will also establish whether shifts in the reproductive pairing system
correspond to patterns and modes of maternal provisioning across the entire
genus of Nucella.

This project has several broad scientific implications: 1) Polyandry and
encapsulation of offspring are widespread in marine organisms, angiosperms, and
matrotrophic animals; however, few studies have considered their evolutionary
ramifications, especially their costs. 2) Reproductive pairing system and
parental-offspring conflict may also drive the evolution of post-zygotic
reproductive isolation. This research brings to light a novel and potentially
widespread mechanism causing such isolation in marine systems. 3) This study
examines consequence of the links between oceanographic processes that affect
recruitment of prey species, such as barnacles and mussels, and their predators.
Unlike other well-studied predators such as seastars, Nucella has limited
dispersal potential, hence is far more likely to exhibit spatially constrained
population dynamics as well as adaptations that reflect varying food supplies.
4) The research will advance our understanding of the scale of ecological and
evolutionary connections among members of marine communities, providing the
foundation for scientifically informed design of marine reserve networks that
sustain both species and genetic diversity. The snail, Nucella, has similarities
to marine animal predators on commercially important marine resource species.

The project will interface with three outreach/training programs, including a
collaborative program for undergraduates working at the interface of math and
biology, an REU program that recruits a diverse population of local high-school
students to collaborate on faculty research projects, and a program that
provides Ph.D. students with hands-on experience in K-12 classrooms, and K-12
teachers and students experience with in the latest technical and conceptual
advances in ocean science. This project will support a molecular ecology website
and associated workshops, and a multi-user DNA facility to train these students,
postdocs, and K-12 teachers in state-of-the-art molecular genetic analysis. It
will support a number of young scientists, giving them multidisciplinary
training at the interface of behavior, ecology, evolution, and marine biology.