* 0929212
* Building an Alliance for New Careers in STEM (KC-BANCS): A Collaborative Model for the Inclusion of Youth and Veterans with Disabilities
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2009,03/31/2017
* Kevin Truman, University of Missouri-Kansas City
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 03/31/2017
* USD 1,419,999.00

The "Building an Alliance for New Careers in STEM (KC-BANCS): A Collaborative
Model for the Inclusion of Youth and Veterans with Disabilities" is a project
that will increase the participation and success of high school and college
students with disabilities within the Kansas City region in STEM education
pathways. The result will be an increase in veterans and other students who
complete associate and undergraduate degrees and ultimately enter the STEM
workforce. The KC-BANKS Alliance's lead institution, the University of Missouri-
Kansas City (UMKC), will partner with two associate degree granting
institutions: Metropolitan Community College (MCC) and Kansas City Kansas CC
(KCCC). The project will work with Project Lead the Way and Project UpLink to
access secondary students from 42 Kansas City high schools. Additionally,
collaborations with Veterans Upward Bound and local Veteran Services Offices
will provide partnering for veteran student recruitment. The following
objectives will be addressed by the KC-BANCS Alliance:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1)
To increase the number of students and veterans with disabilities who enter STEM
post-secondary academic programs (pre-college pipeline
experiences);&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2) To increase the number of students and
veterans with disabilities who complete two-year and four year degrees in STEM
fields (support and retention in post-secondary
experiences);&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3) To increase the number of STEM students
with disabilities who enter the workforce in STEM related careers; and
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4) To develop an Alliance Partnership Model that engages
STEM educators, community organizations, and youth/veterans with disabilities as
equal partners and collaborators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An evaluation team from
the Resource Development Institute (RDI) will work with the KC-BANCS Alliance
team to conduct formative and summative evaluation. During the initial phase of
the project the RDI team will work with KC-BANKS and contact people at UMKC and
each of the partnering organizations to identify key personnel who can supply
data on students with disabilities currently attending the educational
institutions. RDI evaluators will work with these designated personnel to
establish procedures by which each institution will supply disaggregated
baseline data on the number of students with disabilities to include type of
disability, race/ethnicity, gender, and STEM major for those students with
disabilities; as well as data on those completing STEM associate, baccalaureate
and graduate degrees.