* 0929674
* Build IT Underwater Robotics Scale Up for STEM Learning and Workforce Development (BISU)
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Patricia Holahan, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Ford
* 08/31/2015
* USD 2,499,998.00

&lt;br/&gt;This "scale-up" project uses engineering as well as science to bring
engineering experiences to underrepresented communities. The investigators will
build under water robots, create social networks, and produce a webcast. This
project is based on evidence gained from a previous ITEST Strategies grant
(ESI-0624709) that showed that an underwater robotics curriculum can increase
student learning of science and engineering concepts, their practice of 21st
century skills such as problem-solving and collaboration, their enjoyment of
science, and their engineering career interest. The goal of the project is to
create and assess an adaptable scale-up model that enables the participation of
underserved audiences (female, minority and low status youth) in intensive,
experiential STEM learning, acquisition of 21st century skills, and increased
engineering career awareness and interest. The project will expand the existing
design and implementation of the previous project. Also, it will provide a
rigorous test of the research and theory based model in new environments and
will also expand the innovation to cover additional scope within STEM workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will be initiated in four new regions (hub
sites) by working with well-established partners whose K-12 programming engages
girls and underserved youth in informal education environments, while expanding
an in-school implementation model. Some of the project enhancements include
increased use of IT and cyberinfrastructure, and an advanced systems engineering
challenge to expand the scope of the curricular innovation itself. Students and
educators use of cyberlearning tools will be developed well beyond the scope of
the current Strategies project, through: (a) an annual national virtual
underwater robotics competition; (b) incorporation of social networking tools
and webcasting technologies into curricula and professional development to
create a cyber learning community among youth, educators, and STEM researchers;
and, (c) the virtualization of current face-to-face student meetings with STEM
researchers and professionals through the creation of a digital video library
designed to expose students to exciting STEM and IT applications in the real
world and to serve as career exemplars, featuring women and minority
researchers. &lt;br/&gt;