* 0929542
* Collaborative Research: Conference on Cyberlearning Tools for STEM Education
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Carl Wieman, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia James
* 08/31/2011
* USD 24,410.00

The Conference on Cyberlearning Tools for STEM (CyTSE) brings together
scientists, cyberlearning developers, educational researchers, STEM educators
(formal and informal), curriculum developers and other stakeholders that
contribute to the agenda on K-12 STEM cyberlearning and workforce preparation.
Collaborators include Northwestern University, University of Colorado at
Boulder, and the WGBH Educational Foundation. This informative meeting will be
held as a NSTA pre-conference workshop. The conference plan includes keynote
presentations by prominent cyberinfrastructure and cyberlearning professionals,
an expert panel on cyberlearning and the future of STEM education, hands-on
demonstrations of cyberlearning tools for participants, and interactive poster
sessions. Potential tracks for the poster sessions include emerging
technologies, design and development, technical challenges and solutions,
implementation and integration, and research and evaluation. The second day of
the conference will include teacher professional development workshops, as well
as in-depth design focus groups, developer integration and interoperability
workshops, and a session emphasizing the development of a cyberlearning research
agenda.

Additional deliverables include a video overview of the conference (for those
unable to attend), a white paper proposing a cyberlearning research agenda, and
an evaluation study to measure the impact of the conference on participants. A
series of post-conference webinars will be hosted by WGBH's Teachers' Domain and
publicized on their Facebook, Classroom 2.0, and Science Ning sites to encourage
ongoing collaboration. It is anticipated that this two-day conference will
bridge gaps between the stakeholder communities and expose important trends and
issues that will contribute to a comprehensive research agenda.