* 0929353
* SUNY LSAMP 2009 Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) Cohort at Stony Brook
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* David Ferguson, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* A.  Hicks
* 07/31/2013
* USD 987,000.00

SUNY LSAMP 2009 Bridge to the Doctorate Cohort at Stony Brook: Project
Summary&lt;br/&gt;The State University of New York Louis Stokes Alliance for
Minority Participation (SUNY LSAMP) is ready to immediately put into place its
fourth cohort of Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) students at Stony Brook
University, the lead institution of the Alliance. This new cohort will build on
our three previous efforts that have not only significantly added to the UREP
STEM graduate enrollment and masters and doctoral degrees but have also led to
important changes in the culture and practice of STEM education in ways that not
only help UREP students but all graduate STEM students.&lt;br/&gt;Project Goals
and Objectives&lt;br/&gt;The goals and objectives of the SUNY LSAMP 2009 Bridge
to the Doctorate Program at Stony Brook are:&lt;br/&gt;To recruit 12 LSAMP
Bridge to the Doctorate students by:&lt;br/&gt;?] Using recruitment pathways
that we have developed that target the state and national LSAMP pool and recruit
students from a variety of LSAMP institutions and STEM majors.&lt;br/&gt;?]
Having a selection process that works with STEM departments and SUNY AGEP to
choose talented LSAMP students who will succeed with program
support&lt;br/&gt;To design and implement a program that helps students
successfully complete two years of STEM graduate study by:&lt;br/&gt;?]
Providing a comprehensive set of services that monitor student progress, builds
a strong BD community, builds BD students academic and professional skills and
use UREP STEM graduate students as mentors and instructors wherever
possible&lt;br/&gt;?] Collaborating with other NSF and state and federal
programs to make the best use of program resources by integrating BD students
into the existing network of activities and programs&lt;br/&gt;?] Assessing the
success of program services through external evaluation and developing new or
modified activities or interventions based on the results of this
evaluation&lt;br/&gt;To make sure that BD students enter and successfully
complete doctoral study and then move into academia and the high technology
workplace by:&lt;br/&gt;?] Helping students to successfully gain admission into
doctoral programs&lt;br/&gt;?] Preparing BD students to apply for NSF and other
graduate fellowships&lt;br/&gt;?] Working with STEM departments, the Graduate
School and the Turner Fellowship program to develop plans to provide a formal
pathway to PhD programs that include financial support for BD students after the
two years of BD NSF support ends&lt;br/&gt;?] Working with STEM departments to
provide academic support where needed to help students through doctoral
study&lt;br/&gt;?] Maintaining an effective system for tracking students after
they leave the BD program through their educational career and professional work
experience&lt;br/&gt;To promote systemic change in graduate STEM policy and
practices in ways that will increase the success of individual students on the
doctoral pathway and the effectiveness of UREP STEM graduate education
by:&lt;br/&gt;?] Using resources from multiple sources to examine broad issues
related to UREP STEM graduate education using the BD, AGEP and UREP STEM
graduate population&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT The project will add to current
efforts by SUNY LSAMP to build research capacity in STEM education in the area
of graduate education. The lessons learned from the study of the Bridge to the
Doctorate Program will be put into the context of broader issues of systemic
change and disseminated to a broad national audience&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACT
Using the lessons learned from this project, we expect to continue to develop
and refine strategies that will increase the recruitment and retention of UREP
STEM graduate students. This will that will help to increase the number of UREP
STEM students who successfully complete doctoral degrees in STEM disciplines and
make changes in STEM departmental culture and practice.