* 0929544
* Science, Engineering, and Technology for Students, Educators, and Parents
* EHR,DRL
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2013
* Kenneth Hill, Chicago Pre-College Science and Engineering Program, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 12/31/2013
* USD 1,024,019.00

Purpose, Context, STEM Content, & Partnering Organizations: The Science,
Engineering, and Technology for Students, Educators, and Parents (SETSEP)
program will provide K-3 students and their parents with hands-on, activity
based instruction in science, engineering, and digital technology. Through its
parent organization, the Chicago Pre-College Science and Engineering Program
Inc. (ChiS & E), SETSEP will: (a) expose participants to a range of science
content and digital technologies, (b) foster an awareness of STEM careers, (c)
empower parents with tools and resources to support their children, and (d)
provide ongoing professional development to teachers. A host of partners
including Chicago Public Schools (CPS), the Museum of Science and Industry, J.P.
Morgan Chase Bank, Mercy Hospital, and the Illinois Institute of Technology will
collaborate to implement the program. The SETSEP project builds on the history
and success of the Detroit Area Pre-College Engineering Program (DAPCEP).

Participants and Settings: Approximately 360 low income, minority K-3 students,
their parents, and 30 teachers from seven Chicago public schools will
participate in SETSEP. Project participants represent two underrepresented
groups in STEM; African American (3/4 of project participants) and Hispanic (1/4
of project participants). Saturday workshops for SETSEP students and parents and
summer institutes for SETSEP teachers will be held at the Chicago Museum of
Science & Industry, a partnering SETSEP organization. A biennial community fair
with speakers, exhibits, student work showcase and instructional activities will
be culminating events for SETSEP participants.

Project Design and Deliverables: The project will collaborate with Chicago
Public Schools to recruit K-3 students, their parents, and teachers from seven
designated public schools situated in low-income minority communities. Project
participants will engage four -three hour Saturday sessions each semester. An
age appropriate STEM related curriculum has been developed for each grade level;
Kindergarten (Little Hydrologist), Grade 1 (Little Chemist), Grade 2 (Little
Electrical Engineer), and Grade 3 (Little Mechanical Engineer). The parent
component is geared towards providing parents with STEM content, tools, and
resources to better support their SETSEP students. Parents and students will be
required to commit to the program for four years. Project deliverables include
an interactive bilingual website, K-3 curriculum and activities, training
materials and workshops, parent support materials and resources, and biennial
community fair events.

Project Outcomes, Impacts, and Evaluation: The broader impacts of this project
will be reflected by the rich, intensive exposure to science content and digital
technologies through hands-on, cyber-enabled learning activities for over 360
students, their parents, and 60 teachers from low income, underrepresented
communities. The project should: (a) enhance participant STEM knowledge and
interest among underrepresented groups in STEM, (b) foster an awareness of STEM
careers, (c) build STEM instructional capacity through over 90 hours of
intensive, professional development and training institutes, and (d) help
parents to better support their students interest in STEM.

The evaluation study will employ a mixed methods approach to examine project
implementation, effectiveness, and impacts. Document reviews, interviews,
assessments, observations, focus groups, student portfolio and digital artifact
analysis, and attendance records will be used to measure project impacts,
content knowledge, motivation, STEM interest, and project success. Formative
assessments will provide iterative, ongoing opportunities for project refinement
and adjustments. The formative and summative evaluations will endeavor to
capture participants' interest, engagement, and motivation. In addition, data
collected from SETSEP will be used in a comparative analysis of similar
variables tracked in its sister program, the Detroit Area Pre-college
Engineering Program (DAPCEP).

Broader Significance and Importance: The timely Science, Engineering, and
Technology for Students, Educators, and Parents Program has the potential to
contribute to the field?s limited understanding of the impact of such programs
on early K-3 exposure to science content and technology, early STEM career
awareness, K-3 parent empowerment, and teacher professional development
transferability from informal to formal education settings. Few programs exist
that provide authentic science experiences and content, in a range of critical
STEM disciplines such as chemistry and engineering, for K-3 students at each
grade level while simultaneously providing relevant intensive science, academic,
and social support to their parents. The data collected by SETSEP will not only
inform the program but the longitudinal data from SETSEP and DAPCEP will be
compared and analyzed, potentially providing rich opportunities to identify
cross-programmatic practices and critical factors impacting scalability and
project success. The resulting potentially transformative model may challenge
existing beliefs regarding early receptiveness to science content, technology,
and STEM careers by K-3 children, from low income underrepresented groups, in
informal and formal settings.