* 0929206
* Virtual Hall of Science (VHOS)
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Preeti Gupta, New York Hall of Science
* Standard Grant
* Julia Clark
* 08/31/2013
* USD 799,966.00

The New York Hall of Science (NYHS), in partnership with the developers of
Greater Southern Tier BOCES SciCentr program, will engage an ethnically and
economically diverse group of young people in creating the Virtual Hall of
Science (VHOS). This youth cohort will collaborate and work with science and
education professionals to design, build, and staff a virtual science center
while acquiring STEM knowledge and a range of ICT competencies. Participants
will be trained as exhibit designers, builders, active exhibit guides, and
mentors. Acting as a mentoring/governing group, participants will staff the
virtual space and encourage and support new visitors to explore STEM activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two cohorts of 20 high school Explainers and 20 middle
school students are directly impacted by this project, while hundreds of middle
and high school youth are engaged through the online Virtual Worlds platform.
Students receive 70 hours of training and are responsible for developing and
launching the VHOS, training middle school youth, and creating a management
plan. Students form teams, create interactive science exhibits, study
interactive design, and use a variety of Web 2.0 tools for collaboration
purposes. Finally, students beta test the prototype with families, other
Explainers, and project staff before making it available to the public. Students
build skills in six areas identified by International Society for Technology
Education (ISTE) including creativity and innovation, communication and
collaboration, research and information fluency, critical thinking, problem
solving and decision making, digital citizenship, and technology operations
concepts. VHOS will be designed for long-term sustainability through
collaboration with state and regional cooperative service professional
development programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The evaluation will be conducted by
the Center for Children and Technology at the Education Development Center Inc.
(EDC) and will focus on the impact of the VHOS on Explainers and visitors,
understanding of science concepts, and the development and articulation of ICT
workforce skills by youth. A mixed-methods approach will be employed and include
observations, interviews, participant blogs, science concept rubrics, visitor
surveys, and pre-post questionnaires for both the formative and summative
evaluation. It is anticipated that this project will advance the understanding
of the effectiveness of virtual environments in building ICT skills and student
understanding of workforce preparation.&lt;br/&gt;