* 0929343
* Alliance for Broadening Participation in STEM NMSU Bridge to the Doctorate VII
* EHR,HRD
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Ricardo Jacquez, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* A.  Hicks
* 07/31/2012
* USD 987,000.00

New Mexico State University Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation
(NM-LSAMP) Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) Program is a collaborative effort
between the National Science Foundation and New Mexico higher education
institutions to increase the quality and quantity of underrepresented minorities
matriculating to completion of the doctoral degree in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics fields (STEM) fields. The 2009-2011 program, at New
Mexico State University, prepares students to meet the challenges of completing
master's and doctoral programs of study preferably for academic careers in
higher education. In addition, the program develops leadership skills necessary
for success in the STEM workforce nationally and internationally.

Integrating research and education, the BD fellows will be nurtured over two
years as a cohort community that will benefit from a program of academic and
personal development activities as well as social support to sustain their
commitment and success to the terminal STEM degree. Program activities include
linkages to the New Mexico State University Integrated Graduate Education in
Research and Training (IGERT) as well as other NSF-funded research and education
projects, including programs that provide mentoring opportunities for
undergraduate students.

A total of 12 students from underrepresented minority populations in STEM fields
will participate in the program at the New Mexico State University during the
2009-2011 academic years. Results from this support will broaden the
participation of Hispanics and Native Americans in the STEM pipeline, U. S.
workforce and abroad. Results from rigorous evaluation of the project will add
to the body of literature in successful recruitment and retention of
underrepresented minority students in STEM fields.