* 0929997
* ADVANCE Institutional Transformation Award: Advancing Women in Science, Technology, Engineering and Math at Marshall University
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Marcia Harrison, Marshall University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Beth Mitchneck
* 08/31/2012
* USD 750,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The Marshall University (MU)-ADVANCE Program, established in 2006, capitalized
on Marshall's existing human resources by establishing faculty-administrator
partnerships to oversee the Program's initiatives: Recruitment, Faculty
Development, and State and Institutional Policy Changes. Reporting directly to
Academic Affairs, the Program works in partnership with six campus offices:
Equity Programs, Career Services, Multicultural Affairs, Institutional Research,
the Center for the Advancement of Teaching and Learning (CTL), and the MU
Research Corporation. The inclusion of Administrative Partners in the analysis
and review of existing barriers to the success of female STEM faculty has led to
the development of work/life policies, programs, and best practices that have
built-in administrative support. The objectives for this project are to 1)
continue to support pre-tenure female STEM faculty; 2) coordinate faculty
recruitment, retention, and policy efforts with the university offices that will
sustain them; and 3) establish a Path Forward Committee to monitor the progress
of institutionalization.

During this project, MU-ADVANCE will work with university offices to build
sustainability for the recruitment, retention, and policy efforts. Recruitment
efforts will be coordinated with Equity Programs to implement improved search
procedures. To support this implementation, MU-ADVANCE will continue to provide
liaisons to STEM search committees, and will maintain a reporting procedure for
hiring departments and their college offices that will provide information about
the diversity of the applicant pool, the interviewees, and the hires. The Dual
Career Services is already a university-wide program sustained by MU Career
Services. This service will be expanded by collaborating with neighboring
institutions' career development officers. Faculty Development efforts in
collaboration with CTL will focus on a university-wide comprehensive new faculty
support program for faculty within their first two years, which is a critical
transition time when Marshall experiences significant STEM faculty attrition.
This program will begin with New Faculty Orientation and continue with a fall
Seminar Teaching Series and spring Research Boot Camp, a program that offers new
faculty an opportunity for intensive, focused, distraction-free, supervised
writing time; thus helping them make steady progress in their specific projects.
MU-ADVANCE and CTL will also develop a permanent mentoring program for new
faculty based on MU-ADVANCE's coaching sessions which have helped new faculty
form networks within Marshall and the community. Efforts to retain tenure-track
STEM faculty will continue through strong individualized support and networking.
The Policy Committee will conduct ongoing research on faculty teaching loads and
salaries, and continue the review of university policies and practices. This
Committee will be sustained as the Policy Advisory Committee, which will report
to Academic Affairs. University evaluation has been the driving force used to
identify barriers and to guide the development of focused plans for each of the
Program's initiatives. In collaboration with the Office of Multicultural
Affairs, MU-ADVANCE will expand data collection to include the status of women,
minorities, and persons with disabilities for our entire campus. A permanent
Path Forward Committee, housed within Academic Affairs and reporting to the
Provost, will oversee the institutionalization of these efforts.

Because West Virginia (WV) women are among the least likely to succeed
professionally and have the lowest levels of education in the country, programs
such as MU-ADVANCE are of critical importance. Of Marshall's student population,
56% of undergraduates and 70% of graduate students are female, many of whom are
first generation college students. While 41.5% of the faculty at Marshall are
women, only 27% of the STEM faculty are women. Therefore, the MU-ADVANCE
Program's impact on the number of female faculty represents a broader impact of
providing much-needed role models for WV students. In addition, MU-ADVANCE's
faculty development programs help female STEM faculty balance and integrate
their teaching and service commitments, while building competitive research
programs. This increase in research activity has the potential to increase
external funding, providing the state of WV, and the metropolitan area of
Huntington, economic development opportunities. MU-ADVANCE and the WV Division
of Science and Research will develop a state-wide project to disseminate
institutional transformation methods. This project will include evaluation
(e.g., climate surveys, the status of women, minorities, and persons with
disabilities) to provide a data-driven approach to support diversity efforts,
create family-friendly atmospheres, and foster faculty development activities at
WV colleges and universities.