* 0929598
* US-Mexico Workshop on Neotropical Secondary Forest Regeneration: Morelia, Mexico, November 2009
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Robin Chazdon, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Carmina Londono
* 08/31/2010
* USD 39,028.00

The rapid loss of old-growth tropical forests around the world calls for an
urgent need to understand and forecast the importance of secondary forests for
the local, regional, and global conservation of biodiversity and critical
ecosystem services. Present and future societies and economies will depend on
the natural capital in secondary forests, which are rapidly becoming the most
dominant forests across the tropics. This grant will provide funding for 25 U.S.
investigators to attend a 3-day workshop on tropical forest succession at the
Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico (UNAM) in Morelia, Mexico during October
2009. The workshop is co-organized by Miguel Martinez-Ramos and Horacio Paz from
UNAM?s Centro de Investigaciones en Ecosistemas (CIEco). Workshop participants
comprise approximately 50 senior, mid-level, and young investigators from eight
countries in the Americas and Europe. Participants will divide into five working
groups focusing on different aspects of secondary forest regeneration: 1)
species interactions and demography; 2) functional traits of species and
ecosystem processes in secondary forests; 3) species composition within stands
and landscapes; 4) effects of human activities on forest regeneration; and 5)
secondary forest detection using remote sensing. Each working group will
synthesize the current state of knowledge and guiding paradigms, identify major
debates and uncertainties; discuss limitations and challenges of existing
research approaches, and identify future research directions. The documents
emerging from these working groups will provide a basis for planning an
integrated, internationally based research and training program on secondary
forest regeneration in the New World tropics. The workshop will also expand and
enhance the activities of existing international tropical forest research
networks, as well as the U.S. and Mexico Long Term Ecological Research programs.