* 0929822
* International Summer Program in Astrophysical Modeling
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2011
* Pascale Garaud, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Maria Womack
* 09/30/2011
* USD 48,987.00

This award will provide travel and local support for graduate students and
senior scientists for the International Summer Program in Astrophysical
Modeling. This workshop, being developed by Dr. Pascale Garaud (University of
California - Santa Cruz), has a dual goal: to train graduate students and
postdoctoral fellows in astrophysical modeling and to promote scientific
collaborations between theorists, numericists and observers. The workshop will
run for a total of six weeks, and the venue will alternate between Santa Cruz,
California and an international location, the first one of which will be in
France. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The format of the school is highly non-
traditional, in the sense that it will not revolve around teaching the students
a single particular pre-defined skill or knowledge. Instead, the program begins
by presenting the students with interesting topical research problems, and
leaves them to decide whichever mathematical/numerical method they are
interested in developing to address these problems. Mentoring and support in a
wide breadth of technical skills will be provided by the more senior faculty and
postdoctoral fellows for the duration of this research program. By fostering
multi-disciplinary collaboration, every person in the team will have the
opportunity to learn from the others. Mini-workshops will be organized to teach
whomever is interested the mathematical/numerical/statistical tools they may
need for the project of their choice. The program will be run in an
international setting by alternating venues between the United States and the
rest of the world to promote international collaborations and introduce the
students to the international research community.