* 0929148
* Mixed Methods Study of the Factors Influencing Recruitment, Retention, and Academic Achievement of Undergraduate Females and Males in STEM Disciplines at HBCUs
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* James Moore III, Winston-Salem State University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2013
* USD 499,890.00

ABSTRACT HRD 0292148&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Winston-Salem State
University (WSSU) has the primary objective to design and conduct a mixed method
study (Tashakkori and Teddlie, 1998), including both a quantitative and
qualitative component, on STEM students? precollege and college factors,
institutional characteristics, intellectual orientations, and vocational
competence and commitment. National data indicates that the number of
underrepresented women and men receiving STEM degrees has increased over the
years (National Science Foundation, 2008; Nelson, 2007). However, there is a
general agreement among stakeholders (Byars-Winston, Estrada, and Howard, 2008)
that we need to recruit, retain, and graduate more racial and ethnic minority
students in order to enhance America?s competiveness in the global economy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Other objectives of this HBCU-UP research project are to
examine the similarities and differences between female and male STEM students
in terms of their level of academic confidence and motivation, academic and
social integration in the university environment, student involvement on and off
campus, academic self-concepts, educational aspirations, and vocational
competence. Accordingly, the purpose of this study is to render quantitative and
qualitative data to better understand the impacts of individual characteristics
and institutional environments on the academic motivations and persistence
strategies of female and male students majoring in STEM. Further, this study
will determine if the academic environment at HBCUs influences students?
vocational interest and commitment to STEM careers. Further, the findings should
assist college professionals and policymakers in improving academic performance
and graduation rates for STEM students at HBCUs.&lt;br/&gt;