* 0929117
* Fossil Sirenians from Mexico and Puerto Rico
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2009,04/30/2013
* Lawrence Barnes, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 04/30/2013
* USD 35,024.00

&lt;br/&gt;Fossil Sirenians from Mexico and Puerto
Rico&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0929117&lt;br/&gt;Daryl P. Domning (Howard
University, Washington, DC)&lt;br/&gt;Lawrence G. Barnes (Natural History Museum
of Los Angeles County, CA)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract: PIs propose
to collect fossils of seacows (Sirenia; herbivorous marine mammals related to
modern dugongs and manatees) at fossil localities in Mexico and Puerto Rico that
are threatened, respectively, by natural erosion and human disturbance. This
fieldwork will also support the research of J. Vélez, a Puerto Rican graduate
student at Howard University. The fossils known to be at these sites are crucial
to his doctoral dissertation, which will revise the classification and clarify
aspects of the evolutionary history, paleoecology, and geographic distribution
of fossil Sirenia from Puerto Rico, the wider Caribbean, and adjoining areas of
the New World. The localities to be visited include ones that produced the type
specimens of several sirenians whose identities and affinities need to be
clarified by much more adequate fossil material. Besides analyses of their
feeding adaptations and evolutionary relationships, the newly-collected fossils
will also provide samples of tooth enamel for stable-isotope analysis important
for interpreting their feeding ecology.&lt;br/&gt;Baja California Sur, México:
In the North Pacific, seacows have been present at least since the early Miocene
(circa 25 million years ago), and are represented by all three subfamilies of
the family Dugongidae: Halitheriinae, Hydrodamalinae, and Dugonginae. Important
fossils of each of these groups have been collected in Baja California. The
coexistence of all three groups is very interesting from the standpoint of
paleoecology, and a major goal of our research is to understand how these
herbivores shared the marine plant resources of the North Pacific coastline. PIs
seek better specimens of these sirenians, as well as more information about the
other marine animals among which they lived.&lt;br/&gt;Puerto Rico: Fossil
seacows in Puerto Rico include both halitheriines and dugongines. Vélez has
recently collected important new specimens of both, and the potential of
recovering more fossil sirenians (as well as other vertebrates) from the
Tertiary deposits in Puerto Rico is high. It also provides a rare opportunity to
recover sirenians from the Oligocene, an important but otherwise poorly sampled
period in their evolution and diversification. Seacow remains have been
collected from other parts of the Caribbean, but they are mostly either from
older (Eocene) or younger (Miocene) deposits. Several species of seacows are
expected to be found in the different rock layers around the island, further
documenting the former existence of multi-species sirenian communities, and
possibly including early manatees (Trichechidae). &lt;br/&gt;