* 0929814
* U.S. - South America Planning Visit:  Development of Collaborative Research Teams and Genomic Tools for Orphaned Crops of South America.
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Joshua Udall, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2010
* USD 11,280.00

This U.S. - South America proposal will support one junior and three senior
researchers from the U.S., under the direction of Dr. Peter Maughan, to
participate in a set of planning visits to Bolivia, Chile, Peru, and Ecuador.
The objective of these planning visits is to identify priorities for the
utilization and development of genomic tools for the major New World orphaned
crops species [e.g., quinoa (Chenopodium quinoa), amaranth (Amaranthus
hypochondriacus and A. cadatus), tarwi (Lupinus mutabilis), yellow lupine
(Lupinus luteus), cañahua (Chenopodium pallidacule), oca (Oxalis tuberosa), and
mashwa (Tropaeolum tuberosum)]. Genetic resources, such as DNA sequence-based
genetic markers, genetic linkage maps, and gene libraries are essential tools
for understanding and improving the genetic basis of agriculturally important
traits in crop plants. The use of DNA markers and gene manipulation (including
genetic modification and transgenics) are now commonly used in combination with
traditional breeding methods to accelerate and enhance varietal development of
the major food staples. Unfortunately, many regionally important crop species
(commonly referred to as orphan crops) lag far behind the major commodity crops
(maize, soybean, wheat, rice, etc.) in terms of the development of these
advanced genetic tools due to their status as minor crops in the U.S and Europe.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to their regional importance as food and feed
crops, these species are also of interest to the broader community of plant
scientists due to their remarkable adaptation to severe environments and
exceptional nutritional qualities. The work will be done in collaboration with
Jorge Rojas-Beltran of the Fundación PROINPA, Cochabamba, Bolivia; Ivan Maureira
Butler of the National Agriculture Research Institute, Carillanca, Chile; Luz
Gomez Pando of the National Agricultural University La Molina, Lima, Peru; and
Eduardo Peralta of the Instituto Nacional Autónomo de Investigaciones
Agropecuarias, Quito, Ecuador. U.S. scientists will benefit from the interaction
with these Latin American colleagues who will provide important lessons in
applied research and agricultural practices and needs in developing countries.
From these planning visits, a framework will be developed for future research
proposals and a genomics workshop proposal.