* 0929491
* US GEOTRACES North Atlantic Section: Sample collection for iron stable isotopes
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2010,02/29/2012
* Jess Adkins, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 02/29/2012
* USD 20,865.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;GEOTRACES is a newly initiated
international oceanographic program to identify processes and quantify fluxes
that control the distributions of key trace elements and isotopes in the oceans
and to establish an understanding of the sensitivity of these distributions to
changing environmental conditions. Dissolved iron (Fe) is an element that has a
profound impact on phytoplankton growth, ecosystem productivity, and carbon
sequestration in the ocean. Atmospheric dust deposition, dissolved Fe flux from
continental margin sediments, and hydrothermal venting of Fe-rich fluids have
all been identified as important sources of biologically utilized Fe to the
oceans. However, the relative importance of these sources in supplying Fe to the
dissolved phase is not well understood. To address this issue, a scientist from
the California Institute of Technology in collaboration with researchers at
LEGOS (France) will make Fe stable isotopic measurement on samples collected
during the 2010 GEOTRACES cruise along the North Atlantic Ocean basin. Samples
will be taken from all physical and biogeochemical processes that influence
trace metals and their isotopes, namely strong meridional advection, ocean
margin exchange, atmospheric inputs, and hydrothermal sources and sinks. The
resultant dataset should help constrain global Fe fluxes to the ocean.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As regards broader impacts, the study will yield new
insights into the biogeochemical cycle of Fe, an important component needed to
resolve the carbon cycle.