* 0929907
* Partnerships for Adaptation, Implementation, and Dissemination (PAID):  Institutions Developing Excellence in Academic Leadership
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Lynn Singer, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Beth Mitchneck
* 08/31/2013
* USD 921,244.00

Case Western Reserve University (CWRU), based on results of a prior ADVANCE
award, will implement an ADVANCE PAID project that focuses on gender equity
transformation at five regional public institutions of higher education in
northern Ohio while continuing institutional transformation at CWRU. Using a
dual (individual and organizational) focus, this project will also adapt
successful practices and models to educate and empower faculty and
administrative leaders in each university to undertake customized institutional
transformation.

Intellectual Merit. The proposed project, IDEAL, will encourage participating
individuals and institutions to review assumptions and practices regarding
women?s professional roles in S&E disciplines, and provide resources to apply
those lessons to transform their academic cultures. It will call for rigorous
organizational self-examination and the formation of ameliorative strategies
based on evidence. It is envisaged that this project will create an
intercollegiate regional community to share information and ideas on achieving
improved gender participation and equity in academic STEM disciplines. This
project will allow for the dissemination of ideas and practices from NSF ADVANCE
institutions and allow further exploration of how to engender effective
transformational change at universities.

Broader Impact. Because of the institution?s past experiences from a previous
ADVANCE IT award, this project is well poised to affect behavior and policy at
six institutions in the northern Ohio region, and, subsequently, position those
institutions to stimulate change across post-secondary education in the entire
state of Ohio.