* 0929839
* Partnerships for Adaptation, Implementation, and Dissemination (PAID):  Collaborative Research - Career Advancement for Women through the Earth Science Women's Network (ESWN)
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Christine Wiedinmyer, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Beth Mitchneck
* 08/31/2013
* USD 74,965.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

While the number of women receiving advanced degrees in the geosciences has been
rising, the face of scientific leaders in academia remains dominantly male.
Through the establishment of infrastructure to support the Earth Science Women's
Network (ESWN), this ADVANCE PAID project will promote career development, build
community, and facilitate professional collaborations for women in the Earth
Sciences. ESWN is a peer-mentoring network of women, mostly early in their
careers, serving the variety of fields within the geosciences discipline. ESWN
started in 2002 as an initial group of six early-career women in atmospheric
science, and has grown to more than 750 members spanning a wide range of
geosciences sub-disciplines. ESWN's growth has evolved solely from person-to-
person contacts, and its sustained, rapid growth testifies to the group's value
to early career women. The unique aspects of this disciplinary network include
its focus on women at early career stages, and the fact that it was formed and
is led by early career women scientists. These features allow the group to
assist women in the Earth Sciences in advancing professionally while connecting
them with a community of their peers. The network's "grassroots" structure
provides an exceptional opportunity to influence the retention and promotion of
female earth scientists.

Intellectual Merit: Building on the success of ESWN's activities to date, this
project will support the development of a sustainable ESWN infrastructure and
career-development activities to benefit women in academia and promote their
advancement. The requested funding will support the following initiatives over
four years: grow ESWN to serve a wider section of the geosciences community;
design and administer career development workshops; promote professional
networking at major scientific conferences; and develop web resources to build
connections and collaborations for and among women in the Earth Sciences. The
size and diversity of ESWN provides a valuable opportunity to collect statistics
and information on the developing careers of women geoscientists. The membership
will participate in online surveys, interviews and web site monitoring. Insights
and recommendations emerging from these studies will be disseminated through
publications, an online newsletter, and highlights on the ESWN website.

Broader Impacts: The project activities emphasize the advancement and promotion
of women in academic positions in the Earth Sciences. These activities will
identify and develop resources useful to women in academia, increase
accessibility to these resources, initiate mentoring opportunities, and create a
community. An increase in the number of successful women scientists and their
visibility will greatly influence the recruitment of the next generation. ESWN
members already identify the network as a valuable part of their professional
lives and often encourage peers and advisees to join. This project aims to
increase the ethnic and racial diversity of ESWN via connections with existing
successful recruitment programs. By identifying strategies to reduce barriers to
professional success for women geoscientists, we aim to promote a culture that
will enhance the success of all scientists. The nature and extent of the
network, and its continued growth, will also influence the success of female
scientists in a variety of scientific positions including within academia, the
federal government, and public and private sectors.

