* 0929875
* MATE ROV Competitions: Providing Pathways to the Ocean STEM Workforce
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Jill Zande, Monterey Peninsula College
* Standard Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,199,871.00

This project will use the Marine Advanced Technology Education (MATE) Center's
highly successful remotely operated vehicle (ROV) competition network to reach,
engage, and support the participation of middle schools. They represent a
critical point in the educational pathway where students, particularly from
underrepresented groups, are most likely to lose interest in math and science.
It will provide career information and guidance tools that enable students to
make the transition from middle school through high school to college and into
the workplace. It will underscore the importance of parental involvement in
students' education by proactively reaching out to, communicating with, and
engaging parents in project activities. It will also expand the MATE Center's
cyberinfrastructure to create a learning community that promotes access to
resources and encourages communication and collaboration across all grade
levels. The project will also evaluate the impact of these activities and
contribute those findings to the knowledge base about STEM education,
particularly as it applies to traditionally underrepresented groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching project goal is to use the MATE ROV
competition as an engaging platform to prepare middle and high school students
for careers in the ocean STEM workforce. Specifically, the project goals are to
1) increase middle and high school students' interest in STEM and STEM careers;
2) provide teachers with resources that support the delivery of STEM career
information and learning experiences; and 3) increase access to industry mentors
and STEM instructional resources. This access will allow students and educators
at all levels to build upon and advance their STEM knowledge and skills using
ROVs as the vehicle, both figuratively and literally. Over the course of 3
years, the project will provide 240 middle school teachers who serve
underrepresented groups with 28 hours of professional development, to include
one 'take-home' ROV per teacher; provide 60 of those teachers with an additional
56 hours, for a total of 84 hours; provide 10 of those teachers with an
additional 56 hours, for a total of 140 hours; provide 2,400 middle school
students with a minimum of 20 hours of instruction and hands-on STEM learning
experiences. In addition, the project will produce 4 middle school curriculum
modules; implement a beginner level ('SCOUT') competition class at all 12 of
MATE's existing regional contests within the U.S.; modify and improve MATE's
existing career tools to produce an online careers course and complementary
website for middle and high school audiences; disseminate the career information
and guidance tools to the target middle school audience as well as to the other
middle schools and high schools that participate in the competition. The project
will also develop a cyberlearning center that uses web technologies and social
media tools to engage and increase the number of users accessing and sharing
information, resources, and ideas.