* 0929005
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Digitally Mapping The Black Atlantic: Spatial Imagination and the Politics of Reappropriation between Africa and North America
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2009,02/28/2014
* Jamila Moore, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Thomas J. Baerwald
* 02/28/2014
* USD 12,000.00

Drawing upon the fields of black Atlantic studies, architectural history and
theory, and cultural geography, this doctoral dissertation research project
seeks answers to the question: How and why did groups and individuals re-imagine
their physical environments in the black Atlantic? The dynamic and often
complicated process of re-imagining is explored using the concept of spatial
reappropriation, a term that refers to the conscious process through which a
group or individual reclaims a physical space that was previously imagined in a
way that was disparaging to that group or individual. In many cases, spatial
reappropriation critically reconfigures built environments by creating new ways
of seeing, being, and becoming in those sites. Spatial reappropriation responds
to the period of early transatlantic travel and the ways in which some human
landscapes were mapped as modern and others as non-modern. With the onset of
transatlantic travel, many groups formed spatial imaginations, or ways of
seeing, ordering, and inhabiting space, that were informed by European
Enlightenment concepts of man in which the significance of race and place in
establishing ones identity were key. The ways in which groups or individuals
occupied space, particularly in the black Atlantic, therefore never were
arbitrary but were always informed by the types of spatial imaginations they
invented or inherited about a particular site. This doctoral dissertation
research project has two main research objectives. The first objective is to
develop a grounded theory of spatial reappropriation in the black Atlantic. The
second objective is to create a set of interactive digital maps of black
Atlantic sites that will help to visually document the transfer of ideas about
race and space from one country to another. To meet these objectives the
doctoral candidate will draw upon three case studies from the U.S. and the West
African Republic of Liberia. Liberia's relationship with the U.S. provides
unprecedented evidence for the ways in which landscape and architecture contain
embedded ideological concepts like modernity, freedom, and utopia, because even
though the Republic of Liberia was formally established by free blacks in 1822;
the republic initially was contrived by white members of the American
Colonization Society as early as 1801. This longstanding and complicated
relationship enables a cross-regional analysis of race and space in the Atlantic
world. To visually document and analyze instances of spatial reappropriation,
the student will employ historical archival and ethnographic research methods
like focused interviews and participant observations along with spatial analysis
using participatory mapping applications drawn from geographic information
science. The combination of these methods will facilitate a four-sided research
approach towards understanding the multi-directional exchange of ideas about
space between Africa and the U.S.

The results of this study will produce a geographically multi-sited digital map
that will enable researchers to take space and spatial factors including
landscape and architecture as critical modes of interpretation and employ new
Web 2.0 mapping applications to research, analyze, and present new ways of
thinking about spatial relationships in the black Atlantic. In addition, the
digital map will allow community members within each study site to map and learn
about processes of spatial reappropriation in their black Atlantic community. By
developing new pedagogical materials and practices for conducting collaborative
research using participatory GIS and a community-centered praxis, this study
also will provide underrepresented communities in Liberia and the U.S. with new
tools for negotiating and reappropriating the spaces around them. With GIS and
other digital tools, politically disenfranchised communities in Liberia can
begin to map their own futures after fourteen years of civil war. This project
will investigate new challenges to re-imagining urban and rural space in Africa
and will offer new tools for confronting the spatial legacies of settlement,
colonialism, and civil war. Furthermore, this project will broaden the scope and
volume of geographic knowledge produced on Africa and its Diaspora in North
American scientific scholarship. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement
award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising student to
establish a strong independent research career. This award is jointly supported
by the NSF Geography and Spatial Sciences Program and the NSF Office of
International Science and Engineering.

