* 0929970
* Hydrolysis of Cellulose and Lignocellulosic Biomass into Fermentable Sugars using Acidic Ionic Liquid Medium
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2014
* Ananda Amarasekara, Prairie View A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 06/30/2014
* USD 152,325.00

0929970 Amarasekara

The goal of this project is to develop an efficient and environmentally sound
hydrolysis method useful for the production of glucose and other fermentable
sugars from lignocellulosic biomass. The glucose and other fermentable sugars
produced from abundant lignocellulosic biomass provide an economical path to
ethanol production. This anticipated goal would be achieved by the development
of a recyclable acidic ionic liquid solvent system that can easily dissolve
lignocellulosic biomass and act as the hydrolysis catalyst as well. In the
initial stage of the project three different types of acidic ionic liquids will
be synthesized by using 1-methylimidazole, triethanolamine and pyridine as
bases. These acidic ionic liquids will be tested for their ability to dissolve
cellulose under thermal, microwave, and sonication conditions. The resulting
cellulose-acidic ionic liquid solutions will be then diluted with water to a
critical concentration and allowed to hydrolyze by the internal -SO3H group in
the ionic liquid, acting as the catalyst. Glucose and its oligomers produced in
the hydrolysis will be analyzed by HPLC. Furthermore, the total reducing sugars
formed will be analyzed by 3,5-dinitrosalicylic acid or alkaline copper methods.
In the second stage of the project acidic ionic liquids with a built-in
superacid group (-CF2-SO3H) will be synthesized and then similarly tested for
the dissolution and hydrolysis of cellulose to study the catalytic effect of the
superacid group. In the third phase, the use of acidic/superacid ionic liquids
for the dissolution and hydrolysis of lignocellulosic biomass (corn stover,
switch grass, miscanthus grass, wood chips) to fermentable sugars will be
investigated. In the fourth phase of the project optimization of reaction
conditions to produce the maximum yield of fermentable sugars, recovery and
recycling of these acidic ionic liquids will be studied.

The intellectual merits of the project are (a) acidic/superacid ionic liquid is
the solvent and the catalyst as well, therefore no waste in acid and no
separation of acid catalyst is necessary (b) single step dissolution and
hydrolysis under mild temperatures and atmospheric pressure (c) superacid ionic
liquid is a novel concept. Broader impacts of the project are (a) participation
of minorities, as this project will be carried out at Prairie View A&M
University, which is a historically black university (b) postdoctoral research
associates, graduate and undergraduate students will participate in the project
providing them professional development, research training and education (c)
broad dissemination of knowledge about sustainable energy technologies by
presentation of the results at conferences, group meetings, and publications in
journals.