* 0929015
* Significance of metabolic interactions of diatom-diazotrophic associations (DDAs) for ocean ecosystems
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Jonathan Zehr, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2014
* USD 306,172.00

Diatoms (i.e., Hemiaulus) with symbiotic heterocystous cyanobacteria (i.e.,
Richelia) are considered responsible for a significant proportion of di-nitrogen
(N2) and carbon (C) fixation in the World's oceans. Although these associations
often form large and expansive blooms, measures of their N2 and C fixation are
few, and current nitrogen (N) and C budget models do not include their
contributions to new and primary production. This is largely due to the
difficulty in collection and identification of these unique consortia. The
investigators will use newly developed genetic and stable isotope techniques and
high resolution nanometer-scale secondary ion mass spectrometry (nanoSIMS)
approaches to directly resolve the N2 (and C) fixation contributions of these
symbiotic diatoms on a relevant spatial scale.

The project will enable investigators to explore the metabolic interactions of
diatom-diazatoph symbioses and identify environmental conditions that promote
the activity of one symbiosis over the other. The three general questions
driving the research are: 1) How do the individual diatom-cyanobacteria
symbioses differ with respect to their cell specific N2 and C fixation rates; 2)
What is the time scale at which N is transferred from symbiont to host; 3) What
are the physical and chemical conditions that promote the activity of the
different symbioses.

The broader impacts of the research involve advancing our knowledge of metabolic
interactions between marine microorganisms, and providing a better understanding
of marine planktonic symbioses. In addition, the project will contribute to an
on-line web library of photographs for educational outreach. Furthermore, it
will support training and education to an undergraduate senior thesis project,
and will advance our knowledge of the activity of marine microorganisms.