* 0929922
* Acquisition of microscope and automated stage system for fission-track analysis
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2011
* Stuart Thomson, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 06/30/2011
* USD 31,974.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides the Department of
Geosciences at the University of Arizona with the laboratory equipment to carry
out fission-track analysis ? a widely applied age dating technique that provides
detailed information on the low temperature thermal history of rocks and
minerals. The acquisition of this equipment fills a significant gap in the
existing geochronological facilities of the department. Of broader significance
is that this facility provides a unique in-house capability to obtain multiple
ages from single mineral grains (as small as grains of sand) using the
complementary techniques of uranium-lead, fission-track, and uranium-thorium-
helium dating. Uranium-lead dating provides the age of formation of the
particular mineral being analyzed, while fission-track and uranium-thorium-
helium dating provide the time that particular mineral cooled through
temperatures below about 250 degrees Celsius to 60 degrees Celsius. Knowing the
timing and rates of cooling below the latter temperatures is particularly useful
as it provides information of rates and timing of erosion, and by proxy, unique
information on, for example, the timing and rates of mountain building
processes, landscape formation, and sediment deposition. Such "triple-dating"
has unique and innovative potential applications in fields such as understanding
glacial processes in Antarctica, evaluating interactions involving climate,
climate change and mountain building, to providing valuable new information on
the formation and exploration of oil, gas, and mineral
deposits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential to perform fission-track analysis
benefits a variety of ongoing and future projects at the University of Arizona
investigating problems as diverse as sedimentary provenance, modern and ancient
orogenic and landscape evolution, identification of wildfire in the geologic
record, and the role of late Cenozoic global cooling and glaciation on
controlling active mountain building. Furthermore, combining fission-track and
uranium-thorium-helium dating with the departmental state-of-the-art laser
ablation multi-collector inductively coupled plasma mass-spectrometer for
uranium-lead dating allows not only the triple-dating of the commonly-used
mineral zircon, but also the analysis of other more analytically complex
minerals such as titanite, apatite, and monazite. Fission-track facilities also
enhance the infrastructure for research and teaching in the University of
Arizona Department of Geosciences. A number of undergraduate and graduate
students as well as a few post-docs are working on problems that benefit greatly
from the application of the fission-track method. These facilities provide them
with the opportunity to gain hands-on experience in learning and applying this
methodology. This equipment also forms a vital part of ongoing and planned NSF-
funded summer student thermochronology workshops held at the University of
Arizona.