* 0929006
* RDE Collaborative Dissemination Project
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2014
* Sheryl Burgstahler, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 09/30/2014
* USD 236,936.00

The RDE Collaborative Dissemination Project's objectives
are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. To increase awareness of how people with
disabilities can be successful in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. To increase
awareness of strategies and resources for making STEM welcoming and accessible
to people with disabilities, including the findings, products, and opportunities
of RDE-funded projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. To increase collaboration of
RDE-funded projects with respect to dissemination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project team will lead a community of representatives of RDE-funded projects,
who will design project products, share strategies for making resources
accessible, and explore possibilities and develop plans for cooperating on
dissemination efforts. They will create three project products and will utilize
the Internet, public television, and existing networks to share what works and
what does not to increase the successful participation of people with
disabilities in STEM. All project products will be designed to be accessible to
people with disabilities. Products include:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Website: A
password-protected collaborative 'wiki' that engages RDE-funded projects in
developing products and dissemination plans, including those for sharing
information about projects, outcomes, and materials on the
Internet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Video: A video that shows how high school,
college, and graduate students and employees with disabilities succeed in STEM
and highlights the RDE-funded Alliances for Students with Disabilities in STEM
as resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Brochure: A concise brochure that includes
information and results regarding all RDE-funded Alliances for Students with
Disabilities in STEM and pointers to the project website for the project video
and additional information and resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All project
products will promote creative and potentially transformative concepts. The
project evaluation will document (1) high quality, useful, and accessible
resources; (2) effective distribution methods; and (3) increased engagement of
RDE projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The external formative and summative
evaluation for this project will be conducted by Dr. Gerald Gillmore.