* 0929789
* LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Neville Parker, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* A.  Hicks
* 08/31/2011
* USD 987,000.00

NYC LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate Statement of Objectives The objectives of this
Bridge to the Doctorate proposal is to recruit and retain recent LSAMP STEM
Graduates into a research/academic career that leads to the completion of a
Ph.D. degree. The NYC Alliance will track twelve such individuals into doctoral
programs and eventually the professoriate. Methods to be Employed Recent Tier 1
LSAMP graduates from the National LSAMP pool of graduates, and LSAMP graduates
who have completed no more than one full-time semester equivalent of graduate
study shall constitute the group that will be invited to apply for the Bridge to
the Doctorate program. LSAMP senior undergraduates will continue to be allowed
to participate in Bridge activities. Bridge students will be beneficiaries of a
proactive retention and professional enrichment program that will include
academic and research mentoring, GRE workshops, roundtable discussions with
advanced doctoral students, faculty and administrators, and attendance and
participation at local and national professional conferences. The at-large
faculty pool associated with the CUNY Graduate Center, and CUNY Institute/Center
Directors will serve as Bridge faculty/research advisors. The Alliance will
continue to partner with Brookhaven National Labs to provide cutting-edge
research training during the academic year and summer terms. International
research experiences will also be integrated into the training of all selected
BD scholars. Expected Results It is expected that the NYC LSAMP Bridge program
will add 101 students to the Ph.D. pipeline from Cohorts 1-7 (2003 through
2011). Broader Impacts of the Proposed Activity A critical infrastructure
component for research and education is the availability of competent and
committed students. The Bridge program will continue to serve as a catalyst for
raising financial support for graduate students to a level that would attract US
citizens into the STEM research pipeline in numbers sufficient to sustain the
national STEM enterprise. LSAMP will continue to use the level of support
provided by the Bridge program to leverage an increase in STEM graduate student
compensation across the board, in order to sustain an increase in Ph.D.
throughput beyond its two-year duration. Dissemination of Results Progress and
results of the Bridge to the Doctorate program will be disseminated at the NYC
LSAMP Urban University Conference Series, and through its Virtual Community
(http://nyc-amp.cuny.edu), and Newsletter. The Urban University Conference
Series, held annually since 1998, has attracted over 5,500 participants, and
among other networking opportunities, provides the opportunity to recruit
enrolled undergraduate scholars to CUNY for graduate study, or to other doctoral
granting institutions. The BD scholars represent a resource of STEM trainees
that are poised to be involved in Informal Science and Math Education.