* 0930081
* CPS: Small: Control of Distributed Cyber-Physical Systems under Partial Information and Limited Communication
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Domitilla Del Vecchio, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 08/31/2013
* USD 582,000.00

CPS: Small: Control of Distributed Cyber-Physical Systems under Partial
Information and Limited Communication&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
research is the development of novel control architectures and computationally
efficient controller design algorithms for distributed cyber-physical systems
with decentralized information infrastructures and limited communication
capabilities. Active safety in Intelligent Transportation Systems will be the
focus cyber-physical application. For the successful development and deployment
of cooperative active safety systems, it is critical to develop theory and
techniques to design algorithms with guaranteed safety properties and
predictable behavior. The approach is to develop a new methodology for the
design of communicating distributed hybrid controllers by integrating in a novel
manner discrete-event controller design and hybrid controller design and
optimization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The methodology to be developed will exploit
problem decomposition and will have significant technological impact for a large
class of cyber-physical systems that share features of modularity in system
representation, partial information, and limited communication. The focus on
distributed control strategies with limited communication among agents is
addressing an important gap in existing control theories for cyber-physical
systems. The approach will mitigate the computational limitations of existing
approaches to control design for hybrid systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the
focus on cooperative active safety in Intelligent Transportation Systems, the
results of this effort will have significant societal impact in terms of
increased traffic safety and reduced number and severity of accidents. The
broader impacts of this proposal also include involvement of high-school and
undergraduate students and curriculum development by incorporating results of
research into existing courses on cyber-physical systems.