* 0930253
* Developing Professorial Leadership: A Partnership Program
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Iris Litt, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2010
* USD 81,086.00

SES-0930253&lt;br/&gt;Anne Petersen&lt;br/&gt;Stanford
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral
Sciences (CASBS) was established in 1954 by the Ford Foundation to advance basic
research in the behavioral and social sciences and its use in solving major
societal problems. From the start the focus was to provide a place where
collective learning would lead to individual scholarly advance and thereby,
field advance. The strategies might be summarized as sanctuary,
interdisciplinary research, and fostering innovation. Sanctuary refers to
providing a place for reflection and writing, a place that offers respite from
the demands of university life. Interdisciplinarity has only increased in
importance over the half century since the Center was established. With
increasing field specialization, most academics are deeply embedded in narrow
fields. Research on scientific advances has demonstrated that the majority of
discoveries emerge from the boundaries between fields or interdisciplinary
efforts. Finding new interconnections is one of the ways that scientific
frontiers advance. Fostering innovation takes place within special projects
organized in advance or other arrangements such as the groups that Fellows
create once they get to know each other. Special projects provide the
opportunity for scholars to work together on some problem of scientific or
social importance. This project continues an AGEP (Alliances for Graduate
Education and the Professoriate)-CASBS partnership.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral
Sciences (CASBS) has a&lt;br/&gt;long and distinguished history of recruiting
outstanding Fellows. Working collaboratively with AGEP the Center is preparing
underrepresented minorities in the fields of social, behavioral, and economic
sciences for faculty leadership in academia.