* 0930908
* Electrocorticographic Brain-Machine Interfaces for Communication and Prosthetic Control
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Jeffrey Ojemann, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Kaiming Ye
* 08/31/2012
* USD 300,000.00

0930908 Rao

Brain-machine interfaces (BMIs) are devices that allow a subject to control
objects directly using brain signals. Such devices offer the potential to
significantly improve the quality of life of locked-in, paralyzed, or disabled
individuals by allowing them to communicate via virtual keyboards and control
prosthetic robotic devices. The two dominant paradigms for brain-machine
interfacing today rely on non-invasive recording from the scalp (EEG) and
invasive techniques based on intracortical implants. EEG signals are extremely
noisy, thereby limiting the bandwidth of control signals that can be reliably
extracted. Intracortical implants on the other hand yield stronger signals but
pose serious health risks.

In this proposal, the PI describes a research program for investigating BMIs
based on electrocorticography (ECoG), a relatively new technique that involves
recording signals subdurally from the brain surface. These signals have much
higher signal-to-noise ratio than EEG signal while at the same time, pose lesser
risks than techniques that penetrate the brain surface. The proposed research
will address the following key issues:

(1) Exploiting high frequency ECoG signals for BMI: Recent work has shown the
existence of broad-spectral ECoG changes at high frequencies during movement and
imagery. The PI and his team will explore the application of such ECoG
modulation for multi-dimensional control in BMIs. (2) Neural plasticity of local
cortical circuits during BMI: The PI's team will investigate the dynamic range
of the spectral changes in ECoG and analyze the adaptations that occur due to
brain plasticity during BMI control. This will help pave the way for controlling
3 or more degrees of freedom in a BMI from a single control electrode.

(3) Abstraction of control signals: After extended periods of BMI use, many
patients report no longer imagining moving a control limb but rather
concentrating on the desired result of the BMI task itself. The PI and his team
will explore the creation of new cortical communication pathways underlying such
abstraction and leverage these new control signals in expanding the bandwidth of
the BMI. (4) Applications of new control signals to novel BMI paradigms: The BMI
techniques will be tested using virtual devices such as cursor-driven menu
systems for communication as well as more complex robotic systems such as a
prosthetic robotic hand and a humanoid robot. The educational component of the
project involves curriculum development, interdisciplinary training for graduate
and undergraduate students, and outreach to K-12 students.

Intellectual Merit: The proposed research represents one of the first efforts to
exploit ECoG and the brain's plasticity to build BMIs that can control devices
with large degrees of freedom. The study of abstraction of control signals and
its application to robotic BMIs is also novel. Broader Impact: If successful,
this research will lead to new ECoG-based BMI systems that will surpass the
abilities of current BMIs by relying on the brain's ability to adapt to novel
control scenarios and leveraging the large-scale population-level electrical
activity measured by ECoG. The project will enable the training of graduate
students in a multidisciplinary environment. Promising undergraduates, including
students from underrepresented groups, will gain valuable research experience in
preparation for industrial and academic careers. A K-12 outreach effort will
enable students from local area schools to visit the laboratories of the PIs and
gain hands-on experience in the emerging field of brain-machine interfaces.