* 0930371
* RUI: Engineering Organosilica Materials that Rapidly and Reversible Swell for Water Remediation
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2009,05/31/2012
* Paul Edmiston, College of Wooster
* Standard Grant
* Geoffrey Prentice
* 05/31/2012
* USD 148,230.00

0930371&lt;br/&gt;Edmiston&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is significant
need for technologies to clean water, especially as demand continues to increase
while fresh water supplies become increasingly strained. Industrial activity,
modern agricultural practices, and widespread use of various chemicals has led
to contamination of water by organic pollutants. Organic solvents, pesticides,
and other emerging contaminants have infiltrated watersheds making such water
unfit for use by humans until the contaminating species are removed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently, we discovered a new class of chemically inert
silica-based materials that swell 8 times their dry volume in the presence of
organic liquids. The expansion of the material is rapid and highly energetic
resulting in forces that exceed 100N/g. Swellable organically modified silica
(SOMS) does not swell in water, but has the capability of adsorbing large
amounts of dissolved organic species from water or air. Preliminary work has
shown that SOMS is effective at removing a wide range of organics from water
including polar species such as alcohols and methyl tert-butyl ether to non-
polar species such and toluene and perchloroethylene. The swelling process is
completely reversible when absorbed species are evaporated by heating the
material. For these reasons SOMS-based sorbents appear to be ideal for
environmental remediation of water contaminated by organic species.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the proposed work are to: 1. Develop a
fundamental understanding of absorption by these novel silica materials. 2.
Create composite materials that target the removal of halogenated organics and
pesticides from water. 3. Develop and test deployment mechanisms in
collaboration with a local engineering firm. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based on its
unusual properties, SOMS may represent a whole new class of absorbent materials.
Incursion of organic species leads to the expansion of the matrix which is under
tension in the dry state. Experimental work is proposed that will seek to create
a physical and thermodynamic model to explain the absorption process. This will
be done through a combination of spectroscopic, calorimetric, and equilibrium
absorption measurements. These results will be compared to a theoretical
framework developed by extension from the classical Flory-Huggins model and work
on polyelectrolyte swellable polymers systems consisting of matrixes tensioned
by electrostatic forces. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond laying a theoretical
groundwork for absorption by animated materials, SOMS-based sorbents will be
designed to remove/degrade various types of contaminants including: pesticides;
chlorinated solvents, in particular trichloroethylene (TCE) and fluorinated
compounds. Composite materials where nanoparticles of zerovalent iron (nanoZVI)
are incorporated into SOMS will be created to absorb TCE and subsequently covert
it through reduction to chloride ion and ethylene by iron sequestered within the
material. The composite materials will be prepared in slurries for injection
into underground aquifers. Soil injection methods and pilot experiments will be
conducted in collaboration by an environmental engineering firm (Frontz) located
in the immediate area that specializes in the deployment of ZVI and other sub-
surface treatment methodologies for aquifer remediation. Frontz owns mobile
sonic drilling rigs and GeoProbe injection equipment. Chemically modified
materials will be synthesized remove fluorinated compounds from water in a
separate line of investigation. The initial target compound for this work is
perfluorooctanoate which has proven difficult to remove by other measures and
will serve as a model system for investigating whether SOMS-based materials can
be molecularly engineered to selectively absorb a particular class of
substances. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All the work will be accomplished at a liberal
arts college which will provide 10-15 chemistry students with research
experiences in applied environmental engineering, an area that would be new to
the institution. These students would serve as mentors for the SEER program
which was developed at Wooster to recruit pre-college minorities into the
sciences. Undergraduate researchers would also lead groups of junior high girls
in environmental experiments as part of the B-WISER summer science camp.