* 0930229
* Partnerships for Adaptation, Implementation and Dissemination (PAID):   Career Success in Science &amp; Engineering-Related Fields for Female Faculty at Public Two-Year Institution
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* David Ingram, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Beth Mitchneck
* 08/31/2012
* USD 500,000.00

This empirical mixed-methods research study will investigate career paths,
employment outcomes, and factors that influence academic career success for
female faculty in science and engineering-related (S&amp;E) fields at public
community colleges. So far, very limited research exists on the career
advancement of these female faculty members at public two-year institutions.
Within a four-year institutional setting, several employment outcomes, including
representation in faculty and leadership positions, tenure status, academic
rank, salaries, disciplinary affiliation, research productivity, and others, are
identified as markers of academic career advancement. &lt;br/&gt;Community
colleges differ dramatically from their four-year counterparts in missions and
institutional characteristics. These differences point to the need to re-examine
the explanatory power of some findings on S&amp;E career success and advancement
outcomes of female faculty in the four-year sector in the context of two-year
institutions. To this end, this study will investigate (1) the extent to which
the factors associated with advancement and employment outcomes in the four-year
sector translate to the two-year institutional context, and (2) the extent to
which there exist other factors affecting female faculty members' employment
outcomes that are unique to two-year institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
conceptual and theoretical framework for the study is largely grounded in
sociological, organizational, and economic theory. This study follows a mixed
methods design to identify factors associated with community college female
faculty members' academic career success and employment outcomes in S&amp;E
fields by multivariate regression analyses based on the National Study of
Postsecondary Faculty (NSOPF) and to contextualize these results through
qualitative analysis. Success will be measured using a number of employment
outcomes. Qualitative inquiry will focus on career choices and patterns of
academic career advancement, including an examination of barriers to success.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;Two relevant areas of
research on gender differences in higher education-science and engineering in
academe and faculty work at two-year institutions-have very limited information
on the experiences of community college women faculty teaching S&amp;E
disciplines. The former literature largely focuses on the role of women
scientists and engineers in research universities and on doctoral recipients,
whereas the two-year sector scholarship mainly explores general experiences of
female faculty irrespective of their disciplinary backgrounds. The state of
current literature thus ignores, in general, the role that both two-year
institutions and their S&amp;E female faculty play in developing science and
engineering talent, as well as factors promoting the advancement of women
S&amp;E faculty in these institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:
&lt;br/&gt;In today's climate of economic downturn, it is vitally important and,
in fact, urgent to explore how more affordable community colleges may contribute
to developing S&amp;E talent. Community and technical colleges promote diversity
by offering opportunity and access to a heterogeneous student body, including
women, racial and ethnic minorities, and individuals at all stages of their
lives engaged in life-long learning. All of the benefits of community colleges
may only be fulfilled if the talent of both female and male well-qualified
scientist and engineers will be utilized to its fullest potential. Providing
female S&amp;E faculty members chances for career advancement merited by their
academic achievements is a matter of national importance. Results from this
study will be disseminated through many channels, including presentations to
such bodies as the American Association of Community Colleges, and may thus
affect policies to strengthen the overall S&amp;E education infrastructure.