* 0930811
* Workshop:  Models of Intercultural Service Systems: Scholarly Discussion for Building a Research Agenda; San Juan, Puerto Rico;May 19 to 22, 2009
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2009,12/31/2011
* Viviana Cesani, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Russell Barton
* 12/31/2011
* USD 44,987.00

Workshop: Models of Intercultural Service Systems: Scholarly Discussion for
Building a Research Agenda

San Juan, Puerto Rico, May 19 to 22, 2009 Chairperson: Alexandra Medina-Borja,
Ph.D. Omell Pagán, Ph.D., Viviana Cesaní, Ph.D. International Service Systems
Engineering Research Lab, Industrial Engineering Department, University of
Puerto Rico at Mayaguez

This grant will provide funding for a research workshop involving a wide range
of interdisciplinary researchers discussing and identifying key aspects of
inter-cultural service encounters in the design and implementation of service
delivery systems. The standardization of services is difficult, if not
impossible, because of the customer participation in the service ?co-
production?. Some attempts have been made to incorporate human considerations
into service models, but truly interdisciplinary system design has not yet
occurred. Service system design, and the accompanying technology, is usually the
work of engineers and computer scientists while services and culture have been
studied by marketing researchers, behavioral scientists, anthropologists,
ethnographers and human resources researchers. Thus, a truly inter-disciplinary
research workshop is needed to foster this new field of inquiry and advance a
research agenda. The main goal of the workshop is to hasten the development of
modeling frameworks that include inter-cultural considerations by fostering
interdisciplinary research among a variety of fields, academic disciplines and
technical clusters spanning the areas of, but not limited to, industrial
engineering, complex systems, cognitive and behavioral science,
anthropology/ethnography, information systems, and management and human
resources.

If successful, this workshop will (1) identify and extend an inter-cultural
service systems (ICSS) research community; (2) define ICSS issues and propose
interdisciplinary methodologies and, (3) articulate a common agenda for the
emerging research frontier of inter-cultural Service Science and Engineering.
The development of this research direction is of increasing importance given the
distributed locations of service providers and their customers; sometimes coming
from radically different cultures. For the diverse participants in the service
encounter, perceptions of politeness, time, sympathy and expertise might be
quiet different. Call centers in international locations, hotel chains, and
domestic health care centers serving diverse populations are only few of the
many service systems whose design would benefit from this research direction.