* 0930112
* Partnerships for Adaptation, Implementation, and Dissemination (PAID):  Collaborative Award - PAY IT FORWARD
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Paul Sabila, Gallaudet University
* Standard Grant
* mary holmes
* 08/31/2014
* USD 118,864.00

George Washington University proposes the ADVANCE PAID project, PAY IT FORWARD,
which is a four-year dissemination and research project that distills lessons
learned and best practices from our previous ADVANCE workshops, and from others
who have expertise in leadership development for women. This project focuses on
training, mentoring, seed funding, and a vast array of materials and tools via a
virtual workshop repository, to train a cadre of individuals able not only to
conduct their own workshops but to train others. Specifically, this program
provides a core set of knowledge and materials at established locations to
eliminate time loss by institutions starting from scratch. Workshop participants
will serve as representatives of experts to share lessons learned and discuss
what future research and procedures may be needed to advance knowledge on their
respective campuses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit. This project will
feature the development of a training and mentoring process to develop a cadre
of trained STEM career workshop organizers and documentation of a synthesis of
themes and best practices for women?s leadership development. The subsequent
implementation, testing, and evaluation of the PAY IT FORWARD model of
leadership development will further the understanding of the acceptance and
resistance faced in institutional change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts.
This project will significantly broaden the participation of women,
underrepresented groups, and the Deaf and Hard of Hearing in the faculty ranks
from a variety of institutions not currently involved with ADVANCE, thereby
contributing to the national need to diversify and retain women and previously
underrepresented persons in the STEM workforce. The project will also train a
new generation of leadership development organizers and will serve to synthesize
and contribute to a body of literature on progress in leadership development for
women academics.&lt;br/&gt;