* 0930356
* Orographic Precipitation and Regional Climates
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/2010,05/31/2014
* Ronald Smith, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 05/31/2014
* USD 706,258.00

Orographic precipitation, which depends profoundly on the interaction of airflow
with underlying mountainous terrain, has received considerable attention though
large and complex field programs. This project seeks to evaluate novel
theoretical constructs in the context of comparatively simple terrain forcing.
The main hypothesis to be explored is that orographic precipitation in the
tropics may be described as "ascent-forced" convection, in which terrain plays a
key role in modulating not only upstream triggering of new convective clouds,
but their entire life cycle along trajectories across a given mountain barrier.
While cordilleras at various latitudes will ultimately be examined, intensive
observations will first be conducted by the NSF-supported University of Wyoming
King Air research aircraft operating over/around the Caribbean Island of
Dominica. During the DOMinica EXperiment (DOMEX) in March-April 2011, the King
Air's in situ and cloud radar/lidar King Air measurement capabilities will be
combined with data from ground-based weather radar and networked rain gauges to
comprehensively describe clouds and precipitation that form when comparatively
steady trade-wind flow impacts an isolated mountain ridge. These measurements
will specify the nature of this convection, including its relationship to the
existence and magnitude of upstream moisture and temperature fluctuations, and
better describe cloud dynamics and microphysics in terms of entrainment,
vertical velocity, and cloud water production. A second focus will be to
determine the applicability of these results to other locations and climate
zones, with candidate comparison sites including Patagonia, Costa Rica, and
southeastern Alaska. Adjunct studies will evaluate stable isotope analysis of
runoff water as a straightforward means of determining the average "Drying
Ratio"--the ratio of precipitation to the total water vapor flux across a
mountain ridge, known to vary from near 0% in certain tropical locations to 50%
at higher latitudes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Intellectual Merit of this work
centers on development of improved means to explore and describe a newly
hypothesized "ascent-forced" atmospheric convection, and to better relate its
occurrence to differing climate zones and associated airmass modifications for
flow trajectories across both isolated and more complex arrangements of mountain
ridges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts of this research will include
mentoring and field-site training of a postdoc and graduate/undergrad students
pursuing work spanning several scientific disciplines, as well as extensive
international cooperation. Ultimate impacts could include improved weather and
climate modeling, isotope-climate interpretation, and water resources
management.