* 0930100
* Particle Removal from Surfaces using Rinsing Flows with Extensional Viscosity Liquids
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Gerald Fuller, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Geoffrey Prentice
* 08/31/2012
* USD 300,000.00

Fuller&lt;br/&gt;0930100&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"Rinsing flows" are where one
fluid ablates a layer of a second, miscible liquid that coats a solid substrate.
This process is common to everyday experience and to many industrial processes,
particularly in cleaning operations. This flow arrangement is accompanied by a
classic, "hydraulic jump" phenomenon but the stratification of two liquids, with
differing viscosities, leads to qualitatively new results. A particular interest
in this study is during the cleaning of colloidal particles from solid, planar
substrates when the liquid coating the substrate (the one being rinsed off) is
non-Newtonian. Preliminary data are offered that demonstrate that non-Newtonian
polymer and surfactant solutions with large strain thickening extensional
viscosities very effectively "pluck" adsorbed colloidal particles from planar
surfaces. However, this can only be accomplished by rinsing flows that contain
extensional flow gradients. This research will explore the fluid mechanics of
rinsing flows as a function of the viscosity ratio of the two fluids (the
coating liquid and the jet liquid) and as a function of the rheological
character of the coating liquids using high-speed photography and particle
tracking. The dynamics of particle removal in real time will also be directly
measured. Another important consideration is the hydrophobicity of the solid
substrates onto which the rinsing flows are applied. The PI's preliminary data
demonstrate that the surface energy of the substrates has a profound effect on
the process of inertial dewetting and this research will explore this
phenomenon. The PI's previous NSF sponsored research has stimulated a number of
initiatives that broadened the impact of the PI's scholarly activities. In
addition to participating in a REU program at the university, for the past four
summers the PI has extended opportunities to local high school students.
Positions have been made available to students from Eastside Preparatory School
in East Palo Alto and Harker School in Sunnyvale. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
work is jointly funded by the Fluid Dynamics and Particulate and Multiphase
Programs of CBET.