* 0930257
* ISISP: Integrated STEM Initiative on the South Plains
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2015
* Lawrence Schovanec, Texas Tech University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 08/31/2015
* USD 1,187,479.00

Texas Tech University (TTU) has a number of Science, Technology, Engineering,
and Mathematics (STEM) educational outreach programs that overlap in the area of
recruiting new students and in the mentoring of STEM students from
underrepresented groups. Through an "Integrated STEM Initiative on the South
Plains" (ISISP), TTU is providing increased resources and institutional support
for K-12 outreach, recruitment, and mentoring, thereby enhancing and supporting
the existing STEM educational outreach programs. The major focus of ISISP is to
build a long term base whereby K-12 students across the South Plains are
attracted to study STEM disciplines at TTU. ISISP provides administrative
support for existing outreach and mentoring programs through an outreach faculty
member and a recruiter who visits K-12 schools and community colleges throughout
west Texas for the purpose of presenting STEM activities and increasing
participation in TTU's currently funded projects. The ultimate goal is to
provide greater coordination and coherency among ongoing programs so STEM and
Education faculty who participate in these activities are being formally linked
together as a TTU outreach network and TTU administration has committed to a
dialogue on the nature of faculty reward for outreach work. Strong institutional
support for ISISP comes from the President of TTU, the Dean of the College of
Arts &amp; Sciences and the Vice President for Institutional Diversity, Equity
and Community Engagement. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By integrating the activities of
multiple projects, ISISP is:&lt;br/&gt; 1. Increasing the number of high
quality, diverse high school and community college students who enroll as STEM
majors at TTU.&lt;br/&gt; 2. Creating functioning math clubs at 20 K-12 schools
across west Texas.&lt;br/&gt; 3. Creating summer math academies at 10 K-12
schools across west Texas.&lt;br/&gt; 4. Creating a long term STEM recruitment
specialist at TTU whose activities would be coordinated with the Center for
Undergraduate Research, with the College of Arts &amp; Sciences, and with TTU's
Division of Institutional Diversity and Community Engagement, which has
oversight of academic programs for recruiting, assimilating, and retaining
students from underserved populations.&lt;br/&gt; 5. Creating a long term
Coordinator of Outreach (CO) at TTU.&lt;br/&gt; 6. Increasing the number of
baccalaureate STEM degrees earned at TTU by students from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt; 7. Exceeding recruitment goals articulated for the existing
STEM programs.&lt;br/&gt; 8. Eliminating overlap between TTU outreach
programs.&lt;br/&gt; 9. Establishing a formal proposal for the administration at
TTU for the recognition and reward of outreach work as part of the tenure and
promotion process.&lt;br/&gt; 10. Creating a formal pathway within each
participating school to progress from high school to a college degree in the
STEM disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The "Integrated STEM Initiative on the
South Plains" brings together NSF/EHR awards from the GK-12, MSP, Noyce
Scholarship and S-STEM programs, as well as other work, around the Innovation
through Institutional Integration integrative themes for broadening
participation and critical educational junctures.