* 0930184
* Partnerships for Adaptation, Implementation, and Dissemination (PAID):  Department Chair Training to Increase Women in Neuroscience (IWIN)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Jill Becker, Society For Neuroscience
* Standard Grant
* Beth Mitchneck
* 08/31/2013
* USD 589,371.00

The Society for Neuroscience (SfN) will implement an ADVANCE PAID project that
focuses on enhancing opportunities for women in the neuroscience disciplines by
targeting department chairs. The overall and long-term goal of this project is
to increase the number of women, including underrepresented minority (URM)
women, among faculty in neuroscience. This will be accomplished by effecting
change in behavior and practice related to recruitment, promotion and work
climate for women within academic neuroscience and neuroscience-related
departments. The detailed project strategy will allow SfN to reach up to 300
department chairs and to influence over 50 institutions. Specifically, the SfN
PAID project will involve: a training intervention in the form of eight regional
interactive workshops; development of institution-level implementation plans;
ongoing support to participants through peer-to-peer interaction and online
resources; and dissemination of lessons learned and best practices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. The SfN ADVANCE PAID project will
utilize workshop materials from the University of Michigan, University of
Arizona, and University of Washington. Each of these institutions developed
ADVANCE resources that have been proven to improve recruitment, promotion and
work climate for women faculty. At the macro level, by effecting change, the
current project will allow women to arrive and thrive in the highest levels of
neuroscience where their contributions can be realized to the fullest.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. This project is expected to have broader
impact beyond the immediate project participants as a result of: 1) the
project's design (multi-level training and support activities); 2) the
interdisciplinary nature of the field of neuroscience which reaches across
multiple STEM academic departments and programs; and 3) the role of SfN as the
premier association for the profession. The project's support for workshops will
help disseminate information broadly at the institutional level. The best
practices and lessons learned identified through the project will be directly
applicable to neuroscience and other neuroscience-related departments, and SfN
is ideally suited to disseminate this information through its multiple
communication resources (journal, member newsletters, annual meeting, Web site,
etc.) and partners. This transferability is unique to the field of neuroscience
and will ultimately make the lessons learned and best practices sustainable
beyond NSF funding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SfN will monitor and evaluate progress
toward project objectives using formative and summative evaluations. The lessons
learned from this project will be compiled and disseminated at a best practices
meeting to be held as a wrap-up activity in the final project year. This
activity will ensure that best practices are shared across academia in
neuroscience and related fields and are applied to SfN's continuation of the
project beyond the grant period.