* 0930015
* Instability Analysis of Terrain-Induced Canopy Flows
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2015
* Chuixiang Yi, CUNY Queens College
* Continuing Grant
* Edward L. Bensman
* 02/28/2015
* USD 333,874.00

Turbulent transport processes that occur within canopies are extremely complex
and have not been accurately represented in past models, especially for
ecosystems with hilly or mountainous terrain. Better understanding of these
transport processes is important for understanding the introduction of
pollutants into the atmosphere, and the transfer of water and carbon dioxide
between soil and vegetation, and the atmosphere. Prior research has identified
three typical canopy-flow patterns: drainage flows; "chimney phenomenon"; and
oscillations. These three regimes of canopy flows represent different mechanisms
of ecosystem-atmosphere exchanges over complex terrain. The overall goal of this
project is to develop analytical approaches for understanding the transition
(instability) conditions between these three different regimes of canopy flows.
To address this goal, specific objectives are to:

(1) derive analytical criteria for transition conditions between different
regimes of terrain-induced canopy flows by a nonlinear dynamics approach from
simplified hydrothermal equations;

(2) verify the analytical results using computational fluid dynamics; and

(3) validate the analytical and numerical results using field observations.

Intellectual Merit: Understanding canopy flow over complex terrain is crucial
for understanding the global carbon dioxide budget. The annual budget of carbon
dioxide relies on the delicate balance between daytime summer carbon dioxide
uptake by canopies, and nighttime and winter ecosystem release due to
respiration. The nighttime upward transport is strongly affected by respiration
when drainage flow is a dominant transporting mechanism, even over reasonably
flat terrain. Many eddy flux tower sites are located in complex terrain where
topographic advection errors can be of the same order as the upward eddy flux
itself during calm nights. Errors that accumulate during eddy flux measurements
in the stable nighttime atmosphere have confounded researchers and slowed the
widespread use of flux measurements. The instability conditions can be used at
flux sites for understanding these advection problems.

Broader Impacts: The stability studies of canopy flows over complex terrain will
be beneficial not only for the eddy flux research community in solving the
advection problem, but also for assimilating canopy layer observations into
atmospheric, hydrological, ecological, and air quality models. The theoretical
analysis will be incorporated into university-teaching curriculum and text
books. The Principal Investigator will offer a graduate lecture/lab course in
Academic Year 2011-2012 with the title "Canopy Flow Theory and Simulations" in
the School of Earth and Environmental Sciences at Queens College of CUNY. A
post-doctoral Research Associate will be trained as a theoretical scientist in
using nonlinear dynamics to understand the instability of slope flows.