* 0930423
* STTR Phase I:  Multifunctional Nanoparticle Assemblies for Optical Diagnosis and Treatment of Disease
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Jason Ridley, Virginia nanoTech LLC
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 06/30/2010
* USD 149,869.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will develop a
new class of multifunctional nanoparticle assemblies for optical disease
diagnosis and treatment. The nanoparticle assemblies will be synthesized using a
new plasmon-enhanced two-photon activated crosslinking approach that will attach
nanoparticles with an unprecedented level of selectivity towards specific
nanoparticle sites. Through incorporation of organic chromophores, the plasmonic
resonances of the metallic nanoparticles will provide three to six orders of
magnitude enhancement in the efficiency of second harmonic imaging microscopy
and two-photon excitation fluorescence microscopy, which will be utilized for
imaging the locations of disease states such as cancerous tumors within the
body. Increased laser intensity combined with the energy concentration of the
plasmonic hotspots into small spatial volumes will enable hyperthermal treatment
of the disease through large increases in the local temperature.

The broader impacts of this research include acceleration of the development of
optical techniques for diagnosis and treatment of diseases such as cancer. While
such optical techniques are under intense research and development for
implementation in biomedicine, the orders of magnitude increases in efficiency
provided by the new nanoparticle assemblies proposed here will enable more rapid
implementation. Furthermore, the novel approach for synthesis of nanoparticle
assemblies will have a much broader scientific and commercial impact. The
assembly method only requires that one of the nanoparticles be metallic. The
development of this new assembly approach will thus enable the combination of a
wide range functionalities including magnetic nanoparticles, antimicrobial
silver nanoparticles, and fluorescent quantum dots.

