* 0930168
* CPS:Small: Collaborative Research: Distributed Coordination of Agents for Air Traffic Flow Management
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Adrian Agogino, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 08/31/2013
* USD 155,000.00

CPS: Small: Collaborative Research: Distributed Coordination of Agents For Air
Traffic Flow Management

This objective of this proposal is to improve the management of the air traffic
system, a cyber-physical system where the need for a tight connection between
the computational algorithms and the physical system is critical to safe,
reliable and efficient performance. The approach is based on an adaptive
multiagent coordination algorithm with a particular emphasis on the systematic
selection of the agents, their actions and the agents' reward functions.

The intellectual merit lies in addressing the agent coordination problem in a
physical setting by shifting the focus from ``how to learn" to ``what to learn."
This paradigm shift allows a separation between the learning algorithms used by
agents, and the reward functions used to tie those learning systems into system
performance. By exploring agent reward functions that implicitly model agent
interactions based on feedback from the real world, this work aims to build
cyber-physical systems where an agent that learns to optimize its own reward
leads to the optimization of the system objective function.

The broader impact is in providing new air traffic flow management algorithms
that will significantly reduce air traffic congestion. The potential impact
cannot only be measured in currency ($41B loss in 2007) but in terms of improved
experience by all travelers, providing a significant benefit to society. In
addition, the PIs will use this project to train graduate and undergraduate
students (i) by developing new courses in multiagent learning for transportation
systems; and (ii) by providing summer internship opportunities at NASA Ames
Research Center.