* 0930022
* Acquisition of an Electrical Resistivity System to Monitor Hydrologic Impacts of Climate and Land Use Changes and to Image Subsurface Transport and Density Driven Flow
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2009,01/31/2011
* Remke Van Dam, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 01/31/2011
* USD 53,253.00

0930022 Van Dam

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)." This award will provide support for a 400 electrode
resistivity data collection system. It will be fitted with 2 control units (one
field and one laboratory), electric addressing cards for the electrodes, field
installation equipment and service, and control software. The equipment will be
immediately used for the research outlined in the proposal. It is expected to
have at least a five year "lifespan" in which it will be incorporated into
future projects. A procedures document will be formulated for use and care of
the instrumentation and disseminated to users and students. The instrumentation
will be used to track water and solute movement through saturated and
unsaturated soil horizons and zones. The equipment will allow the PIs to make
measurements at various temporal and spatial scales (depending on how electrodes
are installed). The equipment will allow accurate tracer tracking in groundwater
and vadoze zone. Data will enhance studies on root-zone dynamics, biophysical
aquifer processes, and the terrestrial water cycle. Studies will be conducted in
natural and agricultural settings as well as arid environments (UAE). Data are
relevant to land and water use issues facing humankind. Human impact issues are
foremost in broader impacts. Water is and will increasingly be a contentious
issue for humanity. Practitioners, stakeholders and relevant agencies will
benefit from the increased resolution and relevance of collected data and use
them for mitigation or best management practices. The instrumentation will be
incorporated into student research and training.

***