* 0930277
* Building Community through Grantee Meetings for the STEM Talent Enhancement Program
* EHR,DUE
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2012
* Daniel Udovic, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 05/31/2012
* USD 388,595.00

The NSF STEM Talent Enhancement Program (STEP) aims to increase the number of
students graduating in STEM disciplines from the nation's universities, colleges
and community colleges. The primary vehicle for achieving this goal is through
the provision of merit-based grants to individual institutions or teams of
institutions to support the implementation of strategies to improve recruitment
and retention of STEM students (based on best practices). The overall success of
STEP depends on the development and implementation of "best practices," which in
turn depends on the development of a community of PI's (practitioners) who share
ideas, resources, and data, and who can build on each other's successes and
experiences. The goal of this project is to plan and organize annual meetings in
2010, 2011 and 2012 to facilitate the building of community among the
scientists, administrators, student support specialists and evaluators involved
in funded STEP projects. The project builds on the lessons learned from the
first four STEP Grantees' meetings (2006 to 2009) to enhance the value of the
meeting for all participants. As with previous meetings, each meeting will be
held in the Washington, DC area over a period of 1.5 days, with three major
components: plenary sessions; breakout sessions focused on topics of central
importance to the participants; and poster sessions in which all projects are
represented. Potential plenary speakers include researchers working in the area
of higher education, particularly on topics such as student recruitment,
retention, and development, institutional change, or the promotion of diversity,
as well as experts whose work has emphasized the importance of increasing the
nation's capacity in STEM disciplines. Breakout sessions will focus on topics of
central importance to the participants and their projects. Typically, PI's from
mature STEP projects will act as lead discussants or panelists, with NSF program
officers moderating the discussions. Poster sessions will provide all
participants the opportunity to share their challenges and successes as they
relate to the theme of the meeting. All meeting planning will be done in
consultation with DUE program officers and with an advisory committee of several
STEP PI's, and will benefit from the analysis of responses of participants in
surveys relating to the effectiveness of prior meetings. The intellectual merit
of this proposal lies in enhancing the opportunity to share the lessons learned
from STEP projects using diverse strategies. The resulting community of
investigators will be able to make significantly more progress than they would
if they remained isolated. This is particularly true for investigators in
programs such as STEP because the framework for sharing ideas and findings in
the meetings of scientific societies or in peer-reviewed articles is lacking.
The broader impact of the project lies in the overall improvement in retention
and recruitment of STEM students resulting from these investigators sharing
their successes and failures, and in the development of better projects in the
long run as the community develops a collection of proven best practices that
can be adopted or adapted by other institutions.