* 0930243
* Partnerships for Adaptation, Implementation, and Dissemination (PAID):   Successfully Navigating Your Career - Advancing Women Faculty in Engineering and Technology at HBCUs
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Karen Butler-Purry, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 08/31/2014
* USD 900,000.00

The proposed ADVANCE PAID project from the Texas Engineering Experiment Station
at Prairie View A&amp;M University will create a well-designed program focused
on assisting women faculty in successfully navigating and advancing through the
professoriate ranks and entering into academic administration at Historically
Black College and Universities (HBCU) in Colleges or Schools of Engineering and
Technology. The multi-faceted project will offer an array of activities
including professional development and leadership workshops, mentoring/networks,
professional Coaches, seed grants, and a female faculty repository. Participants
will be provided with customized and relevant materials aimed at promoting
professional development through the academic pipeline.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. The quintessential goal of this
ADVANCE PAID project is to generate a toolkit for the different stages of an
academic career path and provide a new base of information regarding effective
strategies and promising practices for women faculty at HBCUS. The specific
objectives of the proposed project are: 1) to develop a continuum of activities
that will assist women faculty in their professional development and growth
while retaining them within the academic and administrative ranks at HBCUs in
Colleges or Schools of Engineering and Technology, 2) to establish Professoriate
Affinity Communities (PAC); 3) to explore the perspectives of key stakeholders
(i.e. Deans, Department Chairs/Heads, etc.); 4) to establish communication
mechanisms for life-long engagement; and 5) to disseminate Best Practices to
HBCU Engineering Administrators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The
project will increase the retention and advancement of women engineering faculty
at HBCUs which will provide more women and minority role models at HBCUs and
potentially increase the pool of women and minority graduates at HBCUs. Also,
the emphasis on women engineering administrators at HBCUs will change the
institutional culture by changing the face of the decision-makers. In addition,
the findings from the project will be disseminated as recommendations to HBCU
administrators on best practices for advancement and retention strategies for
women engineering and technology faculty at HBCUs.&lt;br/&gt;