* 0930055
* Upgrade of Computing Equipment in the Digital Mapping Laboratory, Idaho State University
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2009,03/31/2011
* John Welhan, Idaho State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 03/31/2011
* USD 75,000.00

This award is providing funds to upgrade digital mapping facilities for the
Idaho State University Digital Mapping Laboratory. The workstations, servers,
and associated gigabit network connections supported by this grant are providing
modern work stations that will better service existing and future research
projects at ISU. The digital mapping facilities supported by the project are
contributing to four interdisciplinary near-surface research themes: field
characterization and modeling of landscape response to contemporary and ancient
changes in climate or tectonics; short-term landscape, soil, and vegetation
change as documented by hyperspectral and light detection and ranging (LiDAR)
techniques; geospatially distributed, GIS-based hydrologic and water quality
modeling at the watershed scale in mountain environments, and simulation of
ground-water flow based on statistical analysis and 3-D modeling of inter-bedded
volcanic and sedimentary deposits. Each of these research groups pair innovative
datasets and techniques against applied and theoretical questions that advance
our understanding of water resources, climate change and remote sensing
capabilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The computer facility upgrade is supporting
the research efforts of several early career researchers at Idaho State
University, as well as promoting teaching and training of a core group of
graduate and undergraduate research assistants in the Department of Geosciences.
Increased access to remote sensing and GIS data and applications complements the
student-directed research projects in hydrology, structural geology,
stratigraphy, geomorphology, and petrology. Results of these projects are being
incorporated into the undergraduate and graduate curriculum. Over the lifespan
of these computers, about 375 geoscience majors and graduate students are
expected to benefit from these facilities. Because approximately 40% of the
students who will use the laboratory are members of an underrepresented group,
the award is helping to broaden participation in the geosciences. The research
projects supported by this award are expected to have a societal impact
specifically on decisions regarding Idaho's land use, water resources, and urban
expansion and economic development.