* 0930649
* STTR Phase I:  High-Performance, Non-Precious Metal Oxygen Reduction Catalysts
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Scott Calabrese Barton, Gibbard Research and Development Corp.
* Standard Grant
* Maria Josephine Yuen
* 06/30/2010
* USD 149,902.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer
Phase I project addresses the need for greater efficiency and clean emissions in
power generation systems. Of particular relevance and potential impact would be
the application of fuel cell systems in vehicles. However, the cost of platinum-
based fuel cell oxygen-reduction electrocatalysts comprises a substantial
portion of the system cost, and a major upgrade in the catalytic activity of
non-precious metal catalysts would offer an alternative that could greatly
improve the economics for vehicles powered by fuel cells. The key overall
objective of the project is to attain non-precious metal oxygen-reduction
catalyst activity per unit volume that meets the 2010 Department of Energy
target of 130 amperes per cubic centimeter (iR-free at 0.8 volts and 80Â°C).
Research objectives directed toward this goal focus on increased understanding
of the nature of the catalyst's active site and on a major increase in the
density of accessible active sites. The influence of precursor chemistry and
morphology, synthesis methodologies, and electrode fabrication will be
emphasized. Progress toward objectives will be guided by physical and
electrochemical characterizations. Electrodes utilizing leading catalyst
formulations will be fabricated and optimized for composition and morphology
using fuel cell testing methodologies for membrane-electrode
assemblies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The most significant impacts of this research
will be in the areas of environmental benefits - reduction of toxic and
greenhouse gas emissions to the atmosphere, and commercial benefits - and the
creation and preservation of new jobs in the automotive and related industries.
The market penetration of efficient, non-polluting fuel cell powered vehicles
depends on cost reductions and achievement of acceptable performance, lifetime,
and safety. Achievement of the goals of this project would permit the
replacement of platinum in the oxygen reduction catalyst, which addresses a cost
that can be estimated at $600 per vehicle for a 50-kW system costing $5,000.
Although the activity of pyrolized metal/nitrogen/carbon (MNC) catalysts has
been known for over 20 years, the nature of the active site is not yet clear
because of the complexities introduced by pyrolysis and high-surface-area
supports. Such lack of understanding has hindered the engineering and
implementation of these catalysts in fuel cell applications. The activities of
this project seek to address this shortcoming by detailed study of the nature of
the active site, combined with engineering studies to amplify site density. One
undergraduate and one female graduate student will be supported by the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;