* 0930096
* Role of the cytokine macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) as a neurotrophin in Zebrafish neurogenesis
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Shuichi Takayama, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* James Deshler
* 08/31/2011
* USD 400,000.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of
2009&lt;br/&gt;(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project new
technologies based on the emerging sciences of microfluidics and microelectro-
poration have been developed in a partnership between neuroscientists and
engineers to address fundamental questions of nervous system and sensory system
development. Using a model organism, the tiny zebrafish, newly recognized
factors "immune system cytokines" are being studied for their roles in the
earliest stages of development of the nervous system and sensory systems (ear
and eye). A zebrafish microfluidic bioreactor was developed to expose specific
circumscribed parts of the growing embryo's nervous system or sensory systems to
streams of morphogens (fundamental growth promoting molecules), in controlled
concentrations. In the bioreactor, small areas of the developing nervous system,
the ear or the eye can be bathed in such morphogens, including MIF (macrophage
migration inhibitory factor), which is an "inflammatory" cytokine. Cytokines are
vital for immune system development as well as triggers of damaging inflammatory
reactions after the immune system forms. The primary investigator's laboratory
has made the surprising discovery that immune system cytokines, and especially
MIF, are also vital for the very earliest development of nervous system neurons
(and pathfinding of neurites) and sensory cells in the eye and ear. MIF could
also be involved in repair processes at concentrations orders of magnitude below
those that cause inflammation. MIF and other cytokines therefore act as
"neurotrophins" or directional nerve growth factors in these systems, a
surprising outcome to scientists in a field that had long thought only classical
(already identified) neurotrophins could play such a role. The use of
microfluidic technologies as well as electroporation of molecules directly into
the developing zebrafish inner ear were key to this new line of research. This
project investigates the mechanism of action by which MIF exposure to
circumscribed parts of the nervous system and developing sensory systems
promotes their development and how blocking it alters development. Fundamental
links between the developing nervous and sensory systems and the immune system
can be studied in this model. Zebrafish auditory system development is, in many
ways, the same as that in the human ear. The same molecules that are active in
zebrafish are active in humans, but zebrafish are easier to study. Development
takes place outside the mother and is extremely rapid (a scale of hours to a few
days rather than weeks or months). This project will provide training
opportunities for interdisciplinary teams of neuroscientists and engineers at
all levels from undergraduate and graduate students (who developed the zebrafish
bioreactor) to the postdoctoral and faculty level, who supervised the work.