* 0930343
* STTR Phase I:  Concentrator Photovoltaics with High-Refractive-Index Encapsulants
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2010
* Ashok Sood, Magnolia Optical Technologies Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 12/31/2010
* USD 199,999.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Small Business Technology Transfer
(STTR) Phase I project aims to establish the technical and commercial
feasibility of an innovative approach for improving the performance and lowering
the costs of photovoltaic solar-electric power conversion systems. In
particular, we will improve concentrator photovoltaic (CPV) systems by
encapsulating high-efficiency solar cells within a transparent, high-refractive-
index epoxy. We anticipate lowering CPV manufacturing costs with this approach
by leveraging established light emitting diode (LED) packaging technology. The
use of high index of refraction material in a CPV will enable increased
concentration ratios while maintaining a wide field of view in power generating
subassemblies that can be incorporated into a variety of CPV systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR addresses the renewable energy market by
developing a novel photovoltaic device capable of ultra-high performance with
reduced intrinsic manufacturing costs. Concentrator technologies can radically
alter the renewable energy market in the near term like no other competing
technology. By replacing expensive semiconductor materials with cheaper plastic
lens and/or metal mirrors, concentrator photovoltaic systems can in principle
both reduce overall photovoltaic module costs and improve performance. This STTR
program leverages work in solid state lighting to achieve higher concentration
ratios and wider field of views in CPV systems that can be manufactured at lower
costs and thus realize the ultimate objective of third generation photovoltaics,
namely ultra-high conversion efficiency at low costs. In addition to the
scientific and commercial impact, this STTR program has a strong educational
component, enabling graduate students to be educated and trained in a novel,
interdisciplinary, and potentially high-impact field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;