* 0930206
* STTR Phase I:  Development and Manufacture of Multi-Functional Materials and Structures
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2010
* Toshikazu Nishida, Nanoptics Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2010
* USD 150,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer
Phase 1 project will research and develop continuous micro stereo lithography as
an enabling manufacturing platform of biocompatible, multifunctional material
structures and systems such as plastic fiber microarray plates. These plates
will have important advantages over existing glass fiber microarray plates: the
platform of choice for biochips, microtiter plates, micro and picowell plates,
microfluidic arrays and microcapillary arrays. The glass fibers have been
extensively used to perform optical readout of fluorescence signals indicative
of specific biochemical reactions. Use of special polymers will give the plastic
fibers numerical apertures of up to unity, which has never been reached
previously and will give the highest possible sensitivity. Because of the use of
lithography, the plastic optical fiber arrays will have 0.1 micron position
alignment compared to a few microns for glass fibers. This major difference in
alignment accuracy will be increasingly important as array densities increase
and size of fluorescent light sources decrease. The manufacturing cost of
plastic fiber array plates are shown to be an order of magnitude less than for
glass microarrays. Different types of microarray plates will be fabricated,
characterized and tested for multifunctional biological assays and ultrasound
imaging for biometric identification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Principal societal
benefits from this project will be improvements in health care and national
security. Improved biotechnologies will include: gene sequencing, proteomics,
disease diagnostics, drug discovery and agriculture. These fields can benefit
from the improved accuracy and lower cost microarray technology. Investments at
the University of Florida in state of the art lithography and molecular biology
equipment will be leveraged by using these facilities and collaborating with
expert Faculty and students. The first commercial microarray products resulting
from this project will be used in existing gene sequencing equipment and medical
diagnostic arrays. The annual sales for glass microarray products in these
market segments are $30M and growing at 25% per year. There will be a total $20M
market in plastic fiber microarray plates for the ultrasound biometric market
and Night Vision market. Nanoptics, Inc. has successfully commercialized
previous SBIR/STTR technology and is the largest US producer of plastic optical
fiber. These fibers are used in aiming devices on archery bows, hand guns and
rifles employed by security forces, Israeli Defense Forces and the US Army.
Nanoptics is also the leading global supplier of specialty clear plastic optical
fiber used in medical devices, such as eye surgery. Annual revenue exceeds
$1M.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;