* 0930065
* Acquisition of backup components for a Thermal Ionization Mass Spectrometer used for U-daughter geochronometry
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Warren Sharp, Berkeley Geochronology Center
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2011
* USD 110,189.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). Funds will be used for the acquisition of replacement
electronics and associated components for a thermal ionization mass spectrometer
that has formed the cornerstone of research and training programs in U-series
(230Th-234U-238U) and U-Th-Pb dating at the Berkeley Geochronology Center (BGC).
Our existing mass spectrometer continues to be capable of state-of-the-art U-Pb
measurements and remains an important resource for vetting U-series measurements
by newer techniques (i.e., plasma mass spectrometry); however, it is
increasingly subject to failures of its ageing electronics that disrupt
laboratory operations and reduce productivity. The acquisition via this award of
new electronic components will extend the useful life of the thermal ionization
mass spectrometer for several years, providing performance and productivity
approaching those of a new instrument, but at a fraction of the cost.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reliable, precise ages from U-series and U-Pb dating are
essential to fundamental research on a wide spectrum of processes and events in
the development of the Earth and life upon it. Such topics include climate
change, earthquake science, evolution of humankind and its cultures, and past
global environmental catastrophes that altered the course of biotic evolution.
The BGC has a long history of developing and improving dating techniques,
conveying this knowledge and experience to other labs and scientists, and
training early-career scientists such as graduate students and post-doctoral
fellows, thereby enhancing the national capability and capacity for research in
earth and life sciences. The new award provides highly cost-effective support
that will allow us to sustain these activities. &lt;br/&gt;