* 0930398
* STTR Phase I:  Compressible Magnetorheological Fluids
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl F. Albus
* 06/30/2010
* USD 150,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer
(STTR) Phase I project seeks to develop stable and optimal compressible magneto-
rheological fluids (CMRFs) and to perform device tests on such fluids to
demonstrate their durability. The production of stable and durable CMRFs will be
achieved by using an inexpensive chemical process. The primary goal of the
project is to develop and examine a feasible fluid combining characteristics of
both field controllable fluids and compressible fluids for automatically
adjustable strut/damper applications. The project will develop a novel fluid by
incorporating different base materials, which can produce higher compressibility
while retaining a controllable damping effect. These fluids, when used in a
damper (or a shock absorber) for the suspension system of land vehicles, will be
able to simultaneously provide controllable damping and spring
effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of
successfully developing compressible fluids for the use in vehicle suspension
systems, especially for medium/heavy vehicles to reduce weight, increase
mobility, enhance controllability of the vehicle's motion to prevent roll over
in rough terrains and during emergency maneuvers. This project will have wide
applications from commercial and private sector to military, for medium/heavy
commercial vehicles such as, buses, coaches, trailers, off-highway, and tracked
vehicles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;