* 0930781
* NANOPOROUS 3D SUBSTRATES FOR LABEL-FREE TRACE RAMAN DETECTION OF BIOMOLECULES
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2009,02/28/2013
* Vladimir Tsukruk, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Revzin
* 02/28/2013
* USD 300,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

0930781 Tsukruk

This NSF award by Biosensing/CBET program supports work by Professor Vladimir
V. Tsukruk from Georgia Institute of Technology on fundamental Raman scattering
properties of nanoporous 3D membranes decorated with aggregates of noble metal
nanostructures. Surface enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) substrates designed in
this project will be available for ultra-sensitive, label-free probing of trace
amount of biomarkers in a biological fluid. Comprehensive analysis of different
organic Raman markers and nanoporous structures with variable sizes and shapes
will be accompanied with electromagnetic modeling to establish design principles
for this SERS platform. The knowledge gained from these fundamental studies will
be utilized to optimize 3D SERS substrates with high enhancement factor for two
important classes of biomolecules, immunoglobulin G antibody and prostrate
specific antigen. These nanoporous SERS structures possess the advantage of
large specific surface area available for the tethering of hot spots with
multispectral response; precise control of nanopore diameters and their wall
thickness, waveguiding capabilities of transparent cylindrical nanostructures;
high robustness and flexibility, and very low cost. The ultimate goal of this
project is to achieve robust and reproducible trace detection of femto-mole
amount of biomolecules with high SERS enhancement. The project will be focusing
on enhanced training of graduate students with emphasis on their involvement in
highly interdisciplinary research. To enhance this experience and to increase
the number of students pursuing advanced degrees in science and engineering the
PI will be working with several recruiting programs, including the GT PURA
Program, GT-NSF SURF Site and the NSF REU Programs. The PI places continued
emphasis on recruiting underrepresented students for summer internships, an area
that he has excelled in. Specifically, Tsukruk will develop a new undergraduate
course on soft nanomaterials which will combine fundamentals and applications of
nanomaterials. Overall, the PI will continue efforts to increase the
participation of one underrepresented group, women to a steady level of 35%,
which is much higher comparing to conventional 20% STEM female student
population in domestic engineering schools.