* 0930073
* Partnerships for Adaptation, Implementation, and Dissemination (PAID):  Advancing Ways of Awarding Recognition in Disciplinary Societies (AWARDS)
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Joan Herbers, Association for Women in Science, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Beth Mitchneck
* 08/31/2014
* USD 796,834.00

Professional awards are external markers of achievement and recognition, and are
important for job satisfaction and career advancement for recipients. After
receiving recognition, awardees provide inspiration for science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) professionals and for those aspiring to an
academic career. However, marked gender disparities in awards and recognition
have resulted in a climate that hinders advancement of women and impairs their
retention as STEM leaders. The Association for Women in Science (AWIS) and the
Recognition of the Achievements of Women in Science, Medicine and Engineering
(RAISE) Project will implement a project called AWARDS (Advancing Ways of
Awarding Recognition in Disciplinary Societies) to address the
underrepresentation of women among recipients of awards from STEM disciplinary
societies.

AWARDS will partner with seven Disciplinary Societies to develop processes
customized for each organization to foster the diversity of their scientific
award recipients (Goal 1). Towards this goal, over the next three years, AWARDS
will work collaboratively with the American Chemical Society (ACS), the American
Geophysical Union (AGU), the American Mathematical Society (AMS), the American
Statistical Association (ASA), the Mathematics Association of America (MAA), the
Society for Neuroscience (SfN), and the Society of Industrial and Applied
Mathematics (SIAM); to: 1) Analyze their existing awards, awardees, nominations,
and award processes; 2) Identify components of their cultures, awards nomination
and selection processes that influence who is nominated and selected for awards;
3) Provide information on research based best practices to increase gender
equity in awards, tailored to their Society's characteristics; 4) Assist each
partner Society in selecting and implementing changes to their Society and award
processes, and evaluating the consequences of those changes; and 5) Develop
maintenance practices for long term and sustainable support of award equity. The
partner Societies have a combined membership of 329,000 and sponsor nearly 400
awards. Lessons learned from this work will be used to formulate a framework for
use with additional and varied disciplinary societies (Goal 2). AWARDS will
build on resources from the STEM community, ADVANCE programs, and social science
research to reduce the impact of implicit bias and foster organizational change.
Activities will be directed by a five member Executive Committee, assisted by an
Advisory Committee, and conducted by an action Task Force, all focused on
facilitating changes in partner Societies. The partner Disciplinary Societies
will maintain control and ownership of activities leading to change within their
Society. An outside evaluator will ensure activities are effective and goals are
met.

Intellectual Merit: The existing research on implicit bias and organizational
change will be adapted to the awards processes of seven diverse STEM
Disciplinary Societies. AWARDS will support Society partners as they increase
impartiality, resulting in greater diversity of their award nominees and
winners, and develop leadership within the organization to sustain these
changes. Organizational change experts and Society representatives will assure
that processes are evidence based and appropriate for each Society. Development
of a framework and resources that can be successfully implemented in additional
professional societies with distinctive cultures and awards structures will
expand the impact far beyond the initial Disciplinary Society partners.

Broader Impacts: AWARDS will increase the diversity of STEM awardees and expand
the number of role models who will encourage future generations of women and
other underrepresented groups to pursue and persist in STEM careers. Engaging
Disciplinary Society leaders in AWARDS will change their perceptions and direct
attention to other areas in which equity might be enhanced, e.g., allocation of
resources. AWARDS activities will put members of committees in leadership roles,
and enhance their ability to catalyze organizational changes within and beyond
their professional societies.