* 0930000
* Upgrade of a continuous-flow mass spectrometer for automated analyses of isotope ratios of carbon dioxide and nitrous oxide
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* William Cooper, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2010
* USD 64,829.00

0930000&lt;br/&gt;Townsend-Small&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This award is funded
under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5)."
This award will support upgrades to an existing IRMS to allow additional
analytical capabilities. The enhanced capabilities will be used to track
contributions from urban processes into and between carbon and nitrogen pools.
Requested is a methane-nitrous oxide preconcentrator unit, GC autosampler
(designed to work with the preconcentrator), a specific GC column, and shipping
and training costs. The upgrade will be applied to existing instrumentation.
Adequate space and resources currently exist. A fee-based schedule will be
implemented to offset maintenance and operation costs. Prioritization will be
given to PIs and students and a scheduling system will be implemented if needed.
The PIs will manage the facility new user training. The PIs will use the new
capabilities to track N2O fluxes in urban settings. These have been shown to
vary considerably based on land use, agricultural/urban activities, and sewage
treatment processes. Sample throughput can be increased substantially from the
proposed acquisition. In additional isotopic measurments will be used to
understand biogeochemical fluxes from both natural (respiration) and
anthropogenic (fossil fuel combustion) processes. Future research directions
include using isotopes to trace nutrient inputs to the coastal ocean and CO2
fluxes from different plant types. One main impact of this upgrade will be a
substantial increase in sample processing capabilities which will have a ripple
effect for all users, particularly allowing graduate students to obtain the data
they need to more quickly finish their theses research. Minority students will
be well-served through several UC-I programs. The PIs also work with the non-
profit Ocean Institute which provides an avenue for K-12 outreach. Results from
research efforts will not only be disseminated in the literature and at
meetings, but will have a direct utility for public entities and government
agencies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;