* 0930480
* STTR Phase I: Increasing the Efficiency of Membrane Filtration for Drinking Water Purification through the Incorporation of Novel Anti-Biofilm Small Molecules
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2010
* Christian Melander, Agile Sciences Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Walters
* 12/31/2010
* USD 199,999.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase I Project tests the feasibility of
applying Agile Sciences' technology to decreasing or eliminating biofouling on
filtration membranes used for drinking water purification. The main obstacle in
efficiently applying membrane filtration to provide safe drinking water is the
buildup of biofilms on the membrane, or "biofouling". Biofouling not only causes
a reduction in throughput, but can also result in uneven flow conditions such
that spurts of water carrying contaminants may pass through the membrane, thus
introducing these contaminants into the drinking water. The research group of
Dr. Christian Melander at NC State University has recently identified a series
of small organic molecules that can both inhibit and disperse biofilms of
bacteria across bacterial order, class, and phylum. Incorporation of these
molecules into filtration membranes has the potential to significantly reduce
biofilm buildup, thus greatly improving the efficiency and efficacy of the
filtration process. Agile Sciences has licensed the technology developed in the
Melander Laboratory, and the scope of this Phase I STTR Project is to develop
the methodology necessary to incorporate Agile Sciences' anti-biofilm molecules
into filtration membranes while retaining their antifouling properties.

Although the availability of safe drinking water is a fundamental human need,
exponential population growth as well as the effects of climate change have made
drinking water scarce for large portions of the global population. Over 20% of
the world's population does not have access to safe drinking water, and millions
of people die each year from diseases attributed to contaminated water. A
promising technology for delivering clean drinking water is membrane filtration.
However, large-scale application of membrane filtration is hampered by the
effects of biofouling. The market size for filtration membranes in the United
States alone is estimated to be between $2 billion and $4 billion per year. In
addition to providing safe drinking water, filtration membranes are used in the
semiconductor and pharmaceutical industries to provide ultra-high-purity water
and in treating wastewater. In all these applications, the efficiency of
filtration membranes is limited by biofouling. In addition to the aforementioned
industrial and health applications, development of a hydrophobic polymer that is
resistant to biofouling would represent a substantial contribution to the field
of polymer science.

