* 0930001
* Upgrade of the Laser Heating System for the (U-Th)/He Laboratory at the University of Kansas
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Daniel Stockli, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2011
* USD 82,345.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The funds will be used acquire a diode laser heating system
for the (U-Th)/He thermochronology laboratory in the Department of Geology of
the University of Kansas. The acquisition of a new diode laser heating system
will allow (1) continuation of our NSF-sponsored research at KU currently
involving many graduate and undergraduate students, (2) countless national and
international collaborative efforts, providing a multitude of faculty,
researchers, and students access to a state-of-the-art facility, and (3)
development of new thermochronometric techniques and exploration of new research
avenues. There is a tremendous demand for low-temperature thermochronometry data
to address crucial questions about the timing and rates of a wide spectrum of
geological processes ranging from tectonics and landscape evolution to energy
related research. In addition to our enormous collaborative and service work
load, new research avenues in our laboratory as a result of this acquisition
will focus among other things on: (1) laser (U-Th)/He dating of carbonate and
hydrous phases; (2) diffusion experiments at higher temperatures (900-600ÂºC),
(3) heating and degassing of larger samples (e.g., magnetite), and (4) U-Pb and
(U-Th)/He double-dating of zircon and rutile from sedimentary basins. The
proposed acquisition will help maintain the current productivity levels, enhance
the existing facilities, and impact the national/international user community of
our laboratory. The PI and his colleagues also have a long record of integrating
research and education, involving graduate and undergraduates in research and
attracting minority and underrepresented students to geology and geochemistry.