* 0930521
* Connecting Fundamental Physics and Cosmology
* MPS,PHY
* 01/01/2009,10/31/2013
* Mark Trodden, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Marc Sher
* 10/31/2013
* USD 205,804.00

Abstract: PHY - 0653563 Title: Connecting Fundamental Physics and Cosmology PI
Mark Trodden Institution: Syracuse University

The case for cosmic acceleration presents cosmology with two of its most
pressing problems: the magnitude of the dark energy, since the expected size of
the cosmological constant is entirely inconsistent with observation; and the
coincidence problem - why is the fraction of the critical density in dark energy
is the same order of magnitude as that in matter today. These concerns join
other fundamental unsolved problems - the nature of dark matter, the origin of
the baryon asymmetry, and the fundamental origin of inflation or other physics
of the early universe. A central part of the proposal is the development of a
suite of tests to (a) establish the theoretical viability of dark energy and
modified gravity models and (b) to distinguish such models from one another and
from the default case of a cosmological constant. The P.I. will investigate the
extent to which there are relationships between modified gravity and dark energy
models; the P.I. will map out and explore the territory of possible
modifications to gravity with the potential to drive late-time cosmic
acceleration; and the P.I. will perform a general study of cosmological
perturbation theory in modified source gravity and on a class of models in which
the Gravitational action is a general function of curvature invariants. The P.I.
further proposes to carry out a systematic and comprehensive analysis of coupled
dark energy-matter models, focusing on the stability of these models. The P.I.
also proposes a systematic study of the cosmological consequences of models
arising from compactified higher dimensional theories of particle physics and
gravity; in particular, whether there are specific signatures that might be
accessible to future supernovae studies, lensing surveys, large-scale structure
measurements and collider experiments. The dominant broader impact of the
proposed research is in public science education; bringing cutting edge science
to the public, including populations traditionally underrepresented in physics.
The P.I. has been a co-P.I. on Cosmic Connections, an NSF-funded project to
construct modern cosmology exhibits for display in the Milton J. Rubenstein
Museum of Science and Technology in Syracuse. The P.I. also organizes a public
lecture series - Saturday Morning Physics - to share the ideas and excitement of
cutting edge modern physics with people with no previous science education.
Further, the P.I. has co-founded and organizes Caf√© Scientifique Syracuse. Held
at a downtown restaurant, Cafe Scientifique is a place where scientists and
scientifically interested non-scientists can come together informally to hear
about and discuss interesting science.