* 0930225
* CPS: Small: Collaborative Research: Methods and Tools for the Verification of Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Chris Myers, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 08/31/2013
* USD 270,000.00

CPS:Small:Collaborative Research: Methods and Tools for the Verification of
Cyber-Physical Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to
investigate and develop methods and tools for the analysis and verification of
cyber-physical systems. The approach is to augment the methods and tools that
have been developed at the University of Utah and the University of South
Florida for modeling and verification of asynchronous and analog/mixed-signal
circuits to address challenges in cyber-physical system
verification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will develop a unified
framework with methods and tools which include an integrated formalism to
comprehensively model discrete/continuous, functional/timing,
synchronous/asynchronous, and deterministic/stochastic behavior. These tools
will also include algorithms to analyze behavior and verify that it satisfies
the correctness requirements on functionality, timing, and robustness. Finally,
they will include abstraction and compositional reasoning approaches to enable
large systems to be analyzed and verified
efficiently.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since cyber-physical systems are becoming
ubiquitous, improvements in such systems such as higher reliability, better
fault-tolerance, improved performance, and lower design costs will have
tremendous positive impact on society. Results from this research will be
transferred to the cyber-physical systems community and other application
domains by both publishing papers in related conferences and journals as well as
by freely distributing tools via the Internet. Both graduate and undergraduate
students will be engaged in this multi-institutional research where they will be
exposed to the latest research in formal and probabilistic analysis. Early
involvement of undergraduate students may help encourage them to attend graduate
school. This research project will also recruit underrepresented and female
students to allow it to reach broader audiences.