* 0930033
* Development of Software for the Over-the-Internet Control, Data Acquisition and Product Generation of the Hydrologic Mobile Network of X-Band Polarimetric Radars
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Anton Kruger, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 09/30/2012
* USD 198,998.00

09300033&lt;br/&gt;Krajewski&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support custom
software development to support a network of mobile, scanning, low power, X-band
polarimetric Doppler radars acquired recently through NSF funding. The Doppler
network's effective use requires internet-based remote control, real-time data
visualization and data quality control software and tools for generating
precipitation cell observation products. In addition, data management and
archiving are needed. The software, archive and control systems will enhance
observational capabilities of the fully developed mobile Doppler network and
will allow scientists to address long-standing questions of how to predict
flooding in ungauged basins. The mobile Doppler network was based on the
enhanced capabilities for high spatial and temporal resolution imaging
(manufacturer specifies 1.5 deg beamwidth with 250 square meter pixels at 10 km
range with 1-2 minute scan times). Precipitation distribution and
characterization of 3-D wind velocity fields will be characterized by the X-band
polarimetric radars network which can achieve results far superior to existing
static national NOAA/NWS network of NEXRAD radars (which are limited to 4 square
km pixel resolution). The small (6 m diameter antenna) X-band radars will be
trailer-mounted for mobile field deployment. As emphasized in review of the
funded MRI proposal, the mobile radar network will enable PIs to addresses a
first order driving mechanism of surface and ground water dynamics. The software
proposed here will allow unique data acquisition and dissemination. The PI will
coordinate all activities with assistance from the Co-PI. The radar units are
currently being delivered. During year one, the software design and database
structure will be developed along with radar control routines. In year two,
algorithms will be refined while real-time data will be collected. New and
improved components will be identified and developed. Two PhD students will be
involved in the software development. The system will serve as a prototype for
high-resolution observations and assist in flood research (especially in fast-
responding basins). The heretofore unavailable spatial and temporal data will
feed into improved hydrologic cycle models. Data will feed into the Prediction
in Ungauged Basins initiative, and the NSF-supported WATERS Network. The
software will have a web interface, thus public and educational usage will be
facilitated. Two PhD students will be directly involved, and the radar system
software will be incorporated into two class modules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***