* 0930299
* STTR Phase I:  Nano-sphere Modified Fibers for Super Insulating Window Coverings
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,10/31/2010
* John Slagter, The Mackinac Technology Center
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 10/31/2010
* USD 149,991.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer
Phase I project will demonstrate the effectiveness of a new window insulation
technology with thermal performance properties comparable to a well insulated
wall. In the United States, buildings account for more than 40% of total energy
consumption. Because windows are between 20-40% of the vertical surface area of
an average building, they consume 30-60% of heating and cooling energy,
representing an annual impact of more than 4.1 quadrillion BTU of primary
energy, costing building owners over $40 billion/year. Our innovation is to use
nanometer sized spherically shaped silica particles attached to glass fibers to
create an insulation material with extremely small points of contact that can be
used to make thin vacuum insulation panels. This Phase I project will determine
the feasibility of incorporating these nanoparticle-modified fibers into
innovative Multilayer Vacuum Insulation Panels to achieve target thermal
insulation properties in a commercially viable, dynamic window covering. This
technology will exceed the US DOE's target window insulation properties in a
commercially viable product that will serve as a cost effective solution for
net-zero energy new construction as well as a retrofit product to improve the
energy efficiency of existing buildings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By facilitating
the development and commercialization of a product that will substantially
reduce unwanted heat transfer through fenestration, the research in this Phase I
STTR project will contribute a partial solution to global energy and
environmental challenges. The development of new core materials for vacuum
insulation panels offers enormous opportunities for the improvement of the
energy efficiency of buildings while also contributing a substantial financial
savings over time. The educational impact of this research will be significant
on two levels: 1) a substantial amount of the work will be performed by students
under the direct supervision of recognized experts and 2) the research will
significantly advance the state of the art in thermal insulation
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;