* 0930307
* STTR Phase I:  High Efficiency Thin-film Photovoltaics on Low-cost Substrates by Layer Transfer
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2010
* Saleem Zaidi, Gratings, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 12/31/2010
* USD 150,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase I project will apply high aspect
ratio, nm-scale, columnar, and crystalline Si structures as templates for high-
quality growth of thin-film GaAs solar cells on low-cost flexible substrates.
Sub-10-nm Si seed layers are expected to facilitate growth of low-defect density
GaAs films. The aspect ratio of nm-scale structures also serve as sacrificial
layers for removal of completed GaAs solar cell. Epitaxial growth and
characterization of GaAs films on nm-scale Si structures will be carried out at
the Center for High Technology at the University of New Mexico. Successful phase
I STTR research will lead to commercialization of high (~ 20 %) efficient,
flexible solar cells for applications in a wide range of terrestrial and space
environments. Multiple substrate re-use and inherent large area processing
capability of Si will result in significant cost reductions.

High quality heteroepitaxial GaAs growth on Si has been a subject of intense
research. Due to its direct bandgap, GaAs is attractive for a number of
optoelectronics applications and its integration with Si-based microelectronics
has been a cherished goal. The lattice and thermal expansion mismatches with Si
make it difficult to grow good device quality layers. We have recently
demonstrated as the Si seed dimension is reduced below 100 nm dimensions, the
quality of heteroepitaxial growth increases rapidly. The nm-scale Si structures
are formed using low-cost, large area methods based on conventional integrated
circuit processing methods. Successful research effort will lead to reduction in
PV generation costs, and enhanced applicability of thin-film PV in terrestrial
and space environments because in contrast with competing thin-film solar cells,
GaAs thin-film solar cells will not suffer from light-induced performance
degradation.

