* 0930750
* STTR Phase I:  EBC/TBC coating system for Si-based ceramic components for improved gas turbine performance and lifetimes
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2010
* Soumendra Basu, PLASMA TECHNOLOGY INCORPORATED
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Walters
* 12/31/2010
* USD 150,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer
Phase I project between Plasma Technology Incorporated and Boston University
will develop a functionally graded thermal barrier/environmental barrier coating
(TBC/EBC) system for aerospace and power generation gas turbines. Introducing
ceramic components (such as SiC/SiC composites) into gas turbines increases
their operating temperatures, leading to increased efficiency and reduced
environmental impact. However, these silicon-based ceramics are susceptible to
hot-corrosion and recession in the presence of hot corrosive gases,
particulates, and water vapor. The innovation in this project involves
developing an integrated TBC/EBC system on SiC/SiC composite components in gas
turbines, where the multifunctional mullite-based chemically vapor deposited EBC
layer prevents recession and hot-corrosion and reduces thermal stresses by being
functionally graded, dense, and crack-free. This coating layer is also
substantially thinner than EBCs currently being used, leading to weight savings,
which is of critical importance in aerospace applications. Subsequently, a
plasma sprayed YSZ topcoat with engineered crack microstructure will be
deposited over the EBC layer which will further increase the operating
temperature and/or reduce the temperatures the components are exposed to,
thereby enhancing sustainability of the gas turbine
components.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This innovative coating system will reduce
costs by increasing the coating lifetime and reducing the need for refurbishment
and repair. It will also lead to fuel savings due to increased efficiency and
reduce emissions that adversely affect the global climate, thereby increasing
environmental sustainability. This project will also provide a Materials Science
and Engineering graduate student with commercially relevant research experience
in this very critical area of gas turbine technology. The major customers who
will be benefited are Solar Turbines, GE, Siemens and Pratt &amp; Whitney. The
world turbine industry is roughly a $90 billion industry, and there is a high
market potential for the developed technology. For example, the projected supply
and demand for turbine engines alone in the United States is about $10 billion
by year 2012. Successfully capturing just 0.1 % of this potential market
translates into a $10 million business. Therefore, the large market potential
provides justification for the development of EBC coating techniques and PTI
will work closely with industry partners to commercialize the
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;