* 0930909
* Nitrogen Fixation in Poplar:  Increased Efficiency of Bioenergy Crop Production
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2009,12/31/2012
* Sharon Doty, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Ram Gupta
* 12/31/2012
* USD 350,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-
5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0930909&lt;br/&gt;Doty&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microorgani
sms that live within plants (endophytes) can dramatically enhance plant growth
by increasing resistance to pathogens and stress, providing fixed nitrogen,
solubilizing phosphate, producing plant hormones, and assisting in
detoxification of environmental pollutants. Poplar and willow are fast-growing
trees that are used for the production of paper, lumber, and bioenergy, for
carbon sequestration, and for phytoremediation of pollutants. The PIs have
demonstrated that when some of the endophytes are added to sterile plants or
seedlings, the growth of the plants is significantly increased. In this
proposal, they aim to test the effectiveness of adding nitrogen-fixing
endophytes to poplar grown in greenhouse conditions and on a field site at the
UW Center for Sustainable Forestry. If these results are demonstrated in these
large-scale experiments, this research could provide the means of increasing the
growth of this important bioenergy crop in an inexpensive, environmentally-
sustainable manner. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits of the
proposal include the first study of nitrogen-fixing endophytes for sustainable
production of a bioenergy tree species. Since many of the poplar and willow
endophytes isolated so far can both induce rapid root growth and fix atmospheric
nitrogen, the presence of these endophytes may have a vital role in the survival
and successful establishment of these tree species in poor soils. Since the
poplar genome was recently sequenced and microarrays are now available, the
proposed study into the functions of diazotrophic endophytes on a whole-tree
scale will provide more incentive for future molecular plant-microbe interaction
experiments to be conducted. In addition, this project provides an excellent
opportunity to study the effects of chemical composition of poplar trees induced
by different nutrient regimes on hydrolysability and fermentability of
pretreated biomass during the bioconversion to ethanol process.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts resulting from the proposed activity
include a strong emphasis on education and support for women in science. The
Principal Investigator and 7 of her 9 lab members are female scientists,
including one post-doc, 4 graduate students, and 2 undergraduates. The Doty Lab
is ethnically diverse including Indian, Chinese, Bosnian, Korean, and Hispanic
personnel. This project would initiate new collaborations with three other
faculty members in the College of Forest Resources, Greg Ettl, Director of the
Center for Sustainable Forestry, Soo-Hyung Kim, specializing in plant physiology
and Renata Bura, specializing in bioconversion of lignocellulosic biomass to
ethanol. To further increase the ethnic diversity in our programs, the PIs will
seek undergraduate researchers through the UW Minority Program. The UW
Undergraduate Research Program provides a forum for students to present their
research at the University, and financial assistance to present their data at
scientific conferences. As an active member of the International Poplar
Commission, Dr. Doty has direct connections to users of poplar and willow around
the world to insure that the knowledge generated in this project will be
utilized promptly to increase plantation tree growth without harm to the
environment. Dr. Doty is collaborating with Brian Stanton, president of
GreenWood Resources, who would be willing to use endophytes as a way to increase
poplar growth in his plantations. Therefore, this research could have direct
impacts on poplar growth for a variety of applications including pulp production
and bioenergy.