* 0930375
* Coming Home: The Reintegration of Native Yup'ik Soldiers/Veterans into their rural communities
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Linda Green, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 06/30/2010
* USD 66,415.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research explores the potential
and multiple risks of suicide for Native (Yup'ik) Alaskan soldiers and veterans
returning from the Middle East war theatre as they reintegrate into their rural
isolated communities located in the Yukon - Kuskokwim Delta of southwest Alaska.
Native Alaskan communities in general - and Yup'ik communities in particular -
have some of the highest suicide rates of anywhere in the United States and
young Native men are at the greatest risk (Perkins 2006). Insofar as veterans
from the Middle East war theatre are committing suicide at an alarming rate
these Native soldiers/ veterans are returning to a doubly charged social and
emotional landscape (Tanielian, 2008). Moreover, two of the primary factors that
can inhibit soldiers and veterans from obtaining the needed behavioral and
mental health services are access to care and willingness to seek
care.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The exploratory study has three key objectives;
first, to investigate the multiple strategies utilized by Native soldiers and
veterans to negotiate this dual risk environment. Secondly, to examine the
particular ways in which the struggles that some of these young Native men face
affect their everyday lived experience, that is social relations with their
families, their peers and their community. Lastly, to explore under what
circumstances these young Native adults may or may not choose to seek help for
what has been characterized as the "invisible wounds of war" (Tanielian, 2008).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researcher's hypothesis is that without a culturally -
sensitive, community - based modality of care - a middle ground - that can serve
as a bridge between not seeking any care at all, ie., "going it alone" and
actively engaging with evidenced based medical care for suicide ideation and
associated problems of depression, PTSD, substance abuse, these Native
soldiers/veterans in rural communities are doubly at risk for suicide as they
are isolated - not only from their military peers ( Messinger 2008) - but also
from their families and their community (Lifton, 1973; Appendix C). This study
seeks to understand what the parameters of that middle ground might look like
that is at once socially, culturally and historically
contextualized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This phase of the research contributes to
our understanding of the complexity of the social and emotional problems faced
by these young Native Alaska soldier/veterans in new ways that allows for more
in depth insights usually missed by more prosaic community research methods.
Although many community studies have now incorporated an ethnographic component
into their research design, it is usually delimited by rapid response
techniques, which usually involved a stay in village a week or so, thus
mitigating an understanding of a locally lived social lives embedded within
local history. This study not only explores the lived experiences of individuals
at risk for suicide, but places them within the context of their families, their
history, their community and their culture. In doing so both the strengths as
well as the vulnerabilities of such emerge that may map new ways to reach and
reach out to people in such circumstances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;