* 0930040
* Acquisition of Graphic-Processing-Units (GPUs) to Upgrade the CPU Cluster at University of Wyoming
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Manchung Yeung, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2010
* USD 74,101.00

0930040&lt;br/&gt;Chen&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). Granted funds
will support acquisition of a cluster of NVIDIA Tesla S1070 1.44 GHz GPU
computing nodes to augment an existing Linux CPU cluster at the University of
Wyoming. Graphic Processing Units (GPUs) are designed to provide high throughput
on parallel computations using many-core chips for which the primary market has
been the graphic intensive gaming industry. NVIDIA has recently released the
CUDA (Compute Unified Device Architecture) framework GPU programming interface
making it possible to develop parallel codes to run on GPUs at much higher
price/performance than is possible on CPUs. The PIs will explore parallelism and
scalability of scientific computing on heterogeneous clusters composed of
hardware with very different processing capability, speed and throughput and
develop a set of open-source, GPU-accelerated modeling and inversion codes for
geoscience research and to teach General-Purpose computation on GPUs (GPGPU) to
graduate students at Geology &amp; Geophysics Department, Computer Science
Department and Mathematics Department in University of Wyoming. The PIs will
develop GPU codes for seismic wave propagation simulations and fullwave seismic
tomography and fluid dynamics simulations for oil reservoir modeling, subsurface
fluid flow and solute transport and mantle
convection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;