* 0930303
* STTR Phase I:  Nanoselenium for Simultaneous Detection and Capture of Mercury Vapor in Fluorescent Lighting Technology
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Robert Hurt, Banyan Environmental, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 06/30/2010
* USD 150,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is focused on the
development of a new technology for reducing the human health risks associated
with mercury over the life-cycle of fluorescent lamps. Fluorescent lamps can
break and release their internal inventory of mercury, which is a known
neurotoxicant, environmental pollutant, and developmental toxicant of special
concern for children and women of child-bearing age. Aspen Sciences is teaming
with Brown University and ARCH Venture Partners to develop nano-selenium-based
products to react with and capture mercury vapor during fluorescent lamp
shipping, use, collection, and recycling. The research focuses on: (i) cost-
effective nano-selenium synthesis, (ii) design and testing of reactive barriers
as box or bag safety liners, (iii) study of reaction rates and sorbent color
change for mercury detection, and (iv) sorbent stability during storage use and
disposal.

The broader impacts of this research are to ensure consumer and worker safety in
the large and rapidly growing market for linear and compact fluorescent lamps.
Lamps broken at home or during shipping release elemental mercury vapor in the
immediate vicinity of adults and children. Approximately 80% of inhaled mercury
vapor is physiologically absorbed in the lung and is able to cross the blood-
brain barrier to cause neurological disorders and developmental impairment.
Aspen's new sorbent can capture mercury vapor at ultra-high capacity and reduce
human exposure in the $7 billion annual worldwide fluorescent lamp market, as
well as remove current psychological and safety barriers to the more widespread
adoption of energy-saving fluorescent technologies.

