* 0930477
* NSF Workshop; Electronic Design Automation -- Past, Present, and Future
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2010
* Jason Cong, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2010
* USD 50,000.00

CCF - 0930477 &lt;br/&gt;NSF Workshop; Electronic Design Automation -- Past,
Present, and Future&lt;br/&gt;Cong, Jason &lt;br/&gt;University of California-
Los Angeles &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Electronic design
automation (EDA) of very large-scale integrated (VLSI) circuits and systems is
an important field in computer science and engineering. It has made a
significant impact on the development of information technology?in particular in
supporting the successful scaling of Moore?s Law over the past 40 years, which
in turn has created the performance and cost-efficient information technology
infrastructure that has transformed our lives and all of society. The success of
the EDA is inspiring for many scientific and societal
reasons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the same time, the EDA field is facing serious
challenges. For example, Non-Recurring Engineering (NRE) costs associated with
VLSI circuit design are skyrocketing with estimates of over $30M per ASIC design
undertaken. The rapid increase in the number of transistors available on a
single chip leads to system-on-chip integration, with complex interactions
between software and hardware, digital and analog, etc. Moreover, the field of
applications enabled by semiconductor technology is growing at a rapid
rate?ranging from very high performance microprocessors and signal processors to
a broad array of low-power portable devices to micro sense/communicate/actuate
networks of chips driven by very low per-unit cost and extremely low operating
power. Designers must create chips that function properly in conventional
digital and mixed-signal operation, as well as comprehend sensors that respond
to signals from many physical domains such as pressure, temperature, chemical,
and optical. The design problem is further compounded by the introduction of
many new physical phenomena determining the performance of severely scaled
semiconductor devices. For example, the power and performance characteristics of
transistors are becoming statistical in nature. The probability of soft or
permanent errors is much higher in the new generation of CMOS devices at 32nm or
below or in new emerging non-CMOS devices. These present unprecedented
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In an earlier workshop jointly held in 2006 by
the NSF and SRC a recommendation was made that research in design technology and
tools be increased through a National Design Initiative. Such an effort was
deemed to be critical ?to maintain U.S. leadership in design for integrated
nano- and Microsystems.? The present workshop is to review the progress made
under the National Design Initiative and evaluate whether new directions and
topics should be added to the Initiative. The recommendations from this workshop
will help to influence the design automation funding programs at the
NSF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;