* 0930647
* CPS:Medium:Collaborative Research: Infrastructure and Technology Innovations for Medical Device Coordination
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Insup Lee, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 08/31/2012
* USD 675,000.00

The objective of this research is to develop a framework for the
development&lt;br/&gt;and deployment of next-generation medical systems
consisting of integrated and&lt;br/&gt;cooperating medical devices. The approach
is to design and implement an&lt;br/&gt;open-source medical device coordination
framework and a model-based component&lt;br/&gt;oriented programming methodology
for the device coordination, supported by a&lt;br/&gt;formal framework for
reasoning about device behaviors and clinical
workflows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the project lies in
the formal foundations of the&lt;br/&gt;framework that will enable rapid
development, verification, and certification&lt;br/&gt;of medical systems and
their device components, as well as the clinical&lt;br/&gt;scenarios they
implement. The model-based approach will supply evidence for the regulatory
approval process, while run-time monitoring components embedded&lt;br/&gt;into
the system will enable "black box" recording capabilities for the
forensic&lt;br/&gt;analysis of system failures. The open-source distribution of
tools supporting&lt;br/&gt;the framework will enhance its adoption and
technology transfer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A rigorous framework for integrating
and coordinating multiple medical devices&lt;br/&gt;will enhance the
implementation of complicated clinical scenarios and reduce&lt;br/&gt;medical
errors in the cases that involve such scenarios.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Furthermore, it will speed up and simplify the process of
regulatory approval for coordination-enabled medical devices, while the formal
reasoning framework will improve the confidence in the design process and in the
approval decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Overall, the framework will help reduce
costs and improve the quality of the&lt;br/&gt;health care.