* 0930193
* Partnerships for Adaptation, Implementation, and Dissemination (PAID):  The College NJ's Advancement Program (TAP) to ADVANCE Female Faculty Through Effective Career Development
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Beth Mitchneck
* 08/31/2013
* USD 688,132.00

The College of New Jersey (TCNJ) is a highly selective, primarily undergraduate
institution (PUI) that will implement an ADVANCE PAID project on its campus.
This project will focus on several important initiatives that will advance the
careers of women faculty, while highlighting mechanisms that can be useful with
alternative tenure and promotion structures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit. This project is comprised of four distinct initiatives: 1) the Mentorship
Initiative, which will enable female faculty to develop a circle of mentors,
comprised of individuals inside and outside of TCNJ; 2) the Professional
Development Initiative, which is grounded in the adaptation of Hunter College's
highly successful workshop series targeted towards both new and existing
faculty; 3) the Family Initiative, consisting of a work climate survey and the
formation of an ad-hoc college-wide committee that will culminate in the
drafting of specific recommendations for providing flexibility in a faculty
member's teaching load as well as other family-friendly policies; and 4) the
Equity Assessment Initiative that will consist of a thorough assessment of
gender equity at TCNJ through the collection and tracking of faculty data, work
climate surveys, and qualitative interviews of full and associate professors in
NSF supported disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. This program
provides an opportunity to replicate successful programs initiated by Hunter
College (one of the few teaching-intensive institutions with successful ADVANCE
programs and a partner in developing TCNJ's initiatives) and an adaptation of
programs from research institutions in a PUI context. The results of this
program will serve as a template for other PUIs seeking to remedy gender
inequalities at their own institutions.