* 0930677
* ACM Creativity and Cognition Graduate Symposium
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2010
* Celine Latulipe, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 05/31/2010
* USD 22,378.00

This is funding to support a Graduate Student Symposium (workshop) for about 12
promising graduate students, along with a panel of distinguished research
faculty mentors, which will take place in conjunction with the 2009 ACM
Creativity & Cognition Conference (CC 2009), to be held October 27-30, 2009, at
the Berkeley Art Museum in Berkeley, California. ACM's Creativity & Cognition
Conference series began in 1993, and has evolved into a lively multidisciplinary
event combining research and practice. As computers become pervasive in all of
society, there is a growing need to encourage interaction between the
disciplines of computer and information technology and the disciplines of
digital arts, design, and cognition. Many envision that interactions across
these disciplinary boundaries are fundamental to research advances. Thanks in
part to this conference series, rigorous research is expanding as theoretic
foundations are emerging and goals become more well-defined. Successful practice
manifests itself in a growing array of creativity support tools for discovery
and composition by software and other engineers, diverse scientists, product and
graphic designers, architects, new media artists, musicians, educators,
students, and many others. Creativity & Cognition 2009 is focused on the theme
of everyday creativity: shared languages and collective action.

Involving young researchers during their graduate education is a key opportunity
to seed and encourage the interactions the conference seeks to nurture. Thus,
the primary goal of the Graduate Student Symposium is to expand the
participation of young researchers pursuing graduate degrees in areas with an
emphasis on creativity and cognition, by giving their work wider exposure in the
community, by helping to foster a sense of community among them, and by
providing them with an opportunity to obtain feedback and guidance from senior
members of the research community in an interactive and supportive environment.
Student participants will meet and discuss their ideas with each other and with
a panel of experienced researchers and practitioners, the objective being to
offer them fresh perspectives on their current work. The student participants
will take part in all aspects of the conference; descriptions of their research
projects will be published in the conference proceedings and posted on the
conference web site.

Broader Impacts: This workshop will substantially increase participation in the
Creativity & Cognition 2009 conference by young researchers pursuing graduate
degrees in fields contributing to understanding creativity and cognition. The
event will increase the exposure and visibility of these young researchers'
ideas within the community. PhD and MFA students from all disciplines concerned
with creativity and cognition will be encouraged to apply. Thus, links will be
created across these disciplines, and a sense of community will be established
among the next generation of researchers. In selecting the student participants,
the PI and the members of the organizing committee will consider factors of
institutional balance (e.g., ensuring that there are not too many students from
one institution, and that institutions not normally represented are included),
as well as diversity across traditionally underrepresented groups.