* 0930166
* Collaborative Research: Analytical Techniques and Software: Development of CyberInfrastructure to Support Laser-Ablation ICP Mass Spectrometry
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2015
* Samuel Bowring, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 05/31/2015
* USD 197,007.00

U-Pb laser ablation geochronology has become the most commonly applied tool for
dating zircons. Despite the widespread application of this tool to a host of
geological problems, there is little consensus with regard to analytical
strategies and data reduction protocols. The result is inter-laboratory bias and
both under- and over-estimation of errors on calculated dates. This limits our
ability to compare results from different labs and limits rigorous compilations
from databases such as EarthChem. This project will remedy this situation by
developing cyber infrastructure tools in support of Laser-Ablation ICP-Mass
Spectrometry (LA-ICP-MS). The project will develop open-source, free, software
in consultation with the international community to treat with statistical rigor
all aspects of data reduction, from calculation of ratios to correction for
interferences and drift. Our approach will follow that used in developing
similar software as part of the EARTHTIME project and requires the integration
of the fields of software engineering and geochemistry. The resulting software
will eliminate large sources of interlaboratory bias and serve as a teaching
tool showing clearly how raw ratios are converted into dates and
uncertainties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Creating the software for connecting the LA-
ICP-MS community with the developing EarthChem database for geochronology and
thermochronology will provide the integration of data from this important
technique into the larger data structure of geochemistry and geology. These data
will play an important role in far-ranging fields such as understanding the
growth of continents, chronology of evolutionary changes, timing of early
hominid evolution, and linkages between climate and tectonics. During all phases
of the planned work, we will involve a broad cross section of the community from
undergraduates to post-doctoral scientists to help develop the next generation
of analysts and software engineers. In particular, the systematic evolution of
the collaboration between software engineers and earth scientists will be
advanced as it produces robust and reliable workflow tools.