* 0930896
* Collaborative Research - Improving STEM Learning through Interactive RoboBooks
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Chris Rogers, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 08/31/2011
* USD 153,190.00

The Improving STEM Learning Through Interactive RoboBooks is a collaborative
project between Tufts University?s Center for Engineering Educational Outreach
and the Center for Applied Special Technology, Inc. This project will develop
RoboBooks, a novel interactive cyberenabled workspace for high school students
with learning disabilities and/or behavioral/emotional disabilities that will
improve their science understanding in chemistry and
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phase 1 will focus on preparing the RoboBook
technology for the proposed research by embedding supports and scaffolds into
the tool with the goal of improving the science learning experience for students
with disabilities. Expertise and assets created in an NSF-funded collaborative
research project (DRL-0730260) in which CAST, EDC and the University of Michigan
are developing UDL approaches to science curricula for middle and high school
students will be leveraged for this project. They are 1) developing an open
source UDL Inquiry Science System that enables science curricula to be
transformed into digitally supported versions that incorporate UDL features, 2)
creating guidelines for designing UDL science materials, and 3) developing four
UDL exemplars of chemistry and biology units from tested instructional materials
and evaluating the benefits of these exemplars for middle and high school
students with and without learning disabilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
addition to preparing the technologies with embedded supports and scaffolds, the
development of precise curricular units in physics and chemistry will take place
during this phase of the project. A small cohort of teachers from Fenway High
School and Boston Arts Academy will be incorporated into the project to advice
in the design of the specific supports as well as the curricular materials.
These teachers, along with one additional teacher, will be trained in the summer
of 2010 to implement RoboBooks in their science classrooms in Fall 2010. Two
teachers from each participating school will work with the team in Phase
2.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phase 2 of the project focuses on collecting pilot data
on the overall effectiveness of RoboBooks as designed for students with high
incidence disabilities. This phase will involve two teachers each from Fenway
High School and Boston Arts Academy. A pilot study will be conducted with four
classrooms to measure impact of the books as well as learning (content and
process) gains and engagement in science. The primary research questions driving
the pilot study will be:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. How do students with high
incidence disabilities use interactive RoboBooks in high school physics and
chemistry classes?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Which supports and scaffolds embedded
in RoboBooks do students and teachers find useful?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. How
does the use of the RoboBooks affect student engagement relative to content
using more traditional resources?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4. What are the student-
level attitudinal benefits reasonably ascribable to using
RoboBooks?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;5. What cognitive benefits can be ascribed to
the use of the RoboBooks? How do different implementations affect learning
outcomes? What contextual variables facilitate or impede student-level learning
benefits?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The pilot study will employ the following
measures: student and Teacher questionnaires embedded in RoboBooks to obtain
feedback on usability and content presentation; interviews with teachers and
students facilitated by the project staff and the external evaluator to gather
more qualitative feedback; and pre/post science assessments. In addition,
classroom observations will be conducted to observe the practices of use
students with disabilities engage in with RoboBooks. Davis Square Research
Associates will conduct the formative and summative independent evaluation.
&lt;br/&gt;