* 0930549
* Interactions and self-assembly of anisotropic colloidal particles in electric fields
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Eric Furst, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* William Olbricht
* 08/31/2014
* USD 287,927.00

0930549&lt;br/&gt;Furst&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent results in our
laboratory demonstrate the surprisingly rich role particle shape has on the
disorder to order transition of anisotropic particles in electric fields. These
suggest new routes to forming complex, higher order structures from dispersions
via self assembly. While spherical particles rapidly and reversibly form ordered
hexagonal close packed arrays in AC electric fields, colloidal ellipsoids and
dicolloids, particles resembling two fused spheres, can form unique aggregate
geometries (chains at an angle with the field, particle chains with alternating
orientations) and open, ordered arrays with a centered rectangular symmetry.
However, particle shape may also play a critical role in the self assembly
kinetics by frustrating the path of the disorder to order transition. For
instance, the the lack of registry between chains of dicolloid particles
initially formed in the field direction frustrates assembly into centered
rectangular arrays. However, this also suggests unique possibilities for
creating complex colloidal structures using mixtures of spherical and
anisotropic colloids that resemble molecular compounds. In this work, we will
study the field directed self assembly of homo-dicolloid particles with
symmetric lobes. Even this relatively simple anisotropic shape leads to complex
interparticle interactions, packing, and self assembly kinetics. We will exploit
the large parameter space to create new, complex colloidal structures. This
includes varying the degree of separation between the particle lobes, from
slightly aspherical to kissing spheres, and altering the bulk dielectric,
surface chemistry or surface conductivity of the particles, even making Janus
dicolloids, using adsorbed polymers, surfactants or particle monomer
chemistries. We will study the order disorder transition, including the
characterization of self assembled structures and kinetics, as well as the the
field induced interactions between anisotropic particles. The latter will
elucidate the mechanisms of the particle polarizability and the roles of the
double layer, bulk conductivity, particle dielectric properties and particle
surface conductivity. Combined with the physical insight provided by our
previous work on direct colloidal interaction measurements between spherical
particles, this will enable us to understand and control the fieldinduced
colloidal interactions on the molecular level to tailor particle self assembly.
Furthermore, by mixing particles with different polarizabilities, which controls
particle orientation in the field, self assembled structures with even greater
complexity may be attainable. Other novel aspects of field directed assembly
will be developed, including pulsed fields to anneal structures and assisted
assembly using holographic optical tweezers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: Solution phase self assembly promises to be the technologically and
economically optimal approach in the realization of industrial scale nano
materials and devices. In essence, harnessing self assembly for man made
applications mimics nature's route to the formation of functional
nanostructures. The goal of this work is to develop and fundamentally validate
novel approaches to self assembled structures using colloidal building blocks
and external fields. We will discover new routes to forming complex self
assembled structures and gain a fundamental understanding of the underlying
mechanisms of particle interactions and self assembly in electric fields. The
latter will lead to broad scalability of our findings across a vast parameter
space of physico chemical conditions, including particle size, shape,
composition (dielectric properties), surface chemistry and solution
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. In addition to the broad
technical impacts, the proposed work will develop the human resources needed to
sustain and grow national excellence in the science and engineering of colloidal
and nanoparticle suspensions. The education and outreach impact will be
amplified by sponsoring a secondary school Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics (STEM) teacher as a summer research fellow in our laboratory, in
coordination with the Delaware?s NSF sponsored Nature InSpired Engineering
Research Experiences for Teachers (NISE-RET) program.