* 0930462
* 2009 Photosynthesis Gordon Research Conference: June 28th - July 3rd in Rhode Island
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2010
* Krishna Niyogi, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 07/31/2010
* USD 5,000.00

0930462&lt;br/&gt;Niyogi&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intel
lectual Merits: The main objective of the 2009 Gordon Research Conference (GRC)
on Photosynthesis, to be held June 28-July 3 at Bryant University in Rhode
Island, is to bring together a broad spectrum of scientists, both junior and
senior, from a wide range of disciplines, who will learn from each other and who
will get to know each other, and who collectively will be able to be
increasingly instrumental in (1) understanding the major natural way of solar
energy capture and conversion into chemical energy, and (2) utilizing this
knowledge to contribute to developing natural and bio-inspired systems for
improved solar energy utilization mechanisms in society. There are many exciting
developments in our understanding of photosynthetic energy conversion that have
happened since the last Photosynthesis GRC on biophysical aspects, held in 2006.
Large scale computational studies, done in conjunction with novel imaging
approaches have modeled the assembly of large photosynthetic complexes and
opened the door to the atomic level functioning of these molecular energy
converting machines. Much progress has also been made in our understanding of
the efficiency and regulation of light harvesting by photosynthetic antenna
systems in a number of different photosynthetic systems. There has been an
intense focus on the operation of the water splitting reaction and detailed
function of the oxygen evolving complex. This most critical reaction is
responsible for the oxygen we breathe and understanding its function may be the
key to efficient hydrogen production in the future. All of this work has
implications in the race for sustainable energy sources.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts resulting from the proposed activity
include advancement of understanding and dissemination of cutting-edge research
results. The focus on the development of sustainable global energy solutions has
been especially promoted by having world leading international researchers in
alternative energy speak at our meeting. These include Prof. Dr. Klaus Lips
(Helmholz Institute, Germany) who is a top international researcher in thin film
photovoltaic science and Professor Fraser Armstrong (Oxford University, UK) who
heads a very large and influential laboratory focused on hydrogen production and
bio-based fuel cell technology. These researchers would not normally attend a
conference focused on photosynthesis, but are excited to be interacting with our
photosynthesis community to work together towards sustainable energy solutions.
The conference thus offers a unique opportunity to forge new international
collaborations between experts in Nature's solar energy converter and experts in
sustainable alternative energy technologies. The conference will also emphasize
participation of junior investigators. In addition to a large number of poster
presentations by students and postdocs, 6 of the 24 invited speakers qualify as
junior investigators.