* 0930411
* Enhanced Molecular Detection and Biosensing of Carbohydrate-Mediated Interactions Through Integrated Silicon Nanophotonics
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Michael Hochberg, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 09/30/2013
* USD 628,000.00

0930411&lt;br/&gt;Ratner&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Silicon photonics has revealed its potential to
revolutionize label-free real-time biosensing. Through chemistries that can
selectively functionalize both oxidized silicon and silicon nitride with
protein, DNA, antibody, carbohydrate and small molecule ligands, it is possible
to achieve both specificity and extraordinary sensitivity in a chip-scale system
based on the use of nanophotonic waveguides. Among the most promising biosensing
structures to emerge from the silicon photonics community is the silicon ring
resonator. The ring resonator consists of a travelling-wave ring that is coupled
to a nearby silicon waveguide. Analogous to conventional Surface Plasmon
Resonance (SPR), the surface functionalized ring resonator's (SFRR) response is
a function of the refractive index above the resonator - permitting it to
sensitively and specifically detect cells and biomolecules at or near the
surface of the device. Literature reports have demonstrated that these and other
resonant devices can be used to detect interactions with proteins, DNA, viruses
and bacteria. Preliminary studies indicate that the SFRR possesses sensitivities
that exceed that of SPR for identical surface chemistries - with limits of
detection low enough to potentially detect individual small-molecule binding
events. As such, conjugation methods that have been used for decades within the
surface science and biosensing communities can now be leveraged, with silicon
photonics, to significantly enhance biosensor capabilities. The objective of
this proposal is to develop a new generation of ultrasensitive biosensors based
on the combination of novel integrated silicon nanophotonic devices and
optimized surface chemistries for the presentation of biomolecular ligands. This
proposal will focus on the use of synthetic carbohydrates as model ligands to
facilitate the design and fabrication of this biosensing platform. Carbohydrates
were selected for this application based on the fact that they are involved in a
range of high-affinity and lowaffinity binding events, including interactions
with other carbohydrates, proteins, nucleic-acids, cells, bacteria, and viruses.
Carbohydrates and glycoconjugates are also implicated in a variety of vital
biological processes, and real-time label-free glycan biosensors would be
invaluable to biomedical research in host-pathogen interactions and vaccine
design.