* 0930769
* Spatial Thinking in the Curriculum of Students who are Blind or Low Vision
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Amy Lobben, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 08/31/2013
* USD 214,749.00

The Spatial Thinking in the Curriculum of Students who are Blind or Low Vision
project will advance the knowledge of how students who are blind or visually
impaired learn spatial thinking, a cornerstone of science and mathematical
learning. This demonstration research project will result in pilot-tested
assessment and interventions, which will serve as the basis for more advanced,
robust investigations of how students who are blind or visually impaired think
spatially and learn spatial thinking. The two primary research questions driving
the pilot study are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Do students who are blind or low
vision demonstrate similar spatial thinking skills as their sighted peer groups?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Step 1: Adapting existing instruments into tactile and
audio format.&lt;br/&gt;Step 2: Formative evaluation of tactile
instruments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Can educational interventions or spatial
thinking training protocol enhance spatial thinking skills of students who are
blind or low vision as measured by traditional and new
instruments?&lt;br/&gt;Step 1: Developing the Spatial Thinking
Intervention.&lt;br/&gt;Step 2: Formative Evaluation of Intervention
Activities.&lt;br/&gt;Step 3: Applying the Intervention
Activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Phil Gersmehl, a nationally recognized
expert in geographic education and spatial thinking, will serve as the external
evaluator for this project. Dr. Gersmehl is Co-Director of the New York Center
for Geographic Learning and a Professor of Geography at the University of
Minnesota. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project materials will be disseminated at Dr.
Lobben?s Spatial and Map Cognition Laboratory website at the University of
Oregon Eugene. Results will be disseminated at one or more of the following
conferences: the Association for Education and Rehabilitation of the Blind and
Visually Impaired, the Association of American Geographers, the International
Cartographic Conference, and the NSF?s Division of Human Resource Development
Joint Annual Meeting. Journal articles are expected to be submitted to
publications such as the Annals of the Association of American Geographers
and/or Journal of Visual Impairment and Blindness.