* 0930134
* Institutionalizing the IGERT Innovations at Rutgers
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2009,11/30/2015
* Eileen Kowler, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 11/30/2015
* USD 1,249,974.00

This project is combining the theoretical perspectives of "communities of
practice" and "situated learning" with the innovative research, curriculum, and
community best practices developed in four Integrative Graduate Research and
Education Traineeship (IGERT) projects. This is done horizontally across the
institution's STEM graduate programs and centers, and vertically within the
undergraduate research experience programs. This extensive program of activities
is improving the quality of undergraduate and graduate students completing STEM
degrees. Additionally, the project is using proven methods to increase the
participation of groups underrepresented in STEM fields, including first
generation, economically disadvantaged, and disabled students. With attention to
addressing critical educational junctures, the senior leadership team is
creating the Graduate Innovation and Integration Center (GIIC) to enhance the
integration of the institution's and research and educational efforts. GIIC
center is working with five existing interdisciplinary campus centers to build
collaborations and synergistic outcomes. A comprehensive plan is evaluating each
aspect of the project including critical junctures as well as the impact of the
project on promoting institutional collaboration and synergy. Longitudinal
studies are being planned that follow students for three years post graduation.
The broader impact of this project is the synergy between a wide array of
undergraduate and graduate programs; the broadened participation of
undergraduate students in research experiences, particularly students from
populations underrepresented in STEM disciplines; the improved retention of a
diverse body of graduate students; and a model for student success that can be
used at other institutions.