* 0930364
* STTR Phase I:  Nanomaterial Constructs With Controllable Catalytic Activity: Topic MM-Subtopic SMS
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2010
* Kathleen Meehan, MW Photonics Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2010
* USD 150,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project seeks to develop
nanoconstructs with catalytic activity which is controllable via an external
trigger. Nanoscale metal oxides have unique properties that will be leveraged to
change the catalytic activity. Nanoalloys composed of domains of free radical
generators and domains of free radical scavengers can be designed to limit
catalytic activity until an external control is provided, stimulating changes in
the chemical structure and enhancing the catalytic activity of one domain over
the other. The ability to switch the catalytic activity will enable several
applications to be developed, including medical therapies. The synthesis and
characterization of nanoconstructs with controllable catalytic activity and
demonstration of switching capability under external stimulation will be
developed. Catalytic activity of the nanoconstructs will be characterized as a
function of pH, illumination, and temperature. Measurements will be correlated
with composition uniformity, average composition, size, and defect
concentration. As ceria is a phosphor used in solid state lighting, a secondary
objective is to apply the same techniques to increase efficiency, tune the
wavelength, or alter the fluorescence lifetime.

The broader impact/commercial potential will be the development of externally
switchable catalysts that are large and the applications varied. Applications
would include health care applications, solid state lighting, solar cell, bio-
chemical sensing, and remotely triggerable catalysts. The ability to switch the
nanoparticle's free radical scavenging and generating behavior will have an
enormous impact on the field of nanobiotechnology and may become a necessary
property to minimize the toxicity of nanoparticles uptaken in the body. Markets
for selective killing of cancer cells or bacteria are potentially multi-million
dollar industries. The nanoconstructs can be incorporated as phosphors into new
or existing solid state lighting fixtures to improve efficiency as well as
achieve desired modifications of the spectral output and light modulation. Other
potential applications could include the development of water-based catalysts
that can self-clean to eliminate biofouling for near room-temperature fuel cell
designs, or remote biochemical sensing. Beneficiaries of the technology will be
a wounded soldier, a factory worker using circadian lighting to stay alert on
third shift, users of improved batteries, solar cells, or antibacterial
bandages.

