* 0930709
* STTR Phase I: Field-Applicable Anticorrosion Coatings Using Polyaniline Nanofibers
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Richard Kaner, RESODYN CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 06/30/2010
* USD 150,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase I project involves the development
and characterization of a new type of active anticorrosion coating with zero
VOC, zero HAP, and zero heavy metal content. The coating will have no solvent or
carrier, no drying time, and no curing time. This coating is based on a method,
newly discovered at Resodyn, to create a non-aggregated dispersion of
electrochemically active nanoparticles in a tough, adherent proprietary
thermoplastic matrix. The newly discovered composite coating material may be
applied either the factory or in the field to steel structures by using a novel
polymer thermal spray system developed by Resodyn Corporation. These
thermoplastic coatings may also be field-repaired. In this project, the
synthesis will be optimized to yield high surface area electrochemically active
nanoparticles dispersed in the thermoplastic matrix. The process will be scaled
up to produce useful quantities of the coating material with varying
thermoplastic compositions, several different concentrations of nanoparticles,
and two forms of nanoparticles. These coatings will then be applied to steel
substrates, and characterized for mechanical, barrier, and active
electrochemical properties. Test coupons and rebar will be exposed to severe
corrosion conditions to validate the laboratory results.

Corrosion is a $300 billion per year problem. Steel corrosion is of particular
concern in bridges and other infrastructure, both internally (rebar in
reinforced concrete) and externally (steel structures); direct cost of bridge
corrosion alone is between $6-10 billion annually. The most effective
anticorrosion treatments, such as chromates and solvent-borne coatings, carry
severe environmental hazards. Barrier coatings such as epoxy can provide a
degree of protection, but are difficult-to-impossible to field-apply, can be
damaged in shipping and handling, and generally need a topcoat for any outdoor
exposure. This coating material would be solvent free, instant curing, single
part, no pot life or shelf life issues, non-metallic, and simple to use in both
factory and in situ applications. Field repair of scratches and gouges would be
capable of being done by a simple melting process. The coating will also change
color in areas where corrosion is incipient, giving an early warning that a
repair will be necessary before any actual corrosion damage can occur. The
coating will enable an environmentally friendly method of significantly
extending the life of steel infrastructure at a comparable cost to current
anticorrosion treatments, which represents a potential $1.8 billion market.

