* 0930098
* Phase segregated inorganic heterstructures for low cost, high efficiency photovoltaics
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Stacey Bent, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Ram Gupta
* 09/30/2012
* USD 325,000.00

0930098&lt;br/&gt;Bent&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits:
The development of sustainable energy solutions that will meet the needs of a
growing world population, while reducing greenhouse gas emissions, will rely in
large part on renewable energy sources. With a global radiation flux of 174,000
TW, solar energy is a renewable resource that has the potential to provide more
than enough energy to power the world. However, current solar cell designs are
too expensive to be adopted for large scale application. Hence, new materials
and designs for photovoltaics are urgently needed. One design that is of growing
interest is a nano- or microscale heterojunction design with interdigitated
semiconductor layers, in which the light absorption path length can be decoupled
from the carrier diffusion path to the device junction in order to maximize the
device efficiency. However, the difficulty of making such nano- or
microstructures using any currently available method will drive the cost of the
solar cells up, likely negating any increase in efficiency. This project
proposes to investigate a novel fabrication technique and materials system that
will allow nanostructured or microstructured designs for solar energy conversion
to be made at lower cost. Specifically, fundamental studies into a guided self-
assembly process in which selected inorganic mixtures are induced to self-
organize into the desired heterostructures will be conducted. A thin film of a
multicomponent mixture will be deposited that will be converted during growth or
through a second simple thermal or chemical process to a three-dimensional
nanostructure via self-assembly. This study will investigate the choice of
materials system that will form two semiconductors of opposite polarity with
optimal band and interfacial properties and will explore methods to guide the
assembly process into the desired photovoltaic structure. It is expected that
fundamental advances to the understanding of guided self-assembly in materials
science will be made. In addition, the research has significant potential for
influencing not just the photovoltaic field but also a broad range of
nanoscience studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The research
promises to introduce a new approach to making photovoltaics which, if
successful, could have a significant worldwide impact. Our approach has the
potential to provide high-efficiency solar cells at a cost comparable to cheap
window glass coating, allowing solar electricity to be competitive with that
produced from coal and leading to significant reduction in greenhouse gas
emissions. In addition, the proposed program will achieve broader impacts in
several key ways: (1) Teaching and training; (2) Broadening participation of
underrepresented groups; (3) Disseminating research results broadly to enhance
science and technological understanding; (4) Outreach to the public. The
proposed project will continue building upon the important foundation of
training both graduate and undergraduate students carried out by the PIs.
Currently many of the students in their research groups are minority or female.
Moreover, the PIs propose to engage a high school teacher from local minority-
serving schools on this project in the laboratory for two summers through the
Summer Program of Professional Development.