* 0930016
* Acquisition of a liquid water isotope analyzer for hydrological, glaciological and geochemical research
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2010
* Ozeas Costa, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Thomas J. Boyd
* 09/30/2010
* USD 57,800.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)." This award will fund acquisition of a liquid oxygen isotope
analyzer. The device is a reasonably new instrument relying on cavity ringdown
spectroscopy. Precision specifications for this instrument are published at 0.1
permil and 0.3 permil for oxygen and deuterium isotope ratios, respectively. The
instrument will be housed in the Water Science Laboratory at OSU. A technician
will oversee the use, training and maintenance for the instrument. User fees
will be used to pay for supplies and maintenance (but kept as low as possible).
The PIs will evaluate requests from theses projects and adjust costs as low as
possible. The liquid water isotope analyzer (LWIA) will be used to source
apportion water (groundwater vs. overland flow) to understand carbon flow in
natural and managed watersheds, to measure oxygen and hydrogen isotope ratios of
surface meltwater in order to gain an understanding of storage, sources,
residence time and transport of water associated with glaciers, to understand
precipitation, freezing, glacier dynamics and meltwater contributions to the
hydrogeologic cycle over longer and higher resolution timescales (seasonal and
interannaul), to calculate paleotemperatures using coral skeletal oxygen ratios
which vary when deposited based on ambient temperature, and overall to employ
isotopic analysis to better understand climate change and biogeochemistry. The
PIs have a history of producing graduates from women and minority sectors. PIs
will conduct research with considerable societal relevance (watershed management
impacts, climate forcings, hydrogeologic cycles). Undergraduates will be
incorporated into research projects.