* 0930053
* US-Ethiopia International Workshop: Risk Science Scholarship and Sustainable Development: Building Educator-Practitioner Networks in Africa, Bahir Dar, August 2009
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* John Magistro, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* DeAndra Beck
* 08/31/2010
* USD 59,950.00

John Magistro and The Bureau of Applied Research in Anthropology (BARA) at the
University of Arizona (UA) propose to conduct a five-day workshop entitled Risk
Science Scholarship and Sustainable Development: Building Educator-Practitioner
Networks in Africa. The working session will be hosted by BDU (Bahir Dar
University, Bahir Dar, Ethiopia), a collaborating partner with BARA/UA in the
implementation of a new MSc post-graduate program in Disaster Risk Science and
Sustainable Development (DRSSD). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) Intellectual Merit
The proposed workshop addresses the urgent need for human and institutional
resource capacity building at the university level in Africa to more effectively
manage recurrent and escalating exposure to anthropogenic and naturally
triggered disaster and conflict events on the continent. The underinvestment in
capacity development related to risk management in Sub-Saharan Africa was
recently profiled by the Commission of the African Union, UNISDR and the World
Bank. It stressed the ?lack of technically-oriented human resources? in Africa,
with specific emphasis on the need for cross sectoral training and strengthening
of capabilities in relation to hydrometeorological threats. It also drew
attention to ?low knowledge, skills competencies, staff and information at all
levels? as limiting factors in national and sub-national management of disaster
and associated risks. Despite years of experience in disaster response, Ethiopia
has yet to establish adequate systems to respond to and prepare for the series
of natural and human-made disasters that continue to beset the country.
Development professionals have not yet mastered strategies that focus on risk
reduction and management within the development context. Thus the workshop will
convene leading educators and practitioners who will revise and design a more
socially responsive curriculum that links theory to development praxis for
application among government institutions and training colleges within Ethiopia
and across Africa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(2) Broader Impacts The workshop will
provide clear mutual benefits to BDU and UA by bolstering curriculum development
and the exchange of knowledge in the growing field of risk science and
management. Contributions from leading scholars and practitioners in Africa will
significantly improve the quality of curriculum and pedagogy for both
universities. More importantly, it will broaden the base of institutional
contacts and link the BDU-UA partnership to ongoing educator-practitioner
networks in the risk science and management field in Africa. Benefits will
expand to the larger circle of scholars and experts attending the workshop, by
sharing and coordinating the efforts of the respective research centers and
institutions. As poor and disadvantaged populations are often those who bear the
brunt of accumulating risk processes, the workshop will ultimately benefit
society by promoting curricula that are underpinned by a socially responsive
imperative to address the needs of highly vulnerable populations in both
countries (and including Native American and borderland communities in
Arizona).&lt;br/&gt;