* 0930242
* The City Tech I-Cubed Incubator: Interdisciplinary Partnerships for Laboratory Integration
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Bonne August, CUNY New York City College of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Jody Chase
* 08/31/2014
* USD 1,102,068.00

The City Tech I3 Incubator: Interdisciplinary Partnerships for Laboratory
Integration addresses&lt;br/&gt;three NSF I3 goals: broadening participation,
integrating research and education, and developing a&lt;br/&gt;global workforce.
The incubator will broaden participation by enabling our students, the
majority&lt;br/&gt;of whom are underrepresented in STEM programs of study and
professions, to learn science,&lt;br/&gt;mathematics, and engineering technology
applications in laboratories that have been transformed&lt;br/&gt;to reflect the
collaborative interdisciplinary approaches of advanced science and industry
labs&lt;br/&gt;today. The incubator will provide new opportunities to fuse STEM
education and STEM research&lt;br/&gt;by creating an institution-wide focus on
inquiry based research as a means of learning and doing&lt;br/&gt;science in
labs, in faculty-led research projects outside the classroom, and in industry
settings in&lt;br/&gt;the New York metropolitan area, where our students will
seek their futures. Finally, the incubator&lt;br/&gt;will contribute to the
development of a global workforce by enhancing and expanding the role
of&lt;br/&gt;industry representatives in communicating their needs and practices
to the college and&lt;br/&gt;reciprocally using the college to meet their own
technological workforce needs.&lt;br/&gt;The City Tech I3 Incubator will weave
together dimensions of four current NSF-funded projects:&lt;br/&gt;Metropolitan
Mentors Network: Growing an Urban Talent Pool in New York City
(STEP),&lt;br/&gt;Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Ground-Based and
Satellite Remote Sensing at&lt;br/&gt;NOAA-CREST (REU), S-STEM Scholarships for
Students, and Research, Reflect, Plan:&lt;br/&gt;ADVANCE IT-START at New York
City College of Technology (ADVANCE). Mechanisms of&lt;br/&gt;integration are 1)
creation of a multi-dimensional model of lab practice across all
STEM&lt;br/&gt;departments as a tool for benchmarking lab transformation; 2)
creation of a cross-project matrix&lt;br/&gt;for grant funded projects that
charts diversity goals, outreach to high schools, research&lt;br/&gt;engagement
of students, involvement of industry, and significant learning outcomes; 3)
a&lt;br/&gt;management structure led by the provost, two academic deans, and a
biologist on the faculty that&lt;br/&gt;will be continuously advised by a City
Tech I3Incubator Advisory Board comprising members of&lt;br/&gt;departmental
advisory boards and the PIs of current grant-funded STEM initiatives; 4)
location of&lt;br/&gt;professional development activities for the wider STEM
faculty in the Faculty Commons, a&lt;br/&gt;college-wide center for teaching and
learning; and 5) enhancing communications by using the&lt;br/&gt;cross-project
matrix as a communication tool and establishing a strong web presence for all
I3&lt;br/&gt;activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The City Tech I-Cubed Incubator:
Interdisciplinary Partnerships for Laboratory Integration brings together
NSF/EHR awards from the ADVANCE, NSF-STEP and S-STEM programs, as well as other
work, around the I3 integrative themes for broadening participation, developing
a globally engaged workforce, and the integration of research and education.