* 0930213
* Engineering and Social Justice: Research and Education of (In)commensurable Fields of Practice
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Juan Lucena, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Linda Layne
* 08/31/2013
* USD 299,237.00

This project, supported by the Ethics Education in Science and Engineering
Cross-NSF program, investigates the relationship between engineering and social
justice. Given the global challenges of the 21st century, engineering educators
are implementing innovative ways to prepare tomorrow's engineers--including
programs and courses in community service, sustainable development, and
humanitarian engineering. That engineering students might be enacting various
forms of social justice in these programs and courses raises important
questions. How are engineering students interpreting social justice? How do
those interpretations intersect with their education as engineers? What might
engineering and social justice have in common? In which ways have these two
fields of practice aligned, clashed, or interfaced in recent US history? How and
why should relevant dimensions of social justice be effectively taught and
disseminated throughout engineering curricula? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main
goal of this project is to research these questions and develop educational
resources aimed at relevant connections between engineering and social justice,
allowing for various interpretations of social justice. To achieve this goal,
the project researches historical and ethical connections between engineers and
social justice. Furthermore, given the surge in university programs related to
community service and humanitarian engineering, the project contributes by
developing relevant instructional case studies. The project will also result in
a book about Engineering and Social Justice with chapters exploring the social-
justice dimensions of engineering during the New Deal, radical and non-radical
engineers in the 1960s, engineers of appropriate technology, engineers of
sustainable development, and engineering to help. Primary project partners and
audiences include engineering faculty and students, engineers in organizations
actively pursuing social-justice goals, and a growing network of engineering
educators interested in social justice issues. This project stands to have a
broad impact by increasing recruitment and retention among US engineering
students, particularly women and underrepresented groups, as students become
more concerned with the social relevance of their careers.