* 0930516
* FSML:   Infrastructure for Molecular and Microbial Ecology at the Harvard Forest
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2009,12/31/2012
* David Foster, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 12/31/2012
* USD 384,915.00

The Harvard Forest is awarded a grant to upgrade, modernize, and reconfigure its
John G. Torrey analytical laboratory to include capacity for research in
molecular and microbial biology. Improvements to the laboratory include new
benches, hoods, cold-storage facilities, energy-efficient electrical and
mechanical controls, and a wastewater reduction system. The thoroughly renovated
laboratoy will (1) provide new opportunities for undergraduate and graduate
students, post-doctoral researchers, and faculty from the dozens of institutions
worldwide who conduct research at Harvard Forest; (2) enhance long-term
experimental and monitoring programs supported by the National Science
Foundation and the Department of Energy, and emerging through the Harvard
Forests role as the northeastern core site for the National Ecological
Observatory Network (NEON); (3) support current and new classes and field camps
in microbial and molecular biology, ecology, and archaeology; and (4) complement
existing laboratory facilities dedicated to the study of terrestrial and aquatic
biogeochemistry.

Since 1907, research and education have been the mission of the Harvard Forest,
one of the oldest and most intensively studied forests in North America. From
its center consisting of 3500 acres of land, research facilities, and the Fisher
Museum located in the North Quabbin region of Massachusetts, research
scientists, undergraduates, gradutate students, K-12 students and their
teachers, and forest policy analysts and decision-makers together explore topics
ranging from conservation and environmental change to land-use history and the
ways in which physical, biological and human systems interact to change the
Earth.

