* 0930927
* RAPD: Development of Domestic Virtual Robotic Environment
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Emanuel Todorov, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Ted A. Conway
* 08/31/2012
* USD 331,115.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

0930927 Matsuoka

About 700,000 Americans suffer from new or recurrent strokes each year, with
some 500,000 being fortunate enough to survive [1]. Over half of all strokes
occur in areas of the brain that control movement, leaving many victims with
impaired motor functions [2] that are most often localized in one side of the
body and in one specific area, such as the arm or hand.

With careful physical rehabilitation, damaged motor functions can recover
partial or full mobility as the nervous system rewires its neural circuits to
represent lost functions at new neural locations. The level of recovery depends
on the amount and quality of post-stroke rehabilitative care [1,3]. Once their
condition stabilizes, inpatients typically receive daily occupational and
physical therapy; outpatients visit rehabilitation clinics or receive therapist
home visits several times a week for the first few months of recovery [4].
Research shows that physical recovery continues beyond six months post-stroke
[3]. Unfortunately, the level of longer term care can be prematurely curtailed
by patients' insurance plans, families' ability to transport patients to
rehabilitative care, and patients' own motivation levels. Another significant
factor limiting optimal recovery is "learned non-use" [5,6,7], viz., when stroke
survivors learn to manage daily activities without using the formerly paralyzed
limb even if they can.

Our work can play a critical role not only in helping stroke survivors regain
physical mobility, but in helping them overcome the social, emotional and
motivational barriers to doing so. Our overarching goal is to develop a domestic
rehabilitative environment that is: (1) safe to use residentially, (2) engaging
even for the unmotivated, (3) provides useful interface for off-site therapists
and physicians, and (4) able to overcome or avoid learned non-use issues. Toward
the end of the proposed period, this environment will be placed in several homes
where usability and safety can be qualitatively assessed (without running the
therapeutic program). This is a three-year project; after its successful
completion, we intend to replicate and distribute the system to more patients'
homes for complete therapeutic evaluation.

The intellectual merits of the proposed project are in: (1) the multi-
disciplinary engineering contribution needed to design a novel domestic virtual
robotic environment that is safe and engaging, and (2) addressing scientific
questions related to useful physiological/behavioral data for off-site
therapists and perceptual interactions that augment people?s movements without
their conscious awareness. With these problems solved, we will be able to
rehabilitate patients with motor impairments in their own homes and extend their
range of motion beyond what they had previously thought possible.

The broader impacts of the proposed work are in: (1) reducing the burden on
stroke survivors' families and lowering the cost of care to families and
insurers, (2) extending the environment for use in domestic diagnosis,
prevention, and exercise paradigms for neurological disorders, elder care, and
additional disabled populations, and (3) recruiting more girls in the middle
school into science and engineering by introducing the concept of ?helping
people' through science and engineering. The PI is a woman with a strong track
record in providing K-12 outreach.