* 0930232
* Partnerships for Adaptation, Implementation, and Dissemination (PAID):  Creating a Culture of Success for Women in Engineering and Science
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 08/31/2015
* USD 736,500.00

The College of Engineering and Science (COES) at Louisiana Tech proposes to
implement an ADVANCE PAID project, ADVANCEing Faculty , which has as its mission
advancing women in STEM disciplines. Specifically, this project will address
climate issues with twice weekly Faculty Lunches; a formal faculty mentoring
program; innovative worklife policies and support (release time and graduate
student assistance); and training modules for administrators/faculty on climate
issues. To promote retention/promotion, the project will establish a grant
writing program, career networking awards and a distinguished lectureship
program to facilitate networking and collaboration with experts from around the
country. To enhance professional development this project will offer an
executive coaching program; career development workshops; and an annual awards
banquet to recognize performance accomplishments. &lt;br/&gt;Additionally,
specific resources will be created to support: training for administrators and
faculty; best practices for recruitment and retention; a talking-points guide on
institutional policies; and a resource for guide/coach/mentor best practices.
Internally, we will share these through workshops and the OWISE office.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. This project will adapt existing
ADVANCE programs to an innovative interdisciplinary engineering and science
team-based environment which should yield greater impact and success. The
primary objectives of this project are to: 1) provide a framework and resources
to educate all faculty and enable women faculty in STEM to participate in a
supportive work environment, reduce isolation, and enhance retention, research
productivity and job satisfaction, and 2) apply social cognitive career theory
(SCCT), which suggests that beliefs in self-efficacy strongly affect ability to
perform career-related tasks and are shaped by (1) personal success experiences,
(2) exposure to successful role models, (3) social and verbal persuasive
communication, and (4) maintaining a positive work environment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. Given the strong history and focus of this
institution on interdisciplinary interaction, this project will serve as an
experimental baseline for innovative programs that can be disseminated to other
settings. Also, this project will directly impact not only women faculty in STEM
fields, through training, mentoring and networking initiatives, but also all
faculty and administrators at the university, as well as the women undergraduate
and graduate students with whom they teach an interact, by way of the training
modules and increased success and numbers of women faculty and leaders in STEM
at the university. Further, the innovative programs developed through this
program will be widely disseminated via national conferences (WEPAN, ASEE, SWE
and FIE) and a program website, as well as the WEPAN digital Knowledge Center.
&lt;br/&gt;