* 0930429
* Collaborative research: Isotopic Investigation of Gakkel Ridge peridotites to determine the length scale, origin and age of heterobeneities in the sub-ridge mantle
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Vincent J. Salters, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 08/31/2015
* USD 357,312.00

Ridge magmatism is by volume the most important chemical differentiation process
on the planet. Mapping the chemical and mineralogical heterogeneities in rocks
representative of the mantle (i.e., peridotites) and linking them to the lavas
erupted on the seafloor (i.e., basalts) provides essential information on
Earth's heat budget and helps to constrain mantle convection models. This
research carries out geochemical studies of peridotites collected from the
Gakkel mid-ocean ridge spreading center on the Arctic seafloor by the 2001 AMORE
expedition. This expedition returned a treasure trove of peridotites that is
unsurpassed in its extent and preservation. With these rocks, questions
fundamental to our understanding of mid-ocean ridge processes can now be
answered. Goals of this research include determining compositional variations of
the peridotites because this tells us about the structure and heterogeneity of
the mantle, examining if melt depletions observed on a local scale are related
to the current melting process or represent previous melting events, and
determining the age distribution of the sub-ridge mantle that enters the melting
zone. Major and trace element analyses, petrography, and neodymium and osmium
isotope systematics will be used to help answer these questions. Broader impacts
of the work include training students and including middle and high school
students and their teachers in the research.