* 0930767
* STTR Phase I:  Polyaniline Nanofiber Urinary Tract Infection Biosensor-A Multi-Functional Bioresponsive Material
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Christina Baker, Fibron Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl F. Albus
* 06/30/2010
* USD 150,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer
(STTR) Phase I project seeks to develop polyaniline nanofibers into a
biologically responsive multi-functional material for use as a tool for the
rapid and inexpensive diagnosis of urinary tract infections (UTIs) through a
novel precipitation based smart biosensor platform. The bulk synthesis of
conducting polymer nanofibers is green and highly scalable yielding a product
which forms water stable colloidal suspensions. Conducting polymers have
multiple responses that can be utilized for sensing, including colorometric,
conductivity and oxidation state changes. This project will add an additional
functionality to polyaniline nanofibers which causes them to form a gel
precipitate in the presence of specific sequences of DNA or RNA giving a rapid
visual indication of the presence of a target such as from UTI bacteria for the
detection of a UTI in a patient. This will be accomplished through a novel
functionalization of polyaniline nanofibers with single stranded DNA (ssDNA)
probes. Since this process is aimed at direct analysis of patient samples
without additional sample handling, or equipment, this technology promises to be
a real-time test with accuracy competitive with more expensive current clinical
standards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of
successfully developing a urine culture and antibiotic sensitivity test for
bacteria to determine the presence and type of an infection a patient has within
seconds rather than days. The test will also determine the proper course of
treatment. A patient's actual range of conditions can also vary significantly
from those causing mild inconvenience to those causing painful and serious
ailments. This testing deficiency results in increased demand on the healthcare
system from additional unnecessary costs of treatment and repercussions from
overmedication, such as the development of drug resistant bacteria. The goal is
a UTI diagnostic accuracy approaching 100% through the use of conducting polymer
nanofibers with multiple-analyte probes for bacteria identification and/or
target genes to determine antibiotic resistances. This technology will enable
the initial diagnosis of the UTI as well as identify the proper course of
treatment based on the antibiotic susceptibilities of the infecting bacteria
within minutes instead of days at a cost of a few dollars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;