* 0930427
* STTR Phase I:  Cooperative Nanostructure Driven Self-Assembly in Carbon Nanotube/Block Co-Polymer Systems
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2010
* James Watkins, Porifera inc.
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 12/31/2010
* USD 149,941.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase I project addresses one of the key
barriers for commercial development of the next generation membrane technologies
that exploit extremely fast transport through the carbon nanotube pores. These
pores enable nearly frictionless flow that could drastically lower membrane
resistance and produce in significant energy savings for a wide range of
membrane-based separation processes. The first carbon nanotube membranes were
made from aligned CVD-grown nanotube arrays that are costly and hard to scale
up. The objective of this Phase I project is to demonstrate assembly of bulk
single wall carbon nanotube-polymer composites at high loadings and establish
understanding of the thermodynamics and kinetics of these processes. Another
objective is to develop a strategy for scalability of this process as well as
identify the main parameters that control the quality of the resulting aligned
nanocomposites. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Membrane separation technologies are one
of the cornerstones of modern economy, and this $12B/year market has been
growing at an annual rate exceeding 9%. Membranes are also critically important
for global societal and humanitarian problems, such as availability of clean
water (one of 6 people in the world lacks access to clean water and water
shortage is a growing problem in the Western US). In particular, small-pore
membranes enable reverse-osmosis processes that are the most energy-efficient
route for seawater desalination that could tap into plentiful water resources
available in the ocean. Development of a scalable process for aligning small-
pore carbon nanotubes into a membrane would produce membranes with permeability
of up to 100 times higher than current RO membranes, and would represent a
paradigm shift for the RO membrane market. Commercialization of this process
could potentially make RO desalinated water costs in line with the current
municipal water costs, and thus unlock an almost inexhaustible water source for
the US and global population. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under
the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).