* 0930144
* STTR Phase I:  Spray-On Nanostructured Metal Oxide Films for Efficient Solar Energy Conversion
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,03/31/2010
* T. Danny Xiao, INFRAMAT CORP
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 03/31/2010
* USD 100,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer
Research Phase I project exploits Inframat's revolutionary solution plasma spray
process to fabricate nanostructured dendritic oxide films for low cost
photovoltaic solar energy or solar/water hydrogen splitting device applications.
High surface area metal oxide films are crucial device elements for next
generation energy conversion. While much fundamental work has been conducted to
demonstrate feasibility and build prototypes, little progress has been made
towards addressing the cost and reliability of efficient, high rate
manufacturing processes for these devices. Our process, developed through
collaboration between Inframat and UMass, involves the deposition of oxide films
via the introduction of a fine aerosol produced by the rapid expansion of
precursor solutions saturated with a compressible solvent into a plasma spray
gun. Our feasibility experiments indicate that the process yields open, highly
porous networks of dendritic oxide nanostructures directly, without subsequent
casting or annealing steps. The intellectual merit includes the development of a
deposition technology for pure/doped nanofilms that offers well controlled
architectures and the establishment of the relationships between deposition
conditions, precursor reactivity and film properties. Performance comparison of
solar cells constructed using these materials to baseline devices of traditional
film approaches will provide additional understanding of structure-property
relationships. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact includes validation of
an inexpensive, manufacturable, spray on route to nanostructured metal oxide
films that could significantly reduce the cost of solar cells and H2 generation.
The technology is applicable to other devices, including sensors and batteries.
The anticipated benefits/potential commercial applications include robust
processing, high quality and performance, and economical affordability for next
generation energy conversion devices. The spray on nature of SPS processing
allows us to target the low cost, large area segment of the market, which is
currently underrepresented due in part to high manufacturing costs relative to
efficiency. The ability to tune film structure and crystallinity at the
nanoscale offers enabling gains in device performance and efficiency. The
customers include both large and small companies in the solar energy space,
including those with a concentrated focus on dye-sensitized and flexible solar
cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;