* 0930153
* Individual PAESMEM Award: Nomination of Julio J. Ramirez
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/2011,03/31/2013
* Julio Ramirez, Davidson College
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 03/31/2013
* USD 10,000.00

Dr. Julio J. Ramirez is a behavioral neuroscientist. He obtained his Ph.D. in
Psychology from Clark University and conducted his postdoctoral work in
neuroscience at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Dr. Ramirez joined
the Davidson College Department of Psychology in 1986 and in 1998 was named the
first R. Stuart Dickson Professor of Psychology, an honor that acknowledges his
commitment to science and science education. Dr. Ramirez' work has positively
impacted both undergraduate students of neuroscience and faculty members
teaching courses in undergraduate neuroscience across the nation. Dozens of
Davidson students who have worked with Dr. Ramirez on independent study projects
and as laboratory assistants have gone on to pursue postgraduate degrees in
neuroscience, psychology or medicine. Indeed, he has involved well over a
hundred undergraduate students in his research program since 1981. During the
past 22 years at Davidson, Dr. Ramirez has provided undergraduate students, the
majority of whom were from underrepresented groups, with research experiences in
his laboratory. These research opportunities have yielded significant
experiential learning for young minds, not only in the laboratory, but also
through co-authored papers and presentations at national and international
conferences. A total of 45 women and six men from underrepresented groups who
worked with him are either presently pursuing doctoral level degrees in the
biomedical and health sciences or have already been awarded doctorates in the
sciences, medicine, dentistry, or veterinary medicine. Dr. Ramirez' reach goes
far beyond the walls of Davidson College. He co-founded the national
organization, Faculty for Undergraduate Neuroscience in 1991 and the Journal of
Undergraduate Neuroscience Education in 2002. In 2004, Dr. Ramirez created a
national mentoring program entitled Support of Mentors and their Students
(SOMAS) that has to date supported 48 faculty and their students conducting
summer research at their home institutions. In 2008, the SOMAS program was
renamed "Support of Mentors and their Students from Underrepresented Minority
groups" (SOMAS-URM) and restructured to strengthen the engagement of
underrepresented individuals in neuroscience by creating a program tailored to
their needs. The SOMAS-URM Program addresses two important observations made in
recent studies. The Program provides a path for research experiences for
underrepresented students working in collaboration with the faculty at their
home institutions with the intent of enhancing their competitiveness for entry
into scientific careers. The Program aims to enhance the mentoring abilities of
junior faculty to strengthen a key aspect of the undergraduate research
experience, which has been reported to be the weakest aspect of the
undergraduate research experience. The SOMAS-URM Program has the potential to
serve as a model for a variety of summer undergraduate research and the
intensive one-on-one mentoring framework has already been shown to promote the
recruitment and retention of women and underrepresented minorities in the
sciences.