* 0930785
* IRES:  U.S.-Czech Network Centric Intelligent System:  Drexel and Czech Technical University
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* William Regli, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 08/31/2012
* USD 149,814.00

OISE 0930785&lt;br/&gt;Regli&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This U.S.-Czech program for International Research
Experiences for Students (IRES) links partners from Drexel University in
Philadelphia with counterparts from Czech Technical University (CTU) in Prague.
The U.S. team, led by William Regli and Rachel Greenstadt, brings expertise in
artificial intelligence, wireless networks, privacy and security to a three-year
collaborative program with Czechs partners who have complementing strengths in
multi-agent systems and meta-reasoning. In Prague, the IRES program will be
headed by Michael Pechoucek, in the CTU Department of Cybernetics. These U.S.
and Czech mentors share the goal of contributing to the field of agent
communications while providing the graduate and undergraduate students they
mentor with early career research experience in design of systems that are
tolerant of severe disruptions and interference. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During
the course of the collaborative IRES, the US-Czech team will integrate three
areas of their current research in emerging communication and collaborative
intelligent systems to provide broad and promising new topics for student
projects. The focus areas include: 1) agent communication in constrained
environments, 2) metrics on multi-agent systems, and 3) design patterns for
multi-agent systems. Overall, the combined efforts of researchers and students
are expected to contribute to improvements in network centric intelligent
systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary IRES in engineering and
computer science fulfills the program objective of advancing scientific
knowledge and engaging students by enabling experts in the United States and
Europe to combine complementary talents and share research resources in areas of
strong mutual interest and competence. Broader impacts include early career
introduction of U.S. junior researchers, including women and minority students,
to experts in the international research community who are involved in the
design of agent based systems as well as innovative modeling. The results of
this well balanced U.S.-Czech IRES program are expected to enhance performance
in mobile agent-based computing.