* 0930813
* CPS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Abstraction of Cyber-Physical Interplays and Its Application to CPS Design
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2014
* Kang Shin, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2014
* USD 825,000.00

The objective of this research is to develop abstractions by which the
controlled process and computation state in a cyber-physical system can both be
expressed in a form that is useful for decision-making across real-time task
scheduling and control actuation domains. The approach is to quantify the
control degradation in terms of response time, thereby tying computer
responsiveness to the controlled process performance and use such cost functions
to effectively manage computational resources. Similarly, control strategies can
be adjusted so as to be responsive to computational state. Unmanned aircraft
will be used as vehicles to demonstrate our approach.&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of this research is that it takes disparate fields, control and
computation, and builds formal abstractions in both the computation-to-control
and control-to-computation directions. These abstractions are grounded in terms
of physical reality (e.g., time, fuel, energy) and encapsulate in a form
comprehensible and meaningful to each domain, the relevant attributes of the
other domain. &lt;br/&gt;This research is important because cyber-physical
systems are playing an increasing role in all walks of life. It will allow
design approaches to be systematic and efficient rather than ad hoc. It is based
on a large body of our prior work that has begun to successfully bridge the
representational and algorithmic gap that separates the control and computer
science &amp; engineering communities. Dissemination of results will be by means
of courses in our universities, instructional materials, research and tutorial
publications and industry collaboration (e.g., General Motors R&amp;D). The plan
is to hire minority/female students.