* 0930603
* STTR Phase I:  ACC Synthesis - a Way to Create Safer, Efficacious and Inexpensive Single Enantiomers
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2010
* Emily Tarsis, LifeSciTech, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 12/31/2010
* USD 150,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project propose a new
method of producing enantiomerically pure ketones through the use of ACC chiral
auxiliaries. The synthesis of single enantiomer drugs is an extremely important
aspect of drug development. Current methods to both produce and/or isolate
single enantiomer compounds are quite limited, and those existing methods can be
expensive and difficult to carry out, thus preventing their application on large
scale manufacturing. ACCs can be readily synthesized from commercially available
starting materials in an efficient and cost effective way. They are easily
introduced into the parent ketone, and can be easily recycled upon removal.
Moreover, their inherent reactivity overcomes the practical limitations of
current methods, making them amenable to industrial applications.

The broader impacts of this research are: Development and subsequent FDA
approval for new therapeutic agents has become increasingly difficult. R&D costs
for a new drug are now in excess of $800 million and FDA has introduced more
strict regulations and extensive clinical trials. Additionally, there have been
several cases of leading companies suffering significant financial losses
because of class action lawsuits from their drugs causing unforeseen sideeffects
after reaching the market. The pharmaceutical industry is currently struggling
to find solutions to overcome the new challenges in the field of drug
development and the public has seen limited advances. Our innovative synthetic
method will facilitate the production of single enantiomer drug formulations,
which can contribute directly to finding solutions to the growing crisis facing
the pharmaceutical industry.

