* 0930344
* An Informatics Approach for Near Real-Time Monitoring of Evolutionary Trends in Biological Systems
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2009,02/28/2011
* Robert Guralnick, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Anne Maglia
* 02/28/2011
* USD 75,763.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

The University of Colorado has been awarded a grant to develop
cyberinfrastructure to track the geographic distribution of changes in virus
genetics. The second part of the 20th century was notable for the development of
earth observation systems providing an unparalleled view of a changing world. In
the 21st century, a new frontier is real time monitoring biological systems and
how those systems are changing over space and time. Biological systems provide
an added challenge because organisms continue to evolve, responding to biotic
and abiotic changes to the overall earth system. Therefore, it is not simply
enough to monitor spatiotemporal trends in species or ecosystems. If scientists
are to become better able to predict future changes to biological systems, they
must understand the underlying changes to the genomes of organisms, how those
genetic changes translate to phenotypic changes, and which phenotypes are
successful in relation to a changing environment.

The pipeline of genetic data available for such predictions has increased
rapidly but the ability to analyze these data has lagged behind. This project is
a groundbreaking evolutionary-based biomonitoring program. The prototype system
would begin to close this gap by utilizing an automated analysis workflow that
provides essential information about organismal evolution usable by the
research, education and policy-making community. This proof of concept will be
tested especially on evolution of influenza A viruses to rapidly detect
evolution of drug resistance, a timely and time-sensitive issue. Users will be
able to select a taxon and gene or genome of interest and our system will
automatically harvest those data and produce an evolutionary tree. By tying
locality data of the sequence data to the evolutionary tree, the system can
project that tree onto a virtual globe producing a sharable geophylogeny. The
system will also automate detection of selection pressure on protein coding
genes as another output. Most importantly, once a workflow is set up by a user,
it can be set to persist so that as new data becomes available, new analyses are
consistently run and new knowledge about the state of the biological world
returned to interested users. For the research and policy community, near-real-
time monitoring will provide a useful, customizable and ultimately predictive
tool. For education and outreach communities, geophylogenies offer a powerful
visual tool for exploring and learning about evolutionary changes occurring
across the environment. Information about the project can be found at
http://biodiversity.colorado.edu/.