* 0930877
* Viruses of Acetoclastic Methanogens in Anaerobic Sludge Digesters
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* John Ferguson, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Debra Reinhart
* 09/30/2012
* USD 371,370.00

0930877&lt;br/&gt;Meschke&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Towards the goal of
characterizing the phage community within anaerobic digesters and identification
of viral populations targeting the acetoclastic methanogens as their host, this
project will address the following testable hypotheses:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;i)
Phage capable of infecting acetoclastic methanogens is present in anaerobic
digesters.&lt;br/&gt;ii) Phage molecular signatures will differ between infected
acetoclast cultures showing impairment of methane generation and control
cultures.&lt;br/&gt;iii) In infected pure cultures, phage/acetoclastic host
population dynamics are related to impairment of methane
production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main thrust of this proposed research is to
verify the role of viruses infecting acetoclasts in anaerobic process failure
and to increase understanding of the presence and possible roles for phage on
the microbial ecology of anaerobic digester systems. The above hypotheses will
be addressed through: performance of viral infectivity studies with pure and
enriched acetoclastic hosts; metagenomic analysis of viral size-fraction
filtrates form anaerobic digesters, and development of qPCR methods for
examining viral population dynamics in anaerobic acetoclastic populations. These
tasks will be accomplished using: epifluorescence microscopy to enumerate viral
particles; transmission electron microscopy to characterize viral morphologies
and observe host cell damage; pulsed field gel electrophoresis for
fingerprinting of viral populations in infected and control samples and
isolation of viral DNA specific to acetoclast cultures showing impairment of
methane production; pyrosequencing for analysis of metagenomic viral DNA; and
qPCR for kinetic analysis of viral populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The role of
viruses in biotechnological processes and engineered systems is almost
completely unexplored. Investigating the role of viruses of acetoclasts in
anaerobic digesters may contribute to the understanding of the inability of some
processes to work reliably, shift dominant populations, or fail. Overall, the
results of the proposed study will provide building blocks for anaerobic
digestion research that can help continue development of the fundamental
understanding of the anaerobic microbial community, which is clearly needed for
improved process design and operation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Exploration and
greater characterization of digester communities will benefit society through
enhanced energy (methane) generation, optimized biosolids production, and
greater system stability, providing protection of human and ecological health.
As anaerobic digesters are increasingly used for co-digestion to generate
methane as a biofuel, a greater understanding of the role of viruses in these
systems will help to ensure consistent
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graduate and undergraduate students will
benefit directly from the proposed project in training and research experience.
Efforts will be made to recruit undergraduate students from an underrepresented
group with the assistance of the Engineering Advising and Diversity
Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will additionally offer mentoring to
an early-career woman engineer. The results of this project will be disseminated
to the greater scientific community through publication in peer-reviewed
journals, and through presentation to inter-disciplinary audiences at campus
seminars, and regional and national conferences