* 0930630
* STTR Phase I:  High Performance Piezoelectric MEMS Microphones
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2010
* Karl Grosh, Baker-Calling
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2010
* USD 149,265.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR)Phase I project seeks to develop a
commercially viable, self-calibrating, piezoelectric micro-electro-mechanical
systems (MEMS) microphone. The acoustical specifications of these microphones
(measured by noise floor, linearity, sensitivity) will meet or exceed those of
existing laboratory quality microphones. The devices developed in this project
will be significantly smaller (1 order of magnitude) and less expensive (2
orders of magnitude) than the present state of the art. In addition, these MEMS
microphones would have the capability of in situ self-calibration. The
availability of a self-calibrating microphone would usher in a new age of
instrument quality microphones with integrated sensing, actuation and
adaptation.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of
successfully developing high quality microphones that hold the potential to
affect everyone who has a cell phone uses a hearing aide or other microphone
based communication device. These microphones will have a lower noise floor and
higher dynamic range than existing technologies thereby enhancing communication.
In addition, the availability of very small (less than 1mm2), sensitivity, and
self-calibrating microphones could improve hearing aid technology and thereby
help the hearing impaired. The affordability, manufacturability, and performance
of these microphones, has the potential to become the dominant microphone
technology in applications ranging from studio microphones to cell phones. The
commercialization of self-calibrating microphones would open up new markets and
revenue streams.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This award is funded under the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5)."