* 0930673
* STTR Phase I:  Intelligent Low-Toxicity Nanoparticles for Cancer Diagnosis and Treatment
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2010
* Stefan Bossmann, NANOSCALE MATERIALS INC
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 12/31/2010
* USD 200,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer
(STTR) Phase I project focuses on synthesis and delivery of nanoparticles for
determination of the progression of cancer. Besides diagnosis, the nanoplatform
offers the treatment option of directing high- temperature therapy specifically
to the tumor, without harming healthy tissue. The nanoplatform contains a
central iron/iron oxide/gold core/shell nanoparticle, plus the ability to
identify which of four cancer-specific enzymes in the patient?s body are
abnormally active. The activity of these four enzymes indicates the progression
of cancer (Stage I, Stage II, Stage III, or Stage IV).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of this research are earlier diagnosis of cancer, and more
effective treatment of cancer. Cancer is the second largest cause of death in
developed countries, accounting for nearly 20% of all deaths. Early detection of
cancer is essential even before anatomic anomalies are visible. A major
challenge in cancer diagnosis is detection of tumors at an early stage for
maximum therapeutic benefit. An example is breast cancer where mammography
requires more than a million cells for accurate clinical diagnosis. Offering
better techniques to cancer centers and their patients could detect these
abnormalities in the hundreds to thousands of cells stage, greatly improving
treatment success. The functionalized nanoparticles will be more selective
towards cancer cells than currently available technology, enabling diagnosis by
spectroscopic methods including MRI at earlier stages of the cancers
progression. In addition to enabling earlier detection, these materials also
have potential for breakthroughs in treatment methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;