* 0930665
* STTR Phase I:  Advanced Poly(lactide) (PLA) Materials for Extruded Sheet Applications
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* RAMANI NARAYAN, Northern Technologies International Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Maria Josephine Yuen
* 06/30/2010
* USD 150,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer
Phase I project is responsive to topic Multi-Functional Materials (MM), Subtopic
Materials for Sustainability (MS). Northern Technologies International
Corporation (NTIC), MN, in collaboration with Michigan State University (MSU),
East Lansing, MI, plans to formulate and engineer chemically modified biobased
and biodegradable Poly(Lactide)-based compounds to generate a new class of
materials that are high strength, lightweight, multifunctional and an
environmentally-friendly &amp; cost-effective alternative to the petroleum-based
polymers. NTIC has successfully commercialized a portfolio of reactive blended
biobased and/or biodegradable resins for extrusion, molding and coating
applications. However, it faces a major hurdle due to poor mechanical
properties, high prices and higher densities of current PLA materials. The
objective of this project is to (1) use novel chemistries of compatibilization
and impact modification to create advanced PLA bioresins that offer improved
toughness and heat resistance; (2) improve economic viability of biobased
materials by engineering microcellular foamed sheets. The newly synthesized
materials would control the mechanical and thermal properties of extruded sheets
and injection-molded parts to broaden the scope of industrial applications of
biobased Polylactide (PLA) while providing environmental preservation by
reducing their carbon foot print.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NTIC's target market for
the newly crafted PLA chemistries is extruded and thermoformed sheet
applications currently using petroleum based plastics such as acrylic,
polystyrene, polypropylene, etc.. These include point-of-purchase displays,
retail fixtures, indoor signage, credit cards, gift cards, hotel room keycards,
thermoformed trays and tubs both for food and non-food applications. NTIC
estimates the gross potential to be as high as $250 million. Furthermore,
successful implementation of Phase I &amp; II of this STTR project will have
technical, environmental and economical impacts in the future, as follows: (1)
widen the window of performance of PLA-based applications; (2) further
fundamental understanding of PLA and its chemistries (3) greatly increase the
use of biobased products in larger industrial and packaging markets implying
environmental preservation of fossil fuel resources; and (4) create upto 10 jobs
for sales, manufacturing, technical support of newly developed Natur-TecÂ®
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;