* 0930668
* STTR Phase I:  Carbon Nanotube Electrolytic Ultracapacitor
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Vladimir Mancevski, XIDEX CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* Maria Josephine Yuen
* 06/30/2010
* USD 150,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase I project will demonstrate the
feasibility of building and operating a carbon nanotube (CNT) based electrolytic
double layer capacitor (EDLC) which incorporates an innovative electrode
architecture that will enable unprecedented energy density as well as high power
density and low equivalent series resistance. Analysis and preliminary
experiments show that an EDLC incorporating the CNT forest electrodes we
envision will be capable of providing gravimetric capacitance in the range
200-300 F/g, and energy density in the range 10-100 Wh/kg. The projected energy
density will be of particular significance when realized in practice. This is
because the energy density range that appears feasible with our design is
roughly the same as that typically associated with batteries but unattainable by
capacitors. The innovative electrode architecture is also able to provide
extraordinarily high areal capacity (measured in Farads per unit device area),
which is the energy density performance metric most applicable to power systems
for mobile consumer electronics and power management in MEMS and NEMS based
devices.

Market opportunities in mobile electronics will be targeted where high
performance ultracapacitors are needed to provide pulse power support.
Applications will then expand to battery replacement as the technology matures.
The company's extensive experience with nanodevice fabrication will also be
leveraged by targeting applications involving energy storage and power
management in MEMS and NEMS scale devices. Applications of this kind are
extremely attractive since they will support premium pricing and will be
compatible with our use of lithographic patterning for key manufacturing steps.
New applications will be targeted as devices become smaller and more
specialized, such as in consumer electronics, implantable medical devices, MEMS
and NEMS devices, or next-generation spacecraft, for example, where improving
the performance of the power source is crucial. With the continuing trend among
electronic device manufacturers to increase the power of their products while
continuing to scale down product size, the ultracapacitor market should be
poised for dramatic growth.

