* 0930554
* STTR Phase I: Fabrication of Low-Cost and High-Efficiency Thermoelectric Materials
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Ruxandra Vidu, AMEROM LLC
* Standard Grant
* Maria Josephine Yuen
* 06/30/2010
* USD 149,299.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase I project aims at establishing the
feasibility of fabricating high-efficiency nanostructured thermoelectric at low
cost. CoSb3 skutterudite nanowires will be grown by electrochemical deposition
using template synthesis. After template removal, a novel controlled surface
modification step will be applied to nanowires. We expect this particular
surface treatment alone to reduce thermal conductivity of nanostructured CoSb3
to a greater degree compared to electrical conductivity due to differences in
their respective scattering lengths. Nanostructured CoSb3 skutterudite will be
grown, doped and treated under various fabrication conditions, and then
characterized. Research will lead to tailored thermoelectric properties of the
nanowire arrays. We will address some of these challenges regarding both size
and surface modification. Complex nanoscale characterization will be performed
using electrochemical techniques, X-ray diffraction, electron microscopy (SEM,
TEM, EDS and EELS), and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). Measurements of
electrical conductivity, thermal conductivity and Seebeck coefficient will be
performed to study the efficiency of these nanostructures as a function of wire
size, chemical composition and surface roughness in order to obtain an optimal
condition for the highest efficiency. This technology lays the foundation for
large-scale fabrication of high efficiency thermoelectric devices for energy
conversion. The unique combination of electrochemical deposition and surface
roughening has great potential for mass production of low-cost and high-
efficiency thermoelectric materials that can not be achieved by bulk processing
techniques. Skutterudite group (e. g., CoSb3) thermoelectric materials are used
to generate electrical power from different heat sources (e. g., stove top
generators, engine exhaust powered alternator replacement, self-powered
appliances), but the current market is limited by a low efficiency. With an
increased ZT, CoSb3 processed by this technology can be used in many power
conversion devices operating at intermediate temperatures; moreover, it may
compete with Bi2Te3 for low temperature applications. Additionally, this
technology will enhance the scientific and technological understanding of
nanostructured thermoelectric materials. To date, most of the work on
electrodeposited thermoelectric thin films and nanostructures focuses on
synthesis, primarily investigating compositions and structure. A dissonant gap
between synthesis and characterization of the thermoelectric properties, namely
the Seebeck coefficient and thermoelectric figure of merit, creates only a
partial picture for published works. While composition and structure of
electrodeposits are crucial indicators of physical properties, their measured
thermoelectric performance will ultimately dictate their usefulness in heating,
ventilation, and/or air conditioning (HVAC) in to vehicles and solar thermal
industry.

