* 0930509
* Conference: Increasing Diversity in Animal Behavior through Undergraduate Participation in the Animal Behavior Society Meetings, Pirenopolis, Brazil, June 22-26, 2009
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2014
* Emilia Martins, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 05/31/2014
* USD 76,568.00

This project will take a diverse group of undergraduate students each year to
the annual meeting of the Animal Behavior Society, the largest professional
society in our discipline. The organizers, members of the Diversity Committee of
the Animal Behavior Society, will advertize, identify and select participants
who are members of underrepresented groups, low income, first generation, and
currently attending schools at which there are few opportunities for research.
Ten students each year will be provided with funds to cover all travel, housing,
and registration expenses. In addition to attending all meeting events, the
students will participate in training activities designed to make sure they get
the most out of the meetings. Each student will also be matched with mentors
with whom they can interact during the meeting itself. In 2009, the ABS meetings
will be hosted in Brazil, offering an important international experience for our
students. Based on recent experience, we expect at least 60% of undergraduate
award winners to be members of traditionally underrepresented minority groups.
Moreover, in written surveys, almost 90% of students who participated in our
program activities agreed that they were more likely to go into graduate
research in science as a result of having attended the ABS meetings. More than
80% report having had informal interactions with scientists at the meetings who
are likely to have an impact on their future careers. The program provides a
unique opportunity for graduate training faculty to meet and interact closely
with future doctoral students who are members of underrepresented groups.