* 0930087
* STTR Phase I:  Chemical Sensors for In situ Monitoring of Collector Chemicals in Complex Copper Mine Effluents
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2010
* Philippe Buhlmann, United Science LLC
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 12/31/2010
* USD 180,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer
(STTR) Phase I project addresses unmet analysis needs of froth flotation, a
separations process widely used in the mining industry to separate worthless
gangue from desired mineral particles. The goal of this Phase I is the
preparation of sensors that permit the measurement of collector chemicals used
in flotation suspensions. Our proposed sensors are expected to be ideally suited
for these measurements since they are not affected by turbidity, have a
collector selectivity that can be tuned with specific receptors, and require no
off-stream sample handling. The project will take advantage of the highly
selective and fouling-resistant fluorous perfluoropolymer membranes introduced
by the academic partner Phil Buhlmann. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts
of this research are significant as it will enable the mining industry to be
more sustainable in its approach to mineral recovery. Specifically, our research
aims to significantly reduce the amount of toxic chemical waste associated with
froth flotation and its inevitable environmental impact. The method has the
potential of making the US copper industry more competitive by saving over $200
M in wasted collector while simultaneously improving mining sustainability by
eliminating an estimated 891,000 kg of unnecessary chemical discharges. In
addition to these benefits, the multidisciplinary aspects of this project will
train students in synthetic and analytical techniques, involving concepts from
chemistry, materials science, and engineering. A graduate student will have the
opportunity to mentor an undergraduate students involved in this project through
directed research studies and through the NSF-REU programs at the
UMN.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;