* 0930522
* Research Starter Grant:  An Examination of Effective Methods of Communicating About Language Variation to Educators
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2009,09/30/2011
* Anne Charity Hudley, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 09/30/2011
* USD 50,000.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This National Science Foundation Social,
Behavioral, and Economic Sciences Minority Post-Doctoral Fellowship Starter
Grant funds the launch of a project designed to examine effective methods of
communicating issues about language variation to K-12 educators and provides
infrastructural support for Anne Harper Charity Hudley in her position of
Assistant Professor at the College of William and Mary in Williamsburg,
VA.&lt;br/&gt;The PI?s postdoctoral fellowship # 512005 assessed how listeners
judged the voices of young speakers of African-American English and Southeastern
American English along a range of academic and social characteristics. Listeners
often judged African-American English-speaking youth as having lesser academic
abilities, and their responses indicated that many educators knew very little
about variation within English. These results provided the impetus for this
follow-up project, which explores methods for orienting educators to the reality
of language differences and linguistic intolerance.&lt;br/&gt;The project has
three cumulative objectives. First, the PI will conduct collaborative workshops
with 100 educators in four K-12 schools in Baltimore and Richmond to disseminate
accurate and foundational linguistic knowledge to educators of dialectally
diverse students. Second, a set of 40 educator-consultants will work jointly
with the PI to develop pedagogically sound and linguistically informed
strategies for addressing variation in the speech and writing of their students
using methods that have been developed by linguists but that are largely not
known among most educators. Strategies include best practices for promoting
awareness about language variation, for teaching about the systematic nature of
language variation, and for using knowledge about the systematic nature of
language variation to help students acquire Standardized English. Third, the PI
will collect from the 40 educator-consultants a range of quantitative and
qualitative data (from pre- and post-test surveys, participant-observations,
short reflection responses, and in-depth interviews) to reveal what knowledge
they gained from the workshop and how it might inform their language-related
teaching strategies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The joint empirical and applied nature of this
project contributes to sociolinguistic and educational theory and practice.
Findings will add to a small but critical body of literature that addresses not
only what educators know about language variation but also how educators process
this information and envision its use in their classrooms. The series of
workshop trainings will aid educators in more fully integrating knowledge of
language, literacy, and culture into their classrooms, thereby helping their
students meet the linguistic requirements of academic and social success. NSF
funding will allow for educator-consultants to travel to four school sites in
Richmond and Baltimore to ensure that educator-consultants develop targeted
solutions that are specific to their school environments. This funding will
ensure that educators will be able to attend and fully participate in the
workshops, regardless of their financial status. The grant will also provide
materials to support all workshop participants and will support the development
of a workshop-specific website to ensure broader educator access to the findings
of the project. &lt;br/&gt;Results from this project will help linguists refine
and implement future workshops to similarly connect with educators on the topic
of language variation. The study lays the groundwork for sociolinguists and
educators to work together in a more collaborative fashion to promote the
educational attainment of nonstandardized English-speaking students. As the PI
teaches in an undergraduate department, the award will also support the
participation of undergraduate students in every aspect of the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;