* 0930237
* Partnerships for Adaptation, Implementation, and Dissemination (PAID):  Collaborative Research - Alliance for the Advancement of Florida's Academic Women in Chemistry & Enginee
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Cammy Abernathy, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Beth Mitchneck
* 08/31/2013
* USD 157,852.00

The Colleges of Engineering and Departments of Chemistry at five large state
universities in Florida will join together to form the Alliance for the
Advancement of Florida's Academic Women in Chemistry and Engineering (AAFAWCE).
The University of South Florida is the lead institution with four partners:
Florida State University, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University (FAMU),
University of Florida, and Florida International University (FIU). The project
will modify and adapt successful programs developed by previous ADVANCE projects
focusing on the Colleges of Engineering and Departments of Chemistry at the
partner institutions. The project will implement strategies for; 1) recruiting
women in academic searches based on work developed at the University of
Wisconsin, Madison; 2) transforming careers via leadership COACh workshops
developed at the University of Oregon; and 3) advising and mentoring academic
women at the assistant and associate levels based on work developed by the
University of Texas-El Paso. In addition, the project will adapt and implement a
faculty climate survey within all of the participating departments which was
first developed by the Women in Science and Engineering Leadership Institute
(WESLI) at the University of Wisconsin, Madison. The survey will be used to
identify issues for faculty related to recruitment, mentoring, and the tenure
process.

Intellectual Merit: The project will adapt previously developed strategies to a
state-wide consortium of universities in Florida. The collaboration between the
five institutions is important given the low numbers of female faculty in
engineering and chemistry within these institutions. Faculty in each of the
participating campuses' engineering and chemistry programs will participate in
recruitment workshops along side department chairs, deans and other
administrators. Faculty will have an opportunity to participate in the COACh
workshop on advancing one's career and engage in a mentoring and advising
program.

Broader Impacts: The project provides opportunities for female faculty at all
ranks to engage in activities with others in their discipline areas from other
Florida campuses as well as on their own campus. The collaboration includes two
Minority-Serving Institutions; FAMU which is a Historically Black University and
FIU which is a Hispanic-Serving Institution. This network will provide support
for the faculty as they progress in their academic careers. The project will
post videos of the workshops and other materials on the Global Educational
Outreach web portal. In addition, the project team expects to publish a
monograph with chapters by the project team on the objectives and activities of
the program as well as by the participants in the alliance activities.