* 0930301
* STTR Phase I:  Spectrally Adaptive Photodetectors
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Mark Meisner, Titan Optics & Engineering
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 06/30/2010
* USD 150,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is to develop a
high-performance--spectrally adaptive and high operating temperature--detector
for multiple spectral-band infrared detection and discrimination applications.
The bio-inspired, photon detector will be able to operate throughout the 3 to 14
micron infrared spectrum. In addition the detector material will be optimized to
have the highest performance in the 3 to 5 and 8 to 12 micron spectral
atmospheric windows. The overarching theme of the proposed research and
development effort is to produce a marketable product that will be the
preeminent solution for many infrared detection and imaging applications.

The broader impacts of this research are will allow sensing of infrared
electromagnetic radiation, which is very important for a wide variety of
activities and applications. Infrared (beyond the red visible light) detection
provides a means of seeing-in-the-dark or un-illuminated objects. The proposed
spectrally adaptive high-performance sensor will be important for many medical,
commercial, scientific, and defense applications. In particular, the research
and development activities will directly lead to a sensor product for agile
multispectral imagery, without the use of cryogenic cooling.

