* 0930900
*  An integrated electrothermal processor for portable lab-on-a-chip applications
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Cho Lik Chan, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 08/31/2013
* USD 297,963.00

0930900&lt;br/&gt;Wong&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
elucidate electrothermal flow, which is fluid motion driven by electrical forces
that arise from the presence of non-uniform fluid properties that develop in
response to Joule heating, toward the realization of an electrothermal processor
for lab-on-a-chip applications. The use of electrothermal flow for microfluidic
operations relevant to point-of-care biomedical analyses will be
examined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: A combined theoretical
(scaling analysis and Greens function) and experimental (micro particle image
velocimetry and thermochromic liquid crystal) approach will be taken to
systematically investigate the coupled dynamics of electrothermal flow. The
boundary element method will be used to unravel the influence of interrelated
operating parameters such as the electric field strength and frequency, the
buffer electrical conductivity, and the electrode configuration, on the flow. A
concentric electrode arrangement, which is capable of promoting mixing,
concentration, and separation, will be applied to both (i) characterize the
electrothermal flow and (ii) determine the potential utility of electrothermal
flow in various biological applications. The potential use of electrothermal
flow in key processes, such as DNA hybridization and bacteria trapping, will be
investigated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: While the advent of
microfluidics holds promise for lab-on-a-chip applications, the challenge of
automating sample preparation for point-of-care diagnostic systems remains. This
study directly addresses this challenge. The research will be integrated across
several educational and outreach fronts such as course and laboratory
development, exposure of undergraduate and minority students to research
opportunities, and outreach to K-12 students and high school teachers.