* 0930455
* EAGER:   A Plant Genome Assembly Simulation Platform
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Steven Rounsley, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 08/31/2011
* USD 288,606.00

&lt;br/&gt;The pace of genome sequencing promises to continue to accelerate
thanks to next-generation sequencing (NGS) technologies that have dramatically
reduced the cost of generating large numbers of sequence reads. These new
technologies are also in a state of almost continuous change, and predicting the
state of the art one year from now, let alone five years from now, can be
challenging. With the changing capabilities comes the expansion of the number of
strategies for de novo sequencing of plant genomes. At the same time, access to
NGS platforms is ever expanding and generation of a genome sequence is no longer
solely the domain of the large genome center. Consequently, more scientists are
faced with a greater breadth of possible strategies for sequencing their genomes
of interest, and very little in the way of tools or data to evaluate the
appropriateness of a given strategy. Consequently, this results in either
expensive collection of data to evaluate strategies, or more often, the
selection of a strategy with very little data to support the choice. This
proposal seeks to leverage the existing plant genomes in order to develop a web-
based plant genome assembly simulation platform. For a given genome, a range of
sequencing strategies will be simulated and the resulting data will be assembled
with a number of assembly algorithms. These data will be evaluated with newly
developed evaluation metrics that seek to capture the heterogeneity of uses for
genome sequences, and place the results in a context that maximizes the value to
the user. In addition, the platform's relevance to a larger number of plant
species will be improved by introducing the concept of a virtual genome.
Prototype tools will be developed that enable the construction of such a virtual
genome using key genome characteristics (e.g. size, GC content, nature of
repeats) that impact genome assembly. The simulation platform generated will
provide the user community with:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Pre-computed results
from common sequencing strategies on a range of plant
genomes;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Customizable cost models to compare the costs of
different strategies;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Standardized datasets to compare
existing assemblers, and to benchmark new ones;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Ability
to create artificial genomes through a "recipe" of defined changes to a template
genome, and then test sequencing strategies on it; and, &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-
Ability to use the system to develop and test feasibility of new sequencing (and
physical mapping) strategies prior to testing in the
lab.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The web platform generated leverages
existing investments in plant genomes in order to improve the quality and cost-
effectiveness of future plant genome sequences. Although no explicit outreach
activities are included in this one-year pilot project, the web platform has the
potential to educate visitors about the range of sequencing strategies, and to
be a forum in which new strategies can be discussed. A continued reduction in
cost, and increase in quality of plant genome sequences will have significant,
albeit indirect, impact on some of societies most pressing problems such as food
security, climate change, and biofuel development. Resources and tools generated
by this project will be made freely available to the public through a web site
(www.plantagora.org).