* 0930551
* Collaborative Research ETBC: Combined Experimental and Theoretical Study of the Physical Mechanisms Underlying Deposition, Degradation and Preservation of Marine Organic Carbon
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Daniel Repeta, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 08/31/2013
* USD 413,516.00

Clay-rich marine sediments form Earth's main sink for organic carbon. This
determines atmospheric oxygen levels, as well as fluctuations of global climate.
For example, an increase in carbon burial effectiveness lowers atmospheric CO2
and induces global cooling, with an increase creating the opposite effect.
Understanding oceanic carbon burial therefore has a direct bearing on how we
model past changes of the earth system and predict future developments, such as
global warming due to fossil fuel consumption. This research carries out an
ambitious and holistic controlled laboratory examination of the transport,
deposition, and degradation of organic matter in clay-rich sediments. It
involves construction of a novel, new flume that allows visualization of
transported organo-clay flocs and bed forms and allows for the control of
temperature and system redox conditions. The work also involves detailed
transmission and electron microscopic studies of sediment and organic matter
textural relations, a novel integrated organic matter degradation study, and
development and parameterization of theoretical and mathematical models of
carbon sequestration and degradation. Broader impacts of the work include
support of two researchers in an EPSCoR state (Mississippi), student training,
and public outreach through YouTube and the Internet. It is also applicable to
increasing our understanding of the dispersal of pollutants by sedimentary
processes and may also help the search for unconventional fossil fuel resources
that can ease our transition to the next generation of fuels and power sources.