* 0930699
* STTR Phase I:  Synthesis of multifunctional nanofibrous polyaniline/carbon composites
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,01/31/2011
* John Ferraris, SOLARNO
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Walters
* 01/31/2011
* USD 150,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer
Phase I project will develop novel multifunctional materials based on
polyaniline (PAni) nanofibers (PANFs) and carbon nanofibers(CNFs) for energy
storage. Although PAni composites have been reported for a wide range of
applications, including sensors, biosensors, photoelectrochromic cells, etc.,
due to their excellent electrical, thermal and mechanical properties, none
capitalize on the enhanced properties expected from the combination of PANF with
CNF. PANFs have greater electronic conductivity than PAni nanospheres and
nanorods and can be synthesized on a variety of substrates. Solarno will use a
proprietary process for synthesizing composites of PANFs on CNFs. In Phase I
Solarno will use these composites as electrode materials for asymmetric
supercapacitors, an enabling technology that provides both high energy and
power, with the specific technical objectives of: synthesizing and
characterizing PANFs on CNF substrates, and achieving supercapacitor performance
of 15 Wh/kg, 10 kW/kg and &gt;10 cycles, thus far exceeding current lead acid
batteries in terms of power and cycle life. In Phase II we will improve the
energy density of these devices to enable potential replacement of such
batteries, and explore other functions for the composites, such as sensors and
electro-chemical devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PANF/CNF composites
developed by Solarno will be introduced to the supercapacitor market via
materials sales, and partnering/licensing arrangements, and later to related
electrochemical functions/applications. Solarno is targeting requirements of the
Hybrid Electric Vehicle (HEV) market for its initial supercapacitor designs, and
as such, the ultimate customers will be major automobile manufacturers. The
market requires that capacitors provide higher energy density, reduced size,
higher reliability, and lower cost. Commercially available EDLCs commonly
provide energy densities around 4 Wh/kg, and power densities between 15-21
kW/kg. The supercapacitor developed here can excel in this market by providing
energy density &gt; 25 Wh/kg and better reliability (&gt;2.0 x 104 cycles); the
Phase I work will optimize the properties of our PANF/CNF composite to meet this
goal. The supercapacitors will also be well-suited for load-leveling for
renewable energy sources; direct societal benefits will come from improving the
viability of HEVs and renewable sources, tied to reductions in fossil fuel
consumption, providing bridge power for wind and solar power farms, and
partially replacing lead acid storage batteries. The results of this work in
optimizing PAni composites for supercapacitors will translate well into improved
functionality for other applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;