* 0930018
* Broadening Participation in Materials Science through Institutional Integration of a Masters-to-PhD Bridge Program at Fisk, Delaware State, and Vanderbilt Universities
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Noureddine Melikechi, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Santiago
* 08/31/2015
* USD 1,204,921.00

We propose an innovative pathway to the PhD for substantially broadening the
participation of underrep-resented minorities in materials science, linking
multiple NSF-funded materials research programs (CREST and REU) at the
partnering institutions. The nucleus of this I3 will be the Fisk-Vanderbilt
Masters-to-PhD Bridge program, with its strong track record of enabling students
to earn a Master?s degree at Fisk as a stepping stone to the PhD program at
Vanderbilt. Vanderbilt and Fisk are joined in this I3 by Dela-ware State
University (DSU). Our program?s path to the PhD emphasizes research engagement
and de-liberate mentorship by faculty at PhD-granting institutions to help
students cross the aspirational and insti-tutional transitions.&lt;br/&gt;We
will directly address all of the I3 program goals. In so doing, with the I3
funding requested here we will enable at least 2 underrepresented minority
graduate students toward the PhD in Materials Sci-ence each year, representing
~20 times the national institutional average. Over the 5 years of requested I3
support, this represents 10 individuals supported by I3 funding who will
complete, or be on the path to-ward completing, the PhD. By itself this is a
substantial, tangible result of our innovation and integration and a vital
contribution to the STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;Arguably even more important for
the long-term sustained impact and institutionalization of this program, and the
eventual expansion of our Masters-to-PhD Bridge model into additional STEM
disci-plines, will be the foundation laid here for truly understanding how best
to design the architecture of our model to ensure successful portability into
new disciplinary and institutional contexts.&lt;br/&gt;We
will:&lt;br/&gt;1.&lt;br/&gt;Expand the Fisk-Vanderbilt Masters-to-PhD Bridge
Program to include Materials Science. Key faculty have been identified as the
?bridge builders? following the model of the existing program in physics.
Leveraging significant institutional support already in place, we will ex-pand
and deepen the footprints of our NSF-funded CREST projects and enhance their
sus-tainability.&lt;br/&gt;2.&lt;br/&gt;Extend the Bridge Program in partnership
with Delaware State University. The resulting Fisk-Vanderbilt-DSU Masters-to-PhD
Bridge Program will permit students to transition from the MS at Fisk to the PhD
at Vanderbilt, from the MS at Fisk to the PhD at DSU, or from the MS at DSU to
the PhD at Vanderbilt. The result will be increased synergy and collaboration
across our NSF-funded CREST and REU programs, reducing the artificial boundaries
that can so often impede student mobility across educational
junctures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broadening Participation in Materials Science
through Institutional Integration of a Masters-to-PhD Bridge Program at Fisk,
Delaware State, and Vanderbilt Universities brings together NSF/EHR awards from
the IGERT and CREST programs, as well as other work, around the I3 integrative
themes for broadening participation, critical educational junctures, and the
integration of research and education.