* 0930102
* TTR and Abeta: An Amyloid Regulatory Network?
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Regina Murphy, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Kaiming Ye
* 09/30/2012
* USD 267,839.00

0930102 Murphy

Alzheimer's disease is the most common age-associated neurodegenerative disease.
According to the "amyloid cascade hypothesis", aggregation of a protein, Abeta,
is an essential step leading to death of neurons. Deposition of fibrillar
aggregates of Abeta in the brain tissue of Alzheimer patients is considered one
of the defining characteristic features of the disease. Recent evidence
indicates that soluble Abeta oligomers that appear during the course of
aggregation, rather than the final mature fibrils, are the most toxic. Studies
with transgenic mice indicate that transthyretin, a protein present in blood and
cerebrospinal fluid, protects neurons against the devastating damage caused by
Abeta aggregates. These studies raise several questions: by what mechanism does
transthyretin prevent Abeta toxicity? Is this protective mechanism lost when
Alzheimer's disease develops? Are there pharmacological methods to restore
transthyretin?s protective abilities?

Preliminary data suggest that transthyretin inhibits Abeta toxicity by
accelerating Abeta aggregation, thereby reducing the quantity of soluble toxic
intermediates. Transthyretin in the blood or cerebrospinal fluid is normally
chemically modified at a cysteine residue, and there are over 80 transthyretin
mutants that are known to exist. Early data indicate that chemical modification
or mutation can strongly influence the interaction of tranthyretin with Abeta,
by changing the stability of the transthyretin tetramer. This research will
further explore this hypothesis, and will elucidate the mechanism by which
transthyretin affects Abeta aggregation.

To accomplish this goal, transthyretin will be produced recombinantly and will
be chemically modified at the cysteine residue, to mimic the normal blood
protein. Additionally, several mutants will be generated by site-directed
mutagenesis; these mutants differ by one or two amino acids from the wild-type
but have different stabilities. The structure and stability of these
transthyretin "variants" will be examined experimentally using mass
spectrometry, circular dichroism, fluorescence spectroscopy and related
techniques. Aggregation of Abeta in the presence of transthyretin will be
measured by laser light scattering, size exclusion chromatography, and electron
microscopy. The data will be used to develop mathematical models that describe
the association of transthyretin and Abeta and the effect of these associations
on Abeta aggregation kinetics. Additionally, small drug-like compounds that bind
to transthyretin and increase its stability will be tested to determine if their
use enhances the interaction between transthyretin and Abeta.

Interestingly, transthyretin itself will aggregate under certain conditions;
transthyretin fibril deposition is associated with an age-related disease called
senile systemic amyloidosis. Thus, transthyretin is potentially amyloidogenic,
yet it protects against the toxicity of another amyloidogenic protein, Abeta. Is
it possible that other amyloidogenic proteins also interact with Abeta? Is there
an amyloidogenic network of proteins, where proteins regulate each other's
aggregation and toxicity? This novel concept will be explored by initiating
studies with insulin and related proteins and Abeta. Insulin is a hexameric
protein that will dissociate and form fibrils under certain conditions, and
there is some limited data suggesting that insulin-related growth factors are,
like transthyretin, protective against Abeta toxicity.

Factors that regulate the efficacy of transthyretin as a protective agent
against Abeta toxicity will be identified. Results from these studies could be
used to design compounds with pharmacological activity that stabilize
transthyretin and enhance its efficacy. Such compounds would represent a
completely novel strategy for preventing Alzheimer's disease. On a more
fundamental level, the research could lend support to the notion of a network of
amyloidogenic and anti-amyloidogenic proteins that regulate each other's
behavior. Such a concept is highly speculative, but identification of such a
network, if it exists, would open up many new lines of inquiry and new
approaches for preventing a broad range of aggregation-related diseases.

Graduate students on this project are broadly educated in modern experimental
approaches in protein folding and aggregation, and prepared to take leading
roles in academia or in the biotechnology industry. Through active participation
in a summer research program, underrepresented minority undergraduates will gain
valuable experience and enjoy a sense of accomplishment that will contribute to
their continued enthusiasm for research careers.