* 0930097
* Partnerships for Adaptation, Implementation and Dissemination (PAID):  An Analysis of NSF ADVANCE Programs
* EHR,HRD
* 01/01/2010,09/30/2015
* Sandra Laursen, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 09/30/2015
* USD 825,290.00

This project addresses the need to understand how universities can most
effectively create institutional environments that support the success of women
scholars. We will leverage the significant work done at institutions that have
implemented Institutional Transformation (IT) projects under the National
Science Foundation's ADVANCE program. Individual institutions have assessed and
chronicled their own goals, strategies, and processes. This study takes a cross-
institutional, analytical and synthetic approach to extract the lessons, best
practices, and organizational strategies that support the success of women
scholars in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study addresses the following
question: What has been learned about the effectiveness and long-term viability
of organizational change efforts to create institutional environments that are
conducive to the success of women scholars, particularly in STEM fields?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The sub-questions are: &lt;br/&gt;- What strategies and
processes have worked well in creating institutional environments that are
conducive to the success of women scholars, especially in STEM fields? Have some
strategies worked particularly well in regard to specific goals? &lt;br/&gt;-
Why have these strategies and processes worked well? Why did some not work well?
&lt;br/&gt;- How does a university's organizational culture and other
institutional characteristics relate to the initial choice and ultimate
effectiveness of the strategies and processes used? &lt;br/&gt;- In institutions
where change strategies and processes have resulted in significant outcomes in
terms of creating environments that are conducive to supporting the career
progress of STEM women faculty, what can be learned about effective theories of
change and effective strategies and processes? That is, what lessons on "best
practices" can be learned from ADVANCE programs that have had an impact?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three-year study will use a mixed-methods approach,
guided by conceptual frameworks concerning organizational change and faculty
work. Nineteen institutions that have held ADVANCE IT awards will be surveyed,
from which five will be chosen for detailed examination as case studies. Data-
gathering methods include a review of project reports, a web-based survey,
telephone interviews, and site visits; these largely qualitative data will be
analyzed using the conceptual frameworks and organized in Change Strategy
Matrices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The study is
grounded in the literature on organizational change and faculty work and
presented by a highly qualified team. It is explicitly designed to contribute
both to practice and the scholarly literature. Through analysis of multiple data
sets, the study will produce research findings that expand knowledge about the
process of organizational transformation in higher education. Findings will
contribute to knowledge of how institutions can foster environments conducive to
women's success, how specific change strategies relate to organizational impact,
how institutions use explicit change theories or rationales, and how
institutional context influences the impact of particular change strategies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact &lt;br/&gt;The study will produce outcomes
and deliverables that provide specific evidence-based information and detailed
case examples to a wide variety of audiences: institutional leaders and change
agents who seek to enhance the success of women STEM scholars; female STEM
faculty who may use the study to guide their own career planning or to shape
their own institutions' policies, programs, or strategies; and scholars of
higher education, gender, and organizational change.&lt;br/&gt;