* 0930501
* IDR: ECCS - EPDT: Ultra high-throughput holographic on-chip cytometry using inertial micro-fluidics
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Dino Di Carlo, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2012
* USD 598,814.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law
111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0930501&lt;br/&gt;Ozcan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Flow
cytometry is a workhorse of modern cell biology and clinical diagnostics, but
suffers from three significant downsides: (i) limited throughput; (ii) high
cost; and (iii) challenges towards miniaturization while still keeping its
throughput. Addressing these limitations is likely to increase the availability
and application areas of cytometers, significantly transforming biomedical
research and clinical analysis. In this proposal, to address the existing
limitations of cell analysis platforms, the aim is to (1) Integrate inertial
microfluidic focusing with an on-chip holographic imaging platform; and (2) Test
the performance of this integrated system for conducting complete blood counts
with white blood cell differentials. Given its compact and cost-effective design
without sheath fluids or lenses, together with its ultra-large throughput, and
unique holographic information content, the proposed on-chip cytometry platform
is poised to have a transformative impact for stem cell, immunology &amp; cancer
related research, as well as clinical diagnostics especially in resource limited
or point-of-care settings.&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will also establish a
complementary educational outreach program which will involve high school
students from a predominantly underprivileged and socio-economically impacted
neighborhood of San Fernando Valley, CA. Summer research projects, seminars and
open house visits will serve the high school students to interact with a cutting
edge research environment, helping to increase their scientific curiosity and
shaping their career goals in science and engineering. Furthermore, during the
timeline of this proposal, to better contribute to the development, recruitment,
retention, and graduation of underrepresented engineering students on UCLA
campus, several undergraduate research opportunities will be created to
supplement the existing activities of the PI's in this regard. Finally, a new
graduate level course titled "Lab-on-a-Chip Photonics"; will be developed, which
aims to integrate "knowledge"; and "design"; aspects of engineering education
into a single course.