* 0930365
* Functionally Graded Orthopedic Implants via the Slurry Mixing and Dispensing Process
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,02/28/2013
* Leon Shaw, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Ted A. Conway
* 02/28/2013
* USD 384,069.00

0930365&lt;br/&gt;Shaw&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The materials used for
internal fracture fixations and joint replacements are all currently made of
metals. However, metallic implants suffer from two shortcomings, one being the
poor or non-existent interfacial bonding between the metallic surface and
surrounding bone, and the other the higher rigidity of metallic implants than
that of natural bone. As a result, the life expectancy of metallic implants is
not commensurate with the life expectancy of the recipient, and revision surgery
has to be performed every 12-15 years. Surgical revision, however, can be twice
as expensive as the primary operation and may lead to significant complications,
including infection, deformity, pain, and loss of mobility. This research
project is proposed to address these issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: A new family of functionally graded, porous Ti-6Al-4V/apatite implant
materials with a hierarchy of engineered microstructures will be investigated
and developed through innovative integration of engineering and life science.
This new family of orthopedic implants is the first of its kind because they
have a Ti-rich core and a hydroxyapatite (HA)-rich surface with a controlled
level of micro- and macro-porosity. Together, these carefully designed
composition gradients and engineered microstructures will impart to orthopedic
implants the excellent corrosion resistance, adequate strength, enhanced
mechanical compatibility, and good bioactivity for promoting bone tissue
regeneration and fixation of implants. These revolutionary functionally graded
orthopedic implants will offer an unparalleled solution to all of the issues
faced by the present metallic implants with or without coatings. A novel solid
freeform fabrication (SFF) method, termed as the slurry mixing and dispensing
(SMD) process for making functionally graded materials (FGMs), has been
developed to fabricate such a new family of orthopedic implants. The green
orthopedic implants produced from the SMD process will be converted to solid
implants using a novel sintering method developed recently in our laboratory.
This novel sintering method uses HA nano-rods as the starting powder, and leads
to dense HA bodies at sintering temperatures as low as 8500C, which is the
lowest temperature ever reported in the literature. We have chosen hip implants
as the vehicle to study and demonstrate this new family of orthopedic
biomaterials because hip fracture is by far the most devastating type of broken
bone and it accounts for about 300,000 hospitalizations every year in U.S. To
achieve the research goals, five technical tasks have been identified, and a
research team with all of the requisite expertise has been formed. We firmly
believe that the synergism of this research team will allow us to successfully
conduct this multidisciplinary project and push the frontier of the field of
orthopedic biomaterials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: If successful,
this project will have favorable social and economical impacts on society
because many patients will benefit from this novel technology. The quality of
patient life could be improved greatly. Moreover, a reduction in the need for
revision surgery could translate into reduced health care costs. Additionally,
the SMD process developed in this study can be applied in the future to
fabricate other orthopedic implants (e.g., spinal fixation devices,
maxillofacial implants, bone graft materials to fill tumor defects, etc.) and
many other FGMs for a wide range of applications such as gradient-index lenses,
graded armor materials, bipolar plates for fuel cells, and advanced
nanocomposites for aerospace, automobile and tool industries. The broad impacts
of this program will also be evident in our strong commitment to education,
human resource development and outreach, which will have direct impacts on
undergraduate students, graduate students, and middle/high school students. We
will work with the Connecticut Pre- Engineering Program (CPEP) to increase the
number of underrepresented minorities in engineering, science, and technology.
We will host CPEP students during summer to provide the students with hands-on
labs related to SMD fabrication and orthopedic implants. Mini-projects will be
developed so that CPEP students can conduct these mini-projects in one week with
the help from graduate students and PIs. Through this new initiative, we will
nurture underrepresented minorities towards positive thinking, increase their
interest in science and technology, and motivate them to pursue higher education
and become future leaders of the society.