* 0930074
* Plasmon-Enhanced Imaging of Single Membrane Proteins
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Lukas Novotny, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 09/30/2012
* USD 399,660.00

0930074&lt;br/&gt;Novotny&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks to
fundamentally improve the resolution of optical imaging by exploiting the
properties of optical antennas, a new concept in the field of optical physics.
The objective is to develop an instrument for the imaging, identification and
characterization of single proteins in native cell membranes. An instrument with
such capability will have a high impact on various fields of biological research
because membrane proteins undergo a multitude of specific tasks ranging from
recognition and signaling to molecular transport across the cell membrane.
Although current methods, such as X-ray crystallography or NMR, provide high-
resolution structural details, they are limited by their static observation and
ensemble averaging. As a consequence, the spatial distribution and co-
localization of membrane proteins as well as the correlations with membrane
topology are largely unknown. The instrument to be developed in this project
uses an optical antenna to localize and enhance incident laser radiation thereby
creating a nanoscale light source. This light source will be rasterscanned over
the surface of a biological membrane with fluorescently labeled proteins. Each
point on the sample surface will be characterized by its unique fingerprint in
form of a fluorescence spectrum allowing us to localize, identify and study
single proteins. Preliminary results support the feasibility of this technique
but various issues need yet to be addressed. We will use fused gold
nanoparticles and gold nanorods as optical half-wave antennas and attach them to
pointed dielectric capillaries. Different approaches for suppression of
background fluorescence originating from the cell interior will be investigated.
The instrument will be used to study distributions of adhesion proteins in
endothelial cell membranes which play a key role in leukocyte-endothelial cell
interactions and thus in the inflammatory response. Single layers of endothelial
cells will be grown directly on functionalized glass substrates and P-selectin
proteins will labeled with fluorescent antibodies. The goal is to spatially
resolve individual proteins under physiological conditions and to study the
correlation with membrane topology.