* 0930107
* GOALI: Chemical Design and Electrochemical Process Engineering for Micro-Fabrication
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Edward Wong, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 07/31/2012
* USD 345,014.00

0930107&lt;br/&gt;Barkey&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This GOALI proposal, to be carried
out in partnership with Rohm and Haas Electronic Materials LLC, will advance the
science and engineering of electrodeposition for fabrication of micro-devices
and components including micro machines, passive electronic devices and
electronic interconnects. The versatile chemistry of the acid-sulfate copper
plating bath with additives makes it ideal for a broad class of micro-
fabrication and electronics packaging applications. The work is based on the
central role of interactions among additives, Cu(I) and dissolved oxygen. The
local concentration of the latter two species can be controlled dynamically
through such steps as pulse-reverse current to generate Cu(I) and gas diffusers
to introduce oxygen. These ideas have been successfully implemented by the PI in
filling of through-silicon vias. This work is intended to expand through-chip
filling capabilities and to extend the process to encompass additional
fabrication tasks, including the coating of interior recesses through restricted
openings, and the filling of cavities in through-mask systems where the
electrolyte is confined to a microscopic volume bounded by anode, substrate and
mask. The work will encompass real fabrication processes on both bench and pilot
scales as well as synthetic chemistry, electroanalytical studies and process
modeling. This work will bring a comprehensive reaction-engineering perspective
to the problem and advance beyond the conventional current-distribution
understanding of simpler electroplating processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: This GOALI project will be carried out in partnership with Rohm and
Haas Electronic Materials LLC through its facility in Freeport, NY. The research
will enable advances in micro-fabrication and semi-conductor device manufacture
with potential economic and societal benefits that include growth in the US
high-tech manufacturing economy, new consumer products based on dense vertical
semi-conductor packaging and advances in biomedical engineering based on micro-
devices. In addition, the award will support the efforts of the UNH PI and Co-PI
to engage undergraduate students in meaningful research projects. Continuing
recruitment efforts by the PI include visits to area high schools and
participation in the freshman environmental engineering lectures. The Chemical
Engineering Department at UNH has been successful in recruiting and retaining
women and underrepresented minorities in its program. In the past three years,
the PI has supported four undergraduate researchers, including African-American
and Vietnamese-American NH residents. The budget for the current project will
include support for four undergraduate students per year, and the PI will make
every effort to recruit students from under-represented groups into the project.
The PI has served as a Mentor in the Ronald E. McNair Post-Baccalaureate
Achievement Program, one of the TRIO Programs funded by Title IV of the Higher
Education Act of 1965. The program is designed to encourage students from
economically challenged and racially diverse backgrounds to consider and prepare
for post graduate study and research. The PI intends to continue to serve in
this program and to make his lab available for research projects by McNair
Fellows.