* 0930029
* STTR Phase I:  High Performance Electrical Energy Storage (EES) Devices.
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Charles Gibson, Shamrock Energy Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Maria Josephine Yuen
* 06/30/2010
* USD 149,824.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase I project explores the use of
nanophase mixed ionic/electronic ceramic (MIEC) conductors as functional
electrodes in electrical energy storage (EES) devices. MIEC conductors are
attractive candidates for use in EES devices because their high electrical
conductivity facilitates double-layer formation, and their high ionic
conductivity facilitates redox chemistry. Recent studies suggest that surface
defect density in MIECs is enhanced significantly at nanoscales owing to space-
charge or similar effects which can be effectively utilized for charge storage.
The goal of this project is to provide convincing quantitative proof of concept
of nanoscale MIEC's ability to enhance charge storage above existing materials.
Main research objectives include: (1) screen MIEC conductors for performance;
(2) evaluate electrodes containing MIEC conductors; (3) evaluate prototype EES
devices; and (4) optimize performance of electrodes and prototypes. These
objectives will be accomplished by: (1) synthesis and characterization of a
series of MIECs; (2) fabrication of electrode blends containing MIECs; (3)
evaluation of electrode performance and analysis by electrochemical methods; and
(4) construction/evaluation of prototypes. Anticipated results include
development of pseudocapacitors using MIECs that exhibit enhanced charge
storage, novel hybrid battery configurations with higher power and energy
density, and their prototypes containing MIECs.

This project will enhance scientific and first of a kind technological
understanding of the nanoscale properties of ionic materials in particular the
effect and utilization of enhanced surface defect density on increasing charge
storage in nanoscale MIECs. The project is expected to lead to the development
of new class of high-performance EES devices that contain MIECs. These high-
performance devices are important because they would provide a useful solution
to applications that require both high energy and high power in a small hybrid
package. Oversized batteries are most commonly used in these applications, but
the new nano-MIEC technology offers faster charge/recharge and longer cycle-life
and could supplement or replace batteries in these applications. Anticipated
markets include transportation (hybrid and all-electric vehicles), cordless
power tools, and certain defense applications.

