* 0930231
* Partnerships for Adaptation, Implementation, and Dissemination (PAID):  Enhancing and advancing the scholarship of STEM women faculty at the University of New Hampshire
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Janet Campbell, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Beth Mitchneck
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,334,126.00

This ADVANCE PAID project at the University of New Hampshire (UNH) will have as
its focus advancing women STEM faculty at the institution. Specifically, several
primary objectives will be achieved, including: facilitating women STEM
faculty?s ability to advance successfully through their careers at UNH as
leaders in research and teaching; increasing women STEM faculty?s capacity to
influence policy and decisions at the institutional and national levels;
increasing women STEM faculty satisfaction with resources and research support
and minimize feelings of research isolation amongst women STEM faculty; and
increasing women STEM faculty satisfaction with faculty colleagues, deans and
chairs who mentor them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. UNH?s ADVANCE
PAID program will build upon strategies implemented at other ADVANCE
institutions with innovative approaches that will be initiated and customized
for the needs of UNH women faculty. As such, the existing UNH Faculty Mentoring
and Professional Development Program will be strengthened and STEM women faculty
scholars will be advanced through the initiation of a partnership program
between tenure track and research faculty and through the provision of
incentives for tenured women to participate in academic leadership positions
within and outside of UNH.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The UNH ADVANCE
PAID initiatives will enhance existing programs and provide resources to develop
more substantial programs to advance STEM women faculty. Additionally, a
significant component of this project will include the establishment of new
research collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;