* 0930643
* Facility Support:  OpenTopography - A National Hub for High Resolution Topographic Data, Tools, and Knowledge
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* J Ramon Arrowsmith, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2014
* USD 307,462.00

0930643&lt;br/&gt;Arrowsmith&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative grant to
the Arizona State University and San Diego Supercomputer Center (PI:
Baru/EAR-0930731) will support a three year Facility project to further develop
and scale up the OpenTopography Portal (http://www.opentopography.org) for
provision of high-performance, internet-based access to large volumes of high-
resolution airborne and ground-based LIDAR topographic data sets and generation
of derived data products. The proof-of-concept OpenTopography Portal (OpenTopo)
was developed through NSF/Information Technology Research and EAR/Geoinformatics
support to the San Diego Supercomputer Center as part of the GEON Project. That
portal currently hosts and distributes a limited number of data sets acquired
through the NSF/EAR supported National Center for Airborne Laser Swath Mapping
(NCALM) at the University of Florida and from USGS and NASA-funded research.
This support will enable significant upgrades and assimilation of large volumes
of extant and future LIDAR data through: 1) provision of internet-based access
to LIDAR topography data in multiple formats, including ?raw? point cloud data,
standard LIDAR-derived DEMs, and easily accessible Google Earth products; and 2)
development of additional collaborations with existing LIDAR topography data
providers and hosts (e.g., NCALM, USGS, regional consortia, states, etc.) to
link to their data archives and/or to host and distribute their data and
processing software algorithms through a freely accessible web-interface. High-
resolution digital elevation models derived from LIDAR (Light Distance And
Ranging) methods (both airborne and ground-based) have been revolutionary for
Earth science, environmental, and engineering applications. These data are among
the most powerful tools available for study of the bare Earth surface,
vegetative cover, and civil structures. Capable of generating digital elevation
models (DEMs) more than an order of magnitude better resolved than those
currently available from digitized USGS topo maps or from Shuttle Radar
Topography Mission products, airborne LIDAR (or airborne laser swath mapping -
ALSM) provides the ability to acquire meter-scale resolution, decimeter accuracy
elevation data sets over large areas at relatively low expense. Ground-based or
terrestrial laser scanners (TLS) offers even finer resolution mapping for
specific targets. These data enable research on surface processes at fine scales
and extents not previously possible yet essential for understanding processes
(e.g., erosion, hillslope creep) at the scales at which they operate. OpenTopo
will address the challenge of making massive LIDAR data sets and products
readily accessible to end users through a freely accessible web-portal.
&lt;br/&gt;