* 0930170
* GOALI:  Nanoparticle Immunotoxicology Assessment using High-Throughput Biomimicry (NIAHTB)
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Sudipta Seal, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Karn
* 08/31/2013
* USD 418,045.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-
5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0930170&lt;br/&gt;Seal&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanoparticl
es (NP) show tremendous potential in the area of therapeutics due to their
smaller size and unique physicochemical properties as compared to their coarse
counter parts. However, there exists a fissure in the current body of knowledge
pertaining to NP interactions with human immunology. Immediate attention to this
gap is necessary to define potential environmental threats. Materials which are
environmentally inert such as alumina, titania, ceria or zirconia may turn
reactive and toxic to biological cells in the nanoscale size domain. The root
cause of this behavior may be ascribed to several physical and chemical
parameters such as size, shape, phase, surface area, functionalized terminal
groups, active/reactive electronic configuration, reduction/oxidation potential,
engineered surface defects, enhanced UV or IR absorption, or processing
contamination. Hence, it is important to correlate the immune response of
nanoparticles with their material chemistry, size and surface properties to
engineer and process safe usage. This research proposal, submitted under the NSF
GOALI program in conjunction with UCF and VaxDesign Corporation of Orlando, Fl,
will establish the relation between various physico-chemical properties of the
nanoparticles with their innate and adaptive immune responses. From this they
will be able to develop a quantifiable and reliable database of nanomaterial
toxicity. A functionally equivalent immuno-physiological model (MIMIC) to mimic
the human immune system based on Vaccination Site (VS), Lymphoid Tissue
Equivalent (LTE) and Functional Assay modules will be developed to simulate the
effect of therapeutic NPs in the human body and test the reactogenicity and
immunogenicity of nanoparticle formulation across a large donor pool.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed study will help to achieve intellectual
insight into the understanding of nanotoxicology and in turn allow for design of
safe nanotherapeutics. It will establish concrete evidence to relate the
physical, chemical, and surface properties of nanoparticles with the category of
their immune response through in vitro immunological models. A successful
quantification and integration of these parameters will provide researchers with
a physically relevant template that can be used for rapid assessment of the
immuno nanotoxicity formulations at the earlier stage of discovery, enabling
them to develop products with superior performance in a more efficient and cost
effective way. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal focuses on a complete product
cycle from synthesizing oxide nanoparticles to their characterization and
subsequent testing in physiological conditions to determine their toxic response
to biological cells. The specific objectives based on the hypothesis (metal
oxide NPs can stimulate the human immune system through a complex process based
on size, shape, charge and reactivity to produce reactive oxygen and nitrogen
species. The successful quantification and integration of these parameters will
provide researchers with a physical template (physiological autologous of human
model) that can be used for rapid assessment of the formulations earlier in
their discovery stage enabling more efficient and cost effective selection of
products with superior performance and decreased time to market. It will also
provide information on adverse immunological consequences of nanomaterials which
exhibit toxicity to the human body. Developing such a new tool which can create
a knowledgebase that can be transformed and applied to a host of NPs using a
similar platform will have far reaching implications in the scientific community
by assessing potential nanotherapeutic materials for safe usage in consumer
industries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work is expected to result in
developing a sound model that can correlate the immune response to physico-
chemical properties of NPs. Such a model will fill the widening gap between the
toxicity response of nanomaterials and their immune response, thereby increasing
the fundamental understanding of the research community engaged in assessment of
NPs. This model will identify and make significant strides in our understanding
of the body?s response to NPs present in the environment. Graduate and
undergraduate students will have an opportunity to work at VaxDesign
laboratories on a regular basis, including minorities and underrepresented
students through UCF's REU program. The industrial partnership with VaxDesign
provides technical advice and training in technology transfer, scale-up
manufacturing, commercialization and internships. This proposal is aimed to
establish concrete evidence to relate the physical, chemical and surface
attributes of NPs with the type of immune response in nanotoxicity.