* 0930363
* Exploration of Middle Stone Age Archaeology in Namaqualand, South Africa
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2010
* Teresa Steele, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2010
* USD 29,907.00

The study of modern human origins is of fundamental importance for comprehending
who we are now and how we came to be this way. Archaeology has a significant
role to play in this research, because it is the only field that focuses
specifically on the role of culture in human evolution. Most specialists agree
that cultural innovations in Africa allowed the ancestors of all living humans
to spread throughout the world beginning 50,000 years ago. There is
disagreement, however, about the cause of these innovations and the significance
of their temporal and spatial patterning. Some researchers suggest that numerous
new technologies and behaviors appeared synchronously at the end of the Middle
Stone Age (MSA; ~250,000 to ~40,000 years ago), dramatically improving the human
adaptive capacity. Others argue that these innovations coalesced gradually
throughout the MSA. Resolving such central questions of human cultural evolution
requires improved understanding of technological and behavioral developments in
the African MSA. With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Teresa Steele and
an international team from South Africa, Australia, and the USA will contribute
significant new information to this issue by exploring MSA occurrences in the
Knersvlakte of Namaqualand, South Africa, an archaeologically undocumented
region with a unique environmental setting 265 km N of Cape Town. Artifacts of
MSA antiquity are abundant over several kilometers of the modern land surface,
and at least three untested rockshelters have been identified which contain
numerous MSA artifacts on their adjacent slopes. The project will explore the
archaeological potential of the area through test-excavation of at least two of
these rockshelter sites, and through analysis of spatial and technological
patterns in open-air occurrences. The data produced will help clarify the
sequence of cultural innovations in the area and the means by which early modern
humans adapted to environmental variation through space and time. This proposal
is appropriate for the NSF High-Risk Research in Anthropology Program because it
involves the first exploration of a potentially important but presently unknown
area. Though the contents of the rockshelters cannot be predicted, the local
abundance of MSA artifacts and the richness of archaeological assemblages
recovered from similar shelters in regions to the south render the Knersvlakte
highly promising. The intellectual merit of this project derives from the fact
that, if it is successful, a new window on MSA variation, and therefore modern
human origins, will be opened. The project will have broader impacts through
training and research opportunities for graduate students. If successful, this
proposal will form the basis of a multi-year project that will also provide
educational experiences for undergraduate students. The information generated
about a crucial time in human prehistory will be of general interest, and as
such will provide opportunities to engage the public, and especially to spark
interest in younger children who will go on to become the scientists of
tomorrow. With this in mind, the project's findings and their significance will
be communicated through academic outlets, local community lectures and
educational outreach programs.