* 0930039
* Acquisition of a Noble Gas Mass Spectrometer for the Oregon State University 40Ar/39Ar Geochronology Laboratory
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Anthony Koppers, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2014
* USD 474,140.00

Earth system scientists increasingly explore research frontiers that require
precise timing of physical, chemical and biological processes. With the precise
and accurate measurement of geological ages they are able to correlate and link
past events in the Earth's geological record and determine durations and rates
at which processes act. The application of 40Ar/39Ar age dating techniques is
especially critical to addressing many of the grand scientific challenges in
hotspot geodynamics, large-scale cataclysmic volcanism, paleo-environmental
impacts, lunar crust formation and geological time scale calibrations. The
acquisition of a state-of-the-art ARGUS VI multi-collector noble gas mass
spectrometer to the 40Ar/39Ar Geochronology Laboratory at the College of Oceanic
&amp; Atmospheric Sciences at Oregon State University is significantly improving
the capability to conduct 40Ar/39Ar experiments on very small samples from
dredged submarine basalts and deep sea drill cores, fine-grained terrigenous
sediment fractions to use as paleoproxies to study sediment transport and
climate change, extremely small fragments of lunar impact melts and breccias,
and low-potassium lavas from large oceanic igneous provinces in order to unravel
their temporal evolution and their world-wide environmental
impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Oregon State University 40Ar/39Ar
Geochronology Laboratory has been in operation since 1977 and functions as a
multi-user facility for both scientists and students, within and outside the
United States. With more than 75 visitors and students over the last 17 years,
70 collaborators over the last 3 years, and more than 175 publications, this
NSF-sponsored laboratory has established itself as a widely-used facility,
specifically focused on the geochronology of ocean crust, seamounts, marine
sediments and large igneous provinces. The new ARGUS VI mass spectrometer will
operate in tandem with the current MAP 215-50 mass spectrometer and will allow
for a continued active participation of undergraduate and graduate students and
post-doctoral fellows in this laboratory, training them in noble gas analytical
techniques and the use of the NSF-sponsored ArArCALC software.