* 0930756
* STTR Phase I:  Materials for Sustainability
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2010
* Saeid Ghamaty, Hi-Z Technology Inc
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 12/31/2010
* USD 150,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer
Phase I project will evaluate a novel approach to fabricate high efficiency
quantum well thermoelectric films on low thermal conductivity, affordable
substrates. Hi-Z Technology has made significant advances in developing
thermoelectric thin film materials based on Quantum Well (QW) to achieve high
figure of merit using single crystal silicon substrate, but the higher thermal
conductivity of the substrate greatly increases the heat losses and reduces
overall efficiency, so lower thermal conductivity and low-cost QW
thermoelectrics have not been possible on these substrates. This innovation is
to create single crystalline-like films of silicon atop Kapton and glass
substrates so as provide a surface similar to single crystal silicon wafer for
growth of QW thermoelectrics. The enabling method to achieve single crystalline-
like silicon films is a template synthesized by ion beam assisted deposition
which is expected to provide biaxial texture of crystals even on Kapton and
glass substrates. The anticipated result is QW thermoelectric films on low
thermal conductivity, affordable substrates with figure of merit comparable with
that achieved on single crystal Si substrates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A successful
implementation of this innovation would lead to highly efficient, commercially
feasible systems for both power generation and large-scale cooling application
which are the markets that Hi-Z technology is addressing in its business. Power
generation from waste heat recovery by thermoelectric materials can greatly
improve the efficiency of use of fossil fuels especially in automobiles.
Thermoelectric materials can enhance efficiency of photovoltaic energy
generation by converting otherwise wasted heat into power. Thermoelectric
materials provide multifunctionality in that they could also be used in cooling
applications and replace current mechanical vapor compression systems. In
addition to commercial potential, a strong understanding of the mechanisms of
biaxailly-textured crystalline growth by ion beam assisted deposition on polymer
and glass substrates is expected to be gained from work. Additionally,
investigation of epitaxy of silicon on lattice mismatched template layers would
lead to a broad impact beyond this project. Furthermore, this project is
anticipated to shed light on mechanisms of intricate interplay among electrical
and thermal parameters governing thermoelectric thin film properties. Students
and post-doc working at the University of Houston, subcontractor to this
project, will benefit from research and education experience on thin film growth
mechanisms, texture, epitaxy, and thermoelectrics
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;