* 0930940
* Metamaterials from Assembly of DNA-functionalized Nanoparticles
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Wounjhang Park, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Eddie Chang
* 08/31/2012
* USD 295,099.00

0930940 Jayaraman

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

Intellectual Merit: Metamaterials are a new class of nano/bio related materials
which possess unique optical properties derived from the structural design of
the constituents rather than their individual chemistry. The PIs propose to use
an integrated approach of theory, simulations and experiments to produce
metamaterial structures in both 2D and 3D from metal nanoclusters through
assembly of DNA functionalized nanoparticles. Nanoparticles grafted with single
stranded (ss) DNA are great candidates for assembly because of the highly
specific and tunable inter-particle interaction imparted by complementary
sequences of DNA grafts. Metal nanoclusters are ideal for metamaterials because
the coupled plasmon resonances in a nanocluster can possess both electric and
magnetic features, thereby affecting the macroscopic optical properties. The
novelty of the proposed work lies in: 1) the goal: Creation of metamaterials
from clusters of DNA functionalized nanoparticles, which is the goal of this
proposed work, to the best of the PIs' knowledge has not been attempted so far;
2) the proposed route: Most previous efforts for creation of metamaterials have
been aimed at creating 2D ordered nanostructures by top down lithographic
processes, while the PIs aim to develop bottom up approaches to form 2D and 3D
clusters of DNA grafted metal nanoparticles with specific shape, size and inter-
particle spacing, since optical properties depend primarily on the size, shape
and metal filling fraction of cluster rather than the exact stacking of
nanoparticles inside the cluster. Previous work on assembly of DNA grafted
nanoparticles has focused on creating crystal structures, while our study will
use DNA grafted nanoparticles to create nanoclusters with desired void fractions
and cluster shape; 3) the building blocks: Others have only used nanoparticles
isotropically grafted with ssDNA at high surface grafting, while the PIs will
work with nanoparticles that have ssDNA grafted isotropically as well as
anisotropically at low moderate grafting densities. Low moderate grafting
densities and anisotropic placement of a finite number of ssDNA grafts will
affect the directionality of the inter-particles interactions allowing for
better control over the inter-particle distances and packing fraction which
within the cluster. The specific aims of this project are: 1) to conduct
molecular level theory and simulation studies to elucidate the effect of ssDNA
graft length, sequence of bases, isotropic or anisotropic placement at varying
grafting density on the structure of assembled cluster. 2) To use
electromagnetic simulations to calculate the effective permittivity,
permeability, impedance and refractive index for the structure of the various
nanoclusters. 3) To utilize the predictions from theory and simulations to guide
the experiments for creating nanoclusters of desired sizes, shapes and void
fractions with reduced optical loss, enhanced the magnetic activity and ability
for visible frequency operation. This work is a new direction for both PIs. For
PI Jayaraman the proposed work would provide fundamental understanding of
biomolecular recognition and guide future work on peptide guided assembly of
nanoparticles. For PI Park, DNA functionalization will allow for greater and
more precise control over the nanocluster structures, that has been elusive to
him in his previous work.

Broader Impacts: The proposed work will transform materials engineering by
creating a new class of materials with properties, although not forbidden by
Maxwell's equations, are very difficult to find in nature. Traditionally much
focus has been placed on designing the interface between two materials to affect
their optical properties, but with metamaterials the desired optical properties
can be built into the material by design. The unprecedented engineering freedom
the metamaterial concept offers will fundamentally change the way materials
research is conducted. Metamaterials will have a huge impact on stealth defense
applications, novel imaging devices and enable new communications and computing
technologies. Since the PIs come from different engineering backgrounds the
proposed work will provide interdisciplinary research experiences for graduate
students working on this project. The PIs also plan to attract undergraduates
from under represented minorities to this project through the Research
Experience for Undergraduates program in Functional Materials Science and
Engineering, Women in Engineering Program, and through the Society for the
Advancement of Chicanos and Native Americans (SACNAS). The results emanating
from this work will be demonstrated in new elective courses on Multiscale
modeling and simulations and Metamaterials to be offered by the PIs. To reach a
much broader community and age groups the PIs will work with the Director of
Broomfield library, to make this work available to the general public through
nanotechnology related collections and exhibits.