* 0930069
* OCEANOGRAPHY magazine issues: National Oceanographic Partnership Program (Vol 22, No. 2) and Ocean Acidification (Vol. 22, No. 4)
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2010
* Jennifer Ramarui, Oceanography Society
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2010
* USD 99,482.00

The PI has requested partial funding for two special issues of The Oceanography
Society (TOS) Magazine, "Oceanography", NOPP and Ocean
Acidification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCEANOGRAPHY issue on NOPP - "Ten Years of
the National Oceanographic Partnership Program (NOPP)" - In celebration of the
tenth anniversary of the National Oceanographic Partnership Program (NOPP), to
be released in June 2009. NOPP is a collaboration of federal agencies that
provides leadership and coordination of national oceanographic research and
education initiatives. Through NOPP, the public and private sectors are brought
together to support larger, more comprehensive projects, promote sharing of
resources, and foster community-wide innovative advances in ocean science,
technology, and education. The special issue will include an introductory
article focused on the successful government-academia-industry partnerships that
were forged because of NOPP, and then eight to 10 articles will highlight
individual NOPP projects and accomplishments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCEANOGRAPHY
issue on Ocean Acidification - "The Future of Ocean Biogeochemistry in a High
CO2 World". The guest editors will put together a comprehensive list of
articles, to be written by an interdisciplinary group of scientists, that will
describe the causes and consequences of lowering the pH of our ocean, what tools
we use to study this topic, what the paleo record tells us, and what the
economic impacts for U.S. fisheries might be, among other
topics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The special
issues shouldn't just provide interesting reading, but should also provide
information about where the community is headed in the next few years. What are
the future priorities for NOPP? How is the US going to meet the challenge of
addressing acidification through coordinated interdisciplinary research? These
issues could be covered for the most part in the conclusions sections of each
issue and would not require significant alterations to plans. This proposal is
creating an approachable, scientifically based summary on the cutting edge
oceanographic research over the past decade. These issues will serve as a
valuable resource for not only those in the field of oceanography, but also
those in other science fields as well as informed lay persons. Many educators at
various levels would use these documents in their education efforts. They can be
extremely useful tools in undergraduate and graduate courses.