* 0930057
* Collaborative Research:  Wind, Waves, Rain and their Effects on Air-Water Gas and Momentum Exchanges
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2009,02/29/2012
* David Ho, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 02/29/2012
* USD 279,817.00

OCE-0648275

Small-scale ocean surface dynamics, including waves and turbulence, affect
global climate through their impact on ocean-atmosphere exchange. However, the
role of rainfall on surface fluxes, the dynamics of surface waves, the surface
ocean , and the marine atmosphere boundary layer have not been studied in
detail. A significant percentage of the shear stress at the ocean surface may be
provided, at low wind speed, by rainfall. In addition, moderate rains will
produce a dissipation of kinetic energy that is similar in magnitude to
dissipations that are measuring in the surface-wave zone under breaking wave
conditions. Higher rain rates cause much higher amounts of dissipation and thus
significant amounts of mixing of the ocean surface can occur. This has important
implications for gas, momentum and heat transfer between the atmosphere and the
ocean. Rainfall also impacts the interpretation of surface-ocean remote sensing.
There has been little work to date on the assessing the impact of rain. In this
project, scientists from the University of Delaware and Columbia University,
will conduct laboratory experiments to determine the amount of turbulent mixing
and momentum transfer that occurs from the rain, investigate the dynamic effect
of rain-induced stress on surface waves and examine the impact of rainfall on
air-water gas transfer rates. Parameters such as rain rate, droplet size, wind
speed, shear and turbulence will be measured to determine the mechanisms which
cause significant mixing and also to explore the coupling between surface fluxes
that are induced by rain and those that are induced by wind. In addition, the
dynamic effects of rain-induced stresses on the surface waves will be
investigated. The study has several important broader impacts. An improved
understanding of how rain influences air-sea interactions will facilitate the
improvement of parameterizations of these processes in models of the weather and
climate. Students will be involved in the laboratory work and the results will
be discussed through public outreach efforts.

