* 0930610
* STTR Phase I:  Biologically Inspired Polymer Fiber Adhesives as Enhanced Gripping Materials
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Metin Sitti, nanoGriptech, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 06/30/2010
* USD 150,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer
Phase I project proposes biologically inspired polymer fibrillar adhesives as
new gripping materials for ultragrip sports glove and other potential gripping
and repeatable adhesive applications. Geckos and insects have the gripping
ability to attach thousands of times to widely varying surfaces without
significant degradation, even in the presence of contamination and moisture,
using millions of micro and nanoscale fibers on their feet. Today's repeatable
adhesives foul quickly under these conditions, which leads to limited lifetime
and constrains the scenarios in which they can be used. In this study, models
will be developed to understand the interaction mechanics of fibrillar
adhesives, and gripping materials based on bioinspired polymer fibers optimized
for sports glove applications will be designed and
demonstrated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this research are the
production of wide range of potential commercial products using these
bioinspired gripping and adhesive materials and improved technical understanding
on design of fibrillar adhesives for specific applications. Repeatable adhesives
that leave no residue have a very broad market and commercial potential. In
particular, as an advanced goal, if adhesion to skin tissues is achieved, this
technology would have a strong impact in the medical industry. In the near term,
these adhesives will be integrated into sports gloves to provide increased grip
to a football surface. The scientific and technical understanding gained from
this&lt;br/&gt;project will improve the design of fibrillar adhesives, and
identify challenges for designing adhesives for specific application
scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;