* 0930447
* STTR Phase I:  Development of High Temperature Membranes for Increased PEM Electrolysis Efficiency
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Kathy Ayers, Proton Energy Systems, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Walters
* 06/30/2010
* USD 150,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer
Phase I Project addresses the efficiency limitations of proton exchange membrane
(PEM) electrolysis in order to provide a potentially renewable, cost-competitive
hydrogen source for fueling and backup power applications. Proton Energy Systems
manufactures PEM electrolyzers which operate at differential pressures ranging
from 200 to 2400 psi hydrogen generation. The thickness requirements and
temperature limitations of currently used PFSA-membranes result in large ionic
resistance losses at the typical operating current densities of 1500 mA/cm2 or
greater. Electricity cost is therefore the major contributor to the life cycle
cost. In this work, cross-linked poly(sulfone) and poly(phenylene) thermoplastic
polymers developed by Penn State University will be utilized to increase
mechanical strength and enable higher temperature operation. The research
objectives are to 1) synthesize and characterize alternative membrane
compositions at thicknesses suitable for high pressure electrolysis
applications, 2) incorporate these membranes into MEAs and 3) perform creep
studies and electrolysis testing at the single cell stack level at temperatures
up to 80 C. By using thinner membranes and higher operating temperatures, the
system efficiency can be greatly increased, while the capital cost of the
electrolysis unit is decreased. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three families of products
will be enhanced or enabled by this research program: (1) PEM electrolysis
systems for industrial gas applications, (2) PEM electrolysis systems for
transportation fueling applications and (3) PEM electrolysis systems for
regenerative fuel cell backup power applications. While all of the product
families will benefit from significant cost reduction, the operating cost
targets for backup power are the most aggressive. Several fuel cell companies
have already been offering backup power packages for this market. However, the
typical fueling solution has involved delivered hydrogen. Based on the market
analysis Proton has conducted, this is not a practical solution for many
wireless sites. The total US backup battery market size has been estimated at
~$250M/year, with the addressable section being ~$130M/year. Proton completed a
detailed trade study for DOE which demonstrated that electricity is the largest
contributor to the cost of hydrogen via PEM electrolysis, and therefore
efficiency gains through higher temperature operation are essential to viability
of this application. However, these membrane advances would also benefit the
customers of Proton's commercial products in the lab and power plant markets.
This study also provides critical information on the viability of non-PFSA
membranes for long term electrolysis operation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;