* 0930109
* Innovation through Institutional Integration (I3): The Modeling Institute
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* James Middleton, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 08/31/2014
* USD 977,352.00

Arizona State University's (ASU) Innovation through Institutional Integration
(I-3): The Modeling Institute integrates the efforts of its most successful NSF-
sponsored initiatives in STEM teacher education and more: Modeling Physics
(numerous NSF programs); Project Pathways (MSP); Professional Learning Community
Resources (TPC); Project Learning through Engineering Design and Prime the
Pipeline Project (ITEST); Ask-a-Biologist (NSDL); SMALLab (CISE &amp; IGERT);
Central Arizona-Phoenix Long-Term Ecological Research (CAP LTER); and MARS
(NASA). The I-3 Modeling Institute focuses on the integrative theme of critical
educational junctures at the middle grades level. The result of this I-3 effort
is intended to be the production of 200 middle grades teachers with STEM
endorsements through a program of study that integrates modeling as the core
construct; development of ten STEM sustainability-themed master's level courses;
persistence of these STEM teachers as professionals through the establishment of
Scientific Villages (professional learning communities); STEM-net (a Phoenix
area STEM teacher professional development network) and Ask-A-Scientist
resources (a web-based portal for on-demand learning); and College For Kids (a
summer camp for middle school students and practicum for nascent STEM middle
grades teachers).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The I-3 Modeling Institute draws upon
ASU's seminal work in modeling and employs it as the integrative construct,
connecting mathematics and scientific content through meaningful activity. The
I-3 Modeling Institute's theory of action emanates from research studies that
show the capacity to create models of scientific phenomena and to test those
models is dependent on the development of mathematical ways of thinking about
the phenomena, including the ability to make sense of patterns in data.
Moreover, studies of student learning demonstrate that context is critical for
coming to understand mathematical concepts and skills. This project incorporates
cutting-edge research-based instructional and assessment methods, centered on
Modeling Instruction in a sustainability
context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Innovative aspects of the I-3 Modeling Institute
include: recruiting and preparing a large number of in-service elementary
teachers to become middle grades STEM teachers; infusing the modeling construct
into a master's level STEM education program; integrating sustainability science
as a problem-solving context in the science and mathematics courses; and
coordinating across STEM departments, resulting in powerful linkages to research
scientists as part of the STEM education learning community. The I-3 Modeling
Institute supports the career trajectory of elementary school teachers towards a
disciplinary specialization that enables them to enrich the educational
experiences of middle school students. The I-3 Modeling Institute focuses on
improving the learning of middle grades students, themselves. Research indicates
that middle school is where interest in mathematics and science begins to wane,
along with test scores and STEM career aspirations. I-3 Modeling Institute
graduates are equipped with a toolbox of knowledge and skills to engage students
in dynamic mathematics and science learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The I-3
Modeling Institute, developed in partnership with two of the fastest growing
school districts in Arizona, leverages the most successful aspects of each of
the programs to be integrated in order to generate an enduring STEM
certification and professional development program for elementary school
teachers to become middle school science and mathematics teachers in urban
Phoenix and rural Maricopa county schools. Ultimately, the partnership upon
which this program rests is the nucleus for a vibrant STEM education community
supporting ongoing professional development and collaborations among university
researchers and secondary STEM educators.