* 0930708
* STTR Phase I:  Bio-templated Nanomaterials for Environmental Remediation Applications
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2010
* Chuanbin Mao, Bijhem Scientific, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 12/31/2010
* USD 150,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project proposes to
research and develop technology for the manufacture of a self-regenerating
catalyst with an increased efficacy over commercial catalysts for the adsorption
and destruction of organic contaminants in the environment. The project
incorporates biochemistry and genetic engineering to grow bacteria expressing
nanostructures, which are templated to produce inorganic nanotubes with uniform
diameters, pore sizes and morphology. Uniform control over nanotube dimensions
and morphology has previously been a major challenge in the industry, however,
specific control allows enhancement of positive attributes and minimizes the
negative.

The broader impacts of the research are that the project lays the groundwork for
a platform technology with applications in diverse industries. For example,
among the various types and compositions of nanotubes possible; silica nanotubes
are especially suited for nano-biotechnology applications due to their intrinsic
biocompatibility and the availability of established processes for chemical
modifications. These tubular structures are exceptional candidates for
exploration in fields such as drug and gene delivery, single molecule sensors
and bioseparations. The scaleable biological process provides a competitive
synthesis technology to the variety of chemical and physical processes utilized
for the manufacture of nanotube structures. Nanotechnology advances are
dependent on a library of technologies available for design, fabrication and
application of nanostructures and nanomaterials. For example, nanorods or
nanowires have been synthesized utilizing template based electroplating,
solutionliquid-solid growth and spontaneous anisotropic growth. The proposed
technology provides a valuable addition to the library of technologies available
for the synthesis of nanostructured materials.

