* 0930002
* Upgrade of Sedimentary Geology Preparation and Marine Sedimentary Biogeochemistry Laboratories
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Bradley Sageman, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2011
* USD 81,450.00

0930002&lt;br/&gt;Sageman&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5)." This award
will provide funding to replace equipment for sedimentary geology and
biogeochemistry. The main items which will be improved or replaced are a rock
saw, shatterbox, centrifuge, ovens, a balance, coulometer and spectrophotometer.
All instruments slated for augmentation are older with increasing maintenance
costs and vendor discontinuance. The equipment will be used in the newly-
renovated Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences at Northwestern. The PIs
will use these instruments for research in the broad theme of marine sedimentary
biogeochemistry. The PIs investigate the ocean-atmosphere evolution through
Earth?s history using complimentary methods on sediment carbon, sulfur, iron and
phosphate. These elements and their isotopes provide a glimpse into Earth?s
redox histories and the PIs will focus on the Neoptroterozoic transition.
Elemental abundances and isotope ratios will also be used to study ocean anoxia
over time (Paleozoic and Mesozoic). The impacts on elemental cycling and organic
carbon burial rates will be assessed. Because these instruments are so
fundamental to sedimentary geology studies, their impact will span from
undergraduate to graduate students in the department. The iLabs program, which
exposes high school science students to geochemical laboratory techniques, will
also benefit from this acquisition. Projects will also allow Northeaster
Illinois University (NEIU), a large minority-attended campus, to send students
who will have access to the new instrumentation. General paleoclimate research
themes are of high societal importance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;