* 0930858
* INVESTIGATION OF FACTORS AFFECTING ADSORPTION CAPACITY AND SELECTIVITY OF ACTIVATED CARBON IN HIGHLY EFFICIENT DESULFURIZATION OF DIESEL FUEL
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Teresa Bandosz, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Rosemarie D. Wesson
* 09/30/2013
* USD 291,762.00

0930858&lt;br/&gt;Bandosz&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent environmental regulations
set the limits of sulfur in gasoline to 30 ppm and in diesel fuel to 15 ppm
(2006). Even though in the off-road fuel 500 ppm of sulfur is still an
acceptable level, the limits are set to be 15 ppm by 2010. Hydrodesulfurization
(HDS) is a method, which is able to remove the majority of sulfur-containing
compounds from fossil fuel. In spite of the high efficiency and established
technological importance of HDS it is not able to remove completely
dibenezothiophenes. Especially 4,6 - dimethyldibezothiophene is considered as
resistant to any chemical reactions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the research
program proposed here we seek to define the features of carbonaceous adsorbents
that govern the deep desulfurization process and to develop efficient diesel
fuel desulfurization media. The removal process we target is based on reactive
adsorption of DBT and 4, 6-DMDBT from very low concentration of 20 ppm sulfur.
In the "best case scenario", thiophenic molecules will first be specifically
adsorbed on the catalytic metal center/ heteroatom containing groups and then
the breaking of the carbon sulfur bond will occur with retention of sulfur on
the surface and a return of the hydrocarbon molecule to the fuel stream. In the
"worse case scenario", the DBT and 4,6-DMDBT molecules will be specifically
adsorbed in the pore system on metal oxides, sulfides, sulfur, nitrogen,
phosphorus or oxygen containing centers. Various scenarios of the in-between
interactions can exist. We will provide the detailed experimental procedure for
the preparation of the most efficient removal media (from the point of view of
the capacity, selectivity and regeneration feasibility) along with the mechanism
of the process. The performance of adsorbents in desulfurization from liquid
phase will be linked to their surface features. This will open new routes for
designing more efficient and cost effective adsorbents and catalysts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our review of the literature and research experience lead
to the following research questions related to achieving our objectives and to
the development of new technology: 1) Which temperature of carbonization does
lead to the most effective adsorbent/catalyst? 2) Which heteroatoms do enhance
the capacity and selectivity of adsorption? 3) Which metals/ surface groups or
their combinations are the most effective desulfurization catalysts? 4) Which
content of metal does result the highest capacity? 5) What are the products of
surface reactions (if any)? 6) What is the mechanism of adsorption? 7) Can we
efficiently regenerate the spent adsorbents? 8) Can we design an adsorbent
(based on the commercial carbonaceous precursors) with the surface features
leading to the effective deep desulfurization of diesel fuel?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is directly relevant to developing
new materials and improving technologies of desulfurization of diesel fuel and
other heavy fuel fractions. Due to new environmental regulations, not only in
the US but also worldwide, there is a great interest in petrochemical, chemical
and power generating industries in new adsorbents and catalysts for withdrawal
of sulfur from thiophenic species. The technology developed besides lowering the
cost of future low sulfur level fuel, may also prove to be important for
development of fuel cell, cutting edge of technology, where sulfur free hydrogen
source is the first priority due to the poisoning of the reforming catalysts by
sulfur compounds. The research will also lead to a new class of adsorbents and
catalysts, which may find application in other scientific challenges where the
separation of molecules is involved. Moreover, the broad spectrum of surface
characterization methods applied will have an impact on better understanding the
surface chemistry of carbon and carbonaceous adsorbents in general. The proposed
research is relevant to environmental problems facing contemporary society.
First, it will develop the relatively simple technology in compliance with
environmental regulations to be commenced in the near future. By decreasing the
level of sulfur in fuel, the emissions of SO2 will be reduced, which will lead
to the reduction in acid rain incidents and their detrimental effects on the
environments and human health. Moreover, the lifetime of the automobile exhaust
expensive catalyst will be prolonged. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One graduate student
and one undergraduate student will work on the project. Since CCNY is a minority
serving institution there is a high probability that students from
underrepresented groups will be involved in the research. This will have a
positive effect on the development of environmental awareness in the minority
group. Other important educational aspects are the development of new
environ./phys. chemistry experiments by the undergraduate student involved in
the research (independent research undergraduate project) and the graduate
?undergraduate teem working approach with all steps of research/problem solving
including searching literature resources, familiarity with the principles of
operation of scientific instruments and the ability to outline research theses
and research plans.