* 0930079
* Development of Novel Mesh-Adjustable Molecular Sieves and Their Membranes for Challenging Separations
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2012
* Hongcai Zhou, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Rosemarie D. Wesson
* 12/31/2012
* USD 300,000.00

0930079&lt;br/&gt;Jeong&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF award by the
Chemical and Biological Separations program supports work by Professor Hae-Kwon
Jeong at Texas A&amp;M University to develop innovative temperature-responsive
molecular sieves whose mesh sizes are continuously controllable at the scale of
common gas molecules and to fabricate their membranes for high resolution
separation of commercially important gas molecules, in particular,
propene/propane. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mesh-adjustable molecular sieve (MAMS)
based on a metal-organic framework (MOF) has recently shown remarkable control
of mesh size from 2.9 Å to 5 Å, demonstrating the unprecedented potential for
high resolution gas separation including propene/propane mixtures. These novel
mesh-adjustable molecular sieves have great potential to transform the current
paradigm of kinetic-based membrane separations via precise control of mesh size
(i.e., extremely high resolution separation of gas molecules of small size
disparity). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this work is
fourfold. First, this work will enable the PIs to determine if the novel mesh-
adjustable molecular sieves and their membranes can be successfully designed and
synthesized to address separations which are not currently feasible with current
membranes. Second, the proposed synthesis work will lead to a set of truly
transformative mesh-adjustable molecular sieves. Third, the mesh-adjustable
molecular sieve membranes will potentially transform kinetic-based gas
separations due to their unprecedented tunability of mesh size. Forth, the
proposed research will be built on the PIs? previous results: a series of novel
MOF-based molecular sieves with unprecedented controllability of their mesh
sizes and fabrication/testing of metal-organic framework (MOF) membranes with
controllable microstructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this
work are fourfold. First, the development of membranes capable of performing
propene/propane separation will lead to a technology that is much less energy-
intensive than the current practice of distillation, thereby leaving a much
smaller carbon footprint. Second, while the focus of this work is
propene/propane separation, the materials investigated here will be relevant to
other difficult separations facing the chemical and petrochemical industries
such as N2/CH4 and n-/i-C4H10 in both membrane and powder (i.e., adsorbent)
forms. Third, the collaborative nature of the work, spanning organic/inorganic
material design and synthesis, characterization, and membrane fabrication and
testing, will lead to a truly multidisciplinary research experience for the
students (two graduates and one REU undergraduate) involved. Fourth, the
educational outreach activity development of science videos based on the
proposed research will positively impact K-12 education by increasing public
interest in science and engineering.