* 0930058
* Student Travel Support for the Sixth Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI)
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Thomas Anderson, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2010
* USD 20,000.00

This award provides travel funds to assist approximately 20 US-based graduate
students to attend the Sixth Symposium on Networked Systems Design and
Implementation (NSDI). The goal of the conference is to bring together
researchers from across the networking and systems community?including computer
networking, distributed systems, and operating systems?to foster cross-
disciplinary approaches and to address shared research challenges. This cross-
disciplinary emphasis makes it well-suited as a target for student
participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Sixth Symposium on Networked Systems
Design and Implementation (NSDI) will be held in Boston, MA, on April 22-24,
2009. The conference focuses on the design principles of large-scale networks
and distributed systems and, in particular, challenges that are shared across
systems as diverse as internet routing, peer-to-peer file sharing, sensor nets,
scalable web services, and distributed network measurement.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. Participation in NSDI and similar
conferences is a valuable and important part of the graduate school experience.
It provides students with the opportunity to interact with more senior
researchers in the field, and exposes students to leading edge work in the
field. The award enables the participation of students who would otherwise be
unable to attend NSDI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;