* 0930919
* CPS:Medium:Collaborative Research: Physical Modeling and Software Synthesis for Self-Reconfigurable Sensors in River Environments
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Jonathan Sprinkle, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2014
* USD 300,000.00

The objective of this research is the transformation from static sensing into
mobile, actuated sensing in dynamic environments, with a focus on sensing in
tidally forced rivers. The approach is to develop inverse modeling techniques to
sense the environment, coordination algorithms to distribute sensors spatially,
and software that uses the sensed environmental data to enable these
coordination algorithms to adapt to new sensed
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work relies on the concurrent sensing of
the environment and actuation of those sensors based on sensed data. Sensing the
environment is approached as a two-layer optimization problem. Since mobile
sensors in dynamic environments may move even when not actuated, sensor
coordination and actuation algorithms must maintain connectivity for the sensors
while ensuring those sensors are appropriately located. The algorithms and
software developed consider the time scales of the sensed environment, as well
as the motion capabilities of the mobile sensors. This closes the loop from
sensing of the environment to actuation of the devices that perform that
sensing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work is addresses a challenging problem: the
management of clean water resources. Tidally forced rivers are critical elements
in the water supply for millions of Californians. By involving students from
underrepresented groups, this research provides a valuable opportunity for
students to develop an interest in engineering and to learn first hand about the
role of science and engineering in addressing environmental issues.