* 0930868
* GOALI/CPS:Medium:A Framework for Enabling Energy-Aware Smart Facilities
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2014
* H. Scott Matthews, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2014
* USD 1,500,575.00

The goal of the proposed research is to identify ways to inexpensively provide
specific information about energy consumption in buildings and facilitate
conservation. Signal processing, machine learning, and data fusion techniques
will be developed to extract actionable information from whole-building power
meters and other available sensors. The main objectives are: (a) to create a
framework for obtaining disaggregated, appliance-specific feedback about
electricity consumption in a building by extracting high-value information from
low-cost data sources; and (b) to investigate and develop data mining and
machine learning algorithms for making use of appliance-specific electricity
data, in order to provide users with recommendations on how to optimize their
energy consumption and understand the effects of their energy-related decisions.
A series of residential buildings in Pittsburgh, PA will serve as a test-bed for
evaluating and validating our proposed approach. Blueroof Technologies, a non-
profit corporation located in McKeesport, PA that researches, develops and
provides affordable senior-citizen housing with integrated sensor networks and
building automation systems, will provide access to their Research Cottages for
this project. Similarly, Robert Bosch LLC, a leading global provider of consumer
goods and building technology, will provide additional technical research
assistance and expertise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main scientific merit of the
project is the development of a framework for evaluating energy-use-
disaggregation methods according to their value for promoting energy
conservation. The resulting data sets will be large enough to produce
significant conclusions about the feasibility and effectiveness of the
technology, and allow for the development of new models about the trends and
patterns of appliance usage in buildings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts
of this research include providing a foundation for future cyber-physical
systems by inexpensively obtaining real-time appliance-level data. Such data can
be used to help reduce the energy consumption of buildings by revealing the
relationship between users' behavior and electricity consumption in buildings.
The proposed industry-university collaborative research effort with Bosch will
ensure that the technology and scientific contributions are steered toward
innovative solutions that are practical for adoption in the market. Furthermore,
the project will have significant diversity contributions by attracting minority
students through collaboration with the University of Maryland Eastern Shore, a
land-grant, historically black college with a diverse student body. Finally, a
series of planned industry seminars, workshops and the publication of journal
articles will allow further dissemination of the work.&lt;br/&gt;