* 0930525
* STTR Phase I: Development of Materials for Optical Band Gaps in Magneto-Photonic Crystals for Switching and Biosensor Applications
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Miguel Levy, INTEGRATED PHOTONICS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl F. Albus
* 06/30/2010
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project seeks to develop
new types of optical band gaps inside the Brillouin zone in magneto-photonic
crystals that will be extremely responsive to external stimuli. These band gaps
arise as a result of the hybridization of differently polarized optical modes in
a magneto-optic photonic crystal environment. Their formation in functional
photonic crystals permits the magnetic control of the crystals' optical response
for fast switching applications. The problem to be addressed in this project is
the materials requirements for the formation of these magnetically tunable
optical band gaps in birefringent non-reciprocal periodic magneto-optic garnet
films with large bandwidth. Liquid Phase Epitaxy of thin magneto-optic garnet
films on custom substrates will be optimized for all these properties. The films
will be characterized by the lithographic and focused-ion-beam patterning
implementation of magneto-photonic crystal structures in planar waveguides,
which will be used to demonstrate the effectiveness of this approach in
achieving the desired optical band gaps.

The broader impact/commercial potential will be the development of multi-
functional smart materials with commercial applications, as highly sensitive on-
chip biosensors, controllable fast optical switches, filters and modulators and
magnetic field/current sensors. The detection and analysis of biochemical
substances has vast applications in environmental monitoring, biomedical
research, healthcare, and homeland security. Optical biosensors constitute an
important and powerful tool for the detection of multiple types of analytes
ranging from bacteria and bacterial spores to virus and DNA, as well as toxic
and non-toxic substances. An interesting feature of the degenerate band gap
photonic crystals is the ability to tune a band gap, thus making the structure
attractive for the development of optical filters or switches. Optical switching
is used in the routing of optical signals for telecommunications and in logic
operations. Magneto-optic switching times faster than liquid-crystal, thermal or
mechanically based switches are possible. Optical fiber magneto-optic sensors
have specific applications in the areas of infrastructure, electric power,
automotive, power electronics, aerospace, military, hazardous environments,
educational and non-destructive testing.

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).