* 0930443
* EAGER:  Development of new methods for the study of chemical dynamics on multiple potential energy surfaces in complex chemical systems
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2009,01/31/2011
* Millard Alexander, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 01/31/2011
* USD 133,772.00

This proposal will be awarded using funds made available by the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5), and meets the
requirements established in Section 2 of the White House Memorandum entitled,
Ensuring Responsible Spending of Recovery Act Funds, dated March 20, 2009. I
also affirm, as the cognizant Program Officer, that the proposal does not
support projects described in Section 1604 of Division A of the Recovery
Act&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Millard Alexander of the University of Maryland is
supported by an EAGER award from the Theoretical Chemistry and Computational
program to conduct exploratory research on advanced methods for the study of
chemical dynamics of multiple potential energy surfaces in complex chemical
systems. Much interesting chemistry involves radicals, molecules with unfilled
electronic shells. The interaction of a radical with another atom or molecule
has, therefore, an electronic directionality - an electronic anisotropy - so
that the complete description involves more than one potential energy surface.
The research involves the determination of interaction potentials that describe
correctly the interactions between open-shell atomic and molecular radicals with
extended systems, and how small-molecule dissociation and small radical
recombination are modified by interactions with nearest-neighbor solvent
molecules. Alexander is exploring methods to extend quantum and classical rate
theory to situations where more than one electronic state is involved. This
involves extending a path-integral based quantum description of the system to
include a full set of position (or momentum) states for each different
electronic state. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has potential impact in
many technological important areas including combustion, materials processing,
plasmas and remediation chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;