* 0930564
* STTR Phase I: Full Spectrum Conjugated Polymers for Highly Efficient Organic Photovoltaics
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,12/20/2009
* Quinn Qiao, Isosceles, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Walters
* 12/20/2009
* USD 100,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer
Phase I project will demonstrate the feasibility of forming full spectrum highly
efficient polymer solar cells from newly designed conjugated and potentially
variable bandgap polymers that harvest visible through infrared light. The novel
materials will be forged by incorporating Silole and donor-acceptor-donor
moieties into the backbone and are expected to increase light harvesting and
carrier mobility, and hence short circuit current output potentially by a factor
of three over the state of the art. The key innovations of this work will also
optimize energy levels to reduce voltage loss and further optimization of device
structure and film morphology is expected improve fill factor. The primary
objective of phase I is to determine the feasibility of forging full spectrum
and high carrier mobility conjugated polymers that achieve highly efficient
solar conversion. An ancillary goal of this work is arrive at an understanding
of photophysical processes and device physics that will lead to optimal device
fabrication during phase II.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The environmental, societal
and economic impacts of this technology are enormously broad. The ensuing abrupt
drop in energy costs stemming from full spectrum harvesting promises to deliver
stability and urgently needed relief to today's volatile oil based global
economy. While photovoltaic (PV) production is already the fastest growing
source of energy across the globe, the planned efforts of this STTR project are
expected to disruptively reduce the projected cost of photovoltaic production in
2010 by a factor of 3. At a forecasted production cost of $0.70 per Watt, this
research will demonstrate a technology that is competitive with the cost of
electricity that is produced from fossil fuels. This technology will provide
clean and cost competitive energy for home and industrial power, vehicle
propulsion, consumer electronics, remote sensing, security, and an endless list
of existing applications that currently rely on energy from fossil
fuel.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;