* 0930034
* ACQUISITION OF A NEW MICROFTIR SPECTROMETER TO AID EXPERIMENTAL AND ANALYTICAL STUDIES OF C-H-O VOLATILES IN THE MANTLE
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Anthony Withers, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2010
* USD 102,370.00

0930034&lt;br/&gt;Hirschmann&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). Deep Earth
volatile cycles have a fundamental influence on our planet?s geodynamics,
magmatism, atmosphere, climate, and habitability. Owing to their influence on
transport properties such as viscosity, diffusivity, elasticity, and
conductivity, C-H-O volatiles (including H2O, CO2, and CH4 species) have
profound influence on the convective dynamics of the mantle and on its
observable geophysical properties. This grant funds purchase of a new micro-FTIR
spectrometer, which is a key tool for studying the concentrations of C-H-O
volatiles dissolved in minerals and quenched melts. The new spectrometer will be
employed principally for analyses of samples from high pressure experiments that
investigate the role of volatiles on the chemical and physical properties of
deep Earth materials related to cycling of volatiles in the deep Earth. Specific
research projects include: (1) Partitioning of H between nominally anhydrous
minerals and silicate melts; (2) Intercalibration of standards for improved
accuracy of SIMS, FTIR, and EPMA, analyses of H2O in minerals and melts; (3) Low
temperature FTIR investigations of OH in nominally anhydrous minerals; (4)
Investigating the influence of H2O on upper mantle and transition zone seismic
discontinuities; (5) Investigating the influence of H2O and CO2 on small-degree
partial melting of peridotite and the origin of the Low Velocity Zone (LVZ); (6)
Investigating the role of C-O-H species (CO2, CH4) on mantle melting and the
role of deep planetary volatile cycles; (7) Quantifying water weakening of
upper-mantle minerals; and (8) Influence of H2O on ionic diffusion in olivine.
PI involvement in an NSF funded Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU)
Site will facilitate student training and involvement in modern methods of
materials characterization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;