* 0931416
* CPS: Medium: Collaborative Research: GOALI: Methods for Network-Enabled Embedded Monitoring and Control for High-Performance Buildings
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2015
* Sean Meyn, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* David Corman
* 02/28/2015
* USD 744,540.00

The objective of this research is to develop methods for the operation and
design of cyber physical systems in general, and energy efficient buildings in
particular. The approach is to use an integrated framework: create models of
complex systems from data; then design the associated sensing-communication-
computation-control system; and finally create distributed estimation and
control algorithms, along with execution platforms to implement these
algorithms. A special emphasis is placed on adaptation. In particular, buildings
and their environments change with time, as does the way in which buildings are
used. The system must be designed to detect and respond to such changes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research brings together ideas from control
theory, dynamical systems, stochastic processes, and embedded systems to address
design and operation of complex cyber physical systems that were previously
thought to be intractable. These approaches provide qualitative understanding of
system behavior, algorithms for control, and their implementation in a networked
execution platform. Insights gained by the application of model reduction and
adaptation techniques will lead to significant developments in the underlying
theory of modeling and control of complex systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research is expected to directly impact US industry through the development of
integrated software-hardware solutions for smart buildings. Collaborations with
United Technologies Research Center are planned to enhance this impact. The
techniques developed are expected to apply to other complex cyber-physical
systems with uncertain dynamics, such as the electric power grid. The project
will enhance engineering education through the introduction of cross-
disciplinary courses. &lt;br/&gt;