* 0931035
* CPS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Abstraction of Cyber-Physical Interplays and Its Application to CPS Design
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2014
* Israel Koren, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2014
* USD 675,000.00

The objective of this research is to develop abstractions by which the
controlled process and computation state in a cyber-physical system can both be
expressed in a form that is useful for decision-making across real-time task
scheduling and control actuation domains. The approach is to quantify the
control degradation in terms of response time, thereby tying computer
responsiveness to the controlled process performance and use such cost functions
to effectively manage computational resources. Similarly, control strategies can
be adjusted so as to be responsive to computational state. Unmanned aircraft
will be used as vehicles to demonstrate our approach. The intellectual merit of
this research is that it takes disparate fields, control and computation, and
builds formal abstractions in both the computation-to-control and control-to-
computation directions. These abstractions are grounded in terms of physical
reality (e.g., time, fuel, energy) and encapsulate in a form comprehensible and
meaningful to each domain, the relevant attributes of the other domain. This
research is important because cyber-physical systems are playing an increasing
role in all walks of life. It will allow design approaches to be systematic and
efficient rather than ad hoc. It is based on a large body of our prior work that
has begun to successfully bridge the representational and algorithmic gap that
separates the control and computer science & engineering communities.
Dissemination of results will be by means of courses in our universities,
instructional materials, research and tutorial publications and industry
collaboration (e.g., General Motors R&D). The plan is to hire minority/female
students.