* 0931820
* CPS:Medium: Towards Neural-controlled Artificial Legs using High-Performance Embedded Computers
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* He Huang, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,383,980.00

&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act
of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research
is to develop a trustworthy and high-performance neural-machine interface (NMI)
that accurately determines a user?s locomotion mode in real-time for neural-
controlled artificial legs. The proposed approach is to design the NMI by
integrating a new pattern recognition strategy with a high-performance computing
embedded system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project tackles the challenges of
accurate interpretation of information from the neuromuscular system, a physical
system, using appropriate computation in a cyber system to process the
information in real-time. The neural-machine interface consists of multiple
sensors that reliably monitor the neural and mechanical information and a set of
new algorithms that can fuse and coordinate the highly dynamic information for
accurate identification of user intent. The algorithm is to be implemented on a
high-performance graphic processing unit (GPU) to meet real-time
requirements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has the potential to enable the
design of neural-controlled artificial legs and may initiate a new direction for
research in and the design of prosthetic leg systems. Innovations in this domain
have the potential to improve the quality of life of leg amputees, including
soldiers with limb amputations. The proposed approaches seek to permit cyber
systems to cope with physical uncertainty and dynamics, a common challenge in
cyber-physical systems, and to pave a way for applying high-performance
computing in biomedical engineering. Besides providing comprehensive training to
undergraduate and graduate students, the investigators plan to introduce
community college students to cyber-physical systems concepts in an interactive
and engaging manner.