* 0931871
* CPS: Small: Mathematical, Computational, and Perceptual Foundations for Interactive Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Seth Hutchinson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2013
* USD 540,474.00

CPS:Small:Mathematical, Computational, and Perceptual Foundations for
Interactive Cyber-Physical Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
research is to create interfaces that enable people with impaired sensory-motor
function to control interactive cyber-physical systems such as artificial limbs,
wheelchairs, automobiles, and aircraft. The approach is based on the premise
that performance can be significantly enhanced merely by warping the perceptual
feedback provided to the human user. A systematic way to design this feedback
will be developed by addressing a number of underlying mathematical and
computational challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit lies in
the way that perceptual feedback is constructed. Local performance criteria like
stability and collision avoidance are encoded by potential functions, and
gradients of these functions are used to warp the display. Global performance
criteria like optimal navigation are encoded by conditional probabilities on a
language of motion primitives, and metric embeddings of these probabilities are
used to warp the display. Together, these two types of feedback facilitate
improved safety and performance while still allowing the user to retain full
control over the system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this research could
improve the lives of people suffering from debilitating physical conditions such
as amputation or stroke and also could protect people like drivers or pilots
that are impaired by transient conditions such as fatigue, boredom, or substance
abuse. Undergraduate and graduate engineering students will benefit through
involvement in research projects, and K-12 students and teachers will benefit
through participation in exhibits presented at the Engineering Open House, an
event hosted annually by the College of Engineering at the University of
Illinois.