* 0931778
* Probing Phase transitions in orientationally ordered monolayers on solid surfaces with liquid crystals
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Jiyu Fang, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Eddie Chang
* 08/31/2012
* USD 160,362.00

Highly ordered monolayers of amphiphilic molecules at interfaces provide an
excellent model for the understanding of thermodynamic and rheological
properties of quasi two dimensional nano scale systems. They are also promise in
a variety of applications, such as wetting, lubrication, molecular electronics,
sensors, and nonlinear optics. Some of these applications rely on the
orientational order of amphiphilic molecules in monolayers. The objective of
this proposed research is to study the phase transitions which arise solely from
the change of the molecular tilt azimuth in long range orientationally ordered
monolayers of amphiphilic molecules on solid substrates using liquid crystals as
an optical amplification probe. Well characterized splay stripe and star
textures, which are associated with the regular variation in the molecular tilt
azimuth, will be chosen as prototypes in our studies. The specific aims for
achieving the objective are to 1) assemble the long range orientationally
ordered monolayers with star and stripe textures on glass substrates, 2) image
the star and stripe textures with liquid crystals, 3) measure the azimuthal
anchoring energy of liquid crystals on the star and stripe textures, 4) observe
the blooming transition of star textures and the zigzag transition of stripe
textures on glass substrates, and 5) investigate the effect of the surface
properties of solid substrates on these phase transitions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
Intellectual Merit: The fidelity of transferred monolayers on solid substrates
is a long standing issue in monolayer studies. It has been predicted that the
structure and phase of a transferred monolayer on a solid substrate should
correspond to one which has been observed on water surface, but possibly under
different conditions of surface pressure, temperature, subphase compositions.
However, details of these conditions are still missing. The project aims to
develop a simple and fast platform based on liquid crystal-optical amplification
to image the long range orientationally ordered phases in transferred monolayers
and the transitions between them to advance our understanding of these
conditions and test the theoretical prediction. In addition, the ability of
assembling the long range orientationally ordered monolayers onto substrates has
a considerable technological potential for nanotribology. The proposed work will
also advance our understanding of the interaction mechanism of liquid crystals
with the molecularly engineered surfaces, which is critical in display
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broad Impacts: Lipid rafts in cell membranes
are believed to participate in a member of cellular processes, such as membrane
trafficking and signaling. They are considered as lipid ordered domains enriched
in cholesterol and sphingolipids, which coexist with a liquid disordered phase
enriched in phospholipids. One of long term practical applications of the liquid
crystal optical amplification, which is proposed in this research project, is to
in situ image lipid rafts in membranes. From a broader perspective, aside from
advancing the discovery and understanding of the long range orientationally
ordered phases and phase transitions of amphiphilic monolayers on solid
substrates, the proposed program obligates the PI to educate and train graduate
and undergraduate students in interface engineering, molecular assembly, and
liquid crystals. The PI actively participates in NSF REU programs and UCF
outreach programs, which encourage the participation of underrepresented groups
and high school teachers and seniors. The integration of the proposed research
will involve graduate students, undergraduates, and minorities in scientific
research and discovery, which will benefit the broad community.