* 0931278
* HCC: Small: The CUbiC CAReS Note-Taker: Enabling Students who are Legally Blind to Take Notes in Class
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* John Black, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2013
* USD 450,439.00

Although the benefits of note-taking in the classroom are widely recognized,
there has not been enough research focused on alleviating the difficulties
encountered by legally blind and low vision students in their attempts to take
notes during lecture. The problem is particularly acute in fast-paced STEM
courses. Students who are legally blind typically write by placing their head
close to the writing surface. They may be able to use a monocular to see what is
being written on a board in the front of the classroom. But monoculars with high
magnification also have narrow fields of view, which forces the student to
"hunt" for the target at the front of the classroom each time s/he looks up from
the writing surface. The repeated delay in switching between the writing surface
and the board can make it hard for the student to keep up. In this project, the
PI will develop and evaluate a portable Note-Taker device that does not require
any adaptation of the existing classroom infrastructure, and which allows
visually impaired students to shift their attention between the writing surface
and the class presentation without inefficient context switching. The device
will employ a Tablet PC, a zooming video camera, and an electronic pan/tilt
mechanism, which can all be easily carried in a backpack and set up in a few
seconds on any classroom desk. On the Tablet PC's display surface the student
will be able both to see a zoomed video of the lecturer's presentation at the
front of the classroom in real time, and to take notes with digital ink. The
student will be able to adjust the camera's aim at any time by simply tapping on
the point of interest in the video window on the display surface of the Tablet
PC. The PI's goal is to go beyond mere "accessibility" and to create a device
that allows legally blind students to take notes as efficiently as fully sighted
students. Development and evaluation of the Note-Taker prototype will be done
with the full involvement of legally blind and low vision students on the campus
of Arizona State University, under the auspices of the Cognitive Ubiquitous
Computing Center for Assistive and Rehabilitative Systems (CUbiC CAReS). The PI
hypothesizes that his Note-Taking device will improve the learning of students
who employ it in their secondary or post-secondary classrooms to take notes
during lectures, and that it will also help those students to review their own
notes at a later time, in conjunction with cross-referenced audio and video
recordings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Difficulties in note-taking
are not limited to students with low vision. Students with certain learning
disabilities, for example, often also have difficulty taking notes at the pace
at which material is presented in the classroom. The PI's Note-Taker will reduce
irrelevant stimuli, thereby making it easier for such students to successfully
absorb, record, and ultimately understand the material presented in the
classroom.