* 0931080
* Effect of Stress and Composition on Electrochemical Degradation of Proton Exchange Membrane Fuel Cell (PEMFC) Cathode Catalysts
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Anil Virkar, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 08/31/2015
* USD 291,941.00

0931080&lt;br/&gt;Virkar&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates the role
of surface stress and composition on cathode catalyst degradation in Proton
Exchange Membrane (PEM) fuel cells. Loss of cathode catalyst activity occurs by
four main mechanisms: (a) Particle detachment from carbon support, (b)
Agglomeration and sintering, (c) Ostwald ripening, and (d) Pt dissolution at
cathode and precipitation in the membrane. Ostwald ripening and Pt precipitation
in the membrane depend on Pt ion concentration (Pt2+ and/or Pt4+) in aqueous
electrolyte and/or ionomer. Ostwald ripening involves coupled transport of
Pt2+/Pt4+ ions through aqueous/ionomer medium and electrons through carbon
support. Agglomeration and sintering involve coupled transport of Pt2+/Pt4+
through aqueous electrolyte/ionomer medium and electron transport through direct
particle contact. In mechanism (d), Pt precipitation occurs by a reaction of
Pt2+/Pt4+ and H2. Thus, three mechanisms - agglomeration/sintering, Ostwald
ripening and precipitation of Pt in the membrane depend upon Pt2+/Pt4+ ion
concentration. All factors which increase Pt2+/Pt4+ concentration will increase
degradation kinetics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits: Many factors
determine Pt2+/Pt4+ concentration, some materials related and some related to
operating conditions. This proposed work addresses fundamental materials-related
properties which determine Pt2+/Pt4+ concentration such as the thermodynamics of
alloy systems and surface stress. Fundamental thermodynamic parameter of
interest is the partial molar enthalpy of Pt alloy formation. The role of stress
is also of profound significance. First, it is known that greater tendency for
growth of smaller particles is the surface energy effect, which essentially is
the effect of pressure on chemical potential. The greater the magnitude of
surface compression, the greater is the chemical potential and degradation
kinetics. In pure Pt catalysts, only particle size determines this stress.
However, in core-shell catalysts comprising Pt shell and an alloy or non-noble
metal core, additional coherency stresses exist. By suitable choices of lattice
parameters and interfacial structure, the chemical potential can be reduced
thereby reducing Pt2+ concentration and thus reducing degradation kinetics. This
proposes to investigate a) the effect of Pt2+ /Pt4+ concentration and
temperature on the kinetics of pure Pt, Pt alloy, and core-shell catalysts; and
b) the role of stress and alloy composition on the chemical potential of Pt
using electrochemical techniques. Broader Impacts: The results of this research
should provide a scientific basis for the synthesis of degradation-resistant
cathodes. The proposed methodology is general and applicable to essentially all
electrochemical devices which require the use of nanosize materials in
electrodes and the presence of aqueous/ionic medium. The University of Utah has
a strong commitment to undergraduate and graduate education and in enhancing the
involvement of socially under-represented groups. One undergraduate student and
one graduate student will participate in this research.