* 0931213
* The Second International Conference on Mathematical Modeling and Analysis of Populations in Biological Systems; October 2009; Huntsville, Alabama
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2010
* Jia Li, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 09/30/2010
* USD 21,750.00

Award Abstract DMS-0931213&lt;br/&gt;Jia Li&lt;br/&gt;University of Alabama in
Huntsville&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Second International Conference on
Mathematical Modeling and Analysis of Populations in Biological
Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the participation of U.S. based
faculty, particularly junior faculty, and graduate students in the Second
International Conference on Mathematical Modeling and Analysis of Populations in
Biological Systems, held at the University of Alabama in Huntsville, Alabama,
during October 9-11, 2009.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mathematical modeling and
analysis can give insight and better understanding into the dynamics of
biological populations. The theory and application of mathematical models have
proved useful for the purpose of providing a logical structure within which to
synthesize knowledge, test assumptions, and make predictions about the dynamics
of biological populations with regard to epidemiological problems. Models have
provided the impetus and means for researchers to study increasingly complex and
important questions in these disciplines. The main theme of this conference will
be epidemiology and related topics, specifically, the dynamics of diseases to
which biological species are susceptible, the establishment and spread of
diseases within populations and their control and elimination. Mathematical
models are built on trade-offs between biological accuracy and mathematical
tractability. Of particular importance are the effects of modeling assumptions
concerning spatial or temporal heterogeneities or concerning heterogeneities
among the characteristics of individuals within the population. The conference
theme will focus on the derivation and analysis of dynamic models appropriate
for the study of epidemics and will address a wide variety of theoretical and
applied problems and case studies that illustrate the connection of models with
data, and the impact of the modeling results on the public
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference will bring together expert
researchers for the purpose of establishing a solid basis for contacts and
interdisciplinary collaboration among researchers in mathematical biology at
large and mathematical epidemiology in particular. Five distinguished
researchers will each give a 50-minute plenary talk that will survey current
directions and present frontiers of epidemic modeling. There will be three
parallel sessions consisting of 30-minute talks given by invited speakers. The
formal and informal discussions during the conference will result in the
increase of collaboration among various groups and researchers. A panel
discussion, moderated by the principal investigators, will discuss new
directions and open problems in the field of Mathematical Biology, in
particular, of Mathematical Epidemiology. The panel will further discuss
strategies to promote the integration of mathematics and biology curricula as
promoted by NSF-UBM programs across the country. For the graduate and
undergraduate students, this will be a great opportunity to meet leading
authorities in the field and discuss with them, formally and informally, topics
and questions in which they are interested.&lt;br/&gt;