* 0931550
* CPS:  Medium:  Vehicular Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2014
* Daniela Rus, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 09/30/2014
* USD 1,500,000.00

The objective of this research is to develop technologies to
improve&lt;br/&gt;the efficiency and safety of the road transportation
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;The approach is to develop location-based vehicular
services combining&lt;br/&gt;on-board automotive computers, in-car devices,
mobile phones, and&lt;br/&gt;roadside monitoring/surveillance systems. The
resulting vehicular&lt;br/&gt;Cyber Physical Systems (CPS) can reduce travel
times with smart&lt;br/&gt;routing, save fuel and reduce carbon emissions by
determining greener&lt;br/&gt;routes and commute times, improve safety by
detecting road hazards,&lt;br/&gt;change driving behavior using smart tolling,
and enable&lt;br/&gt;measurement-based insurance plans that incentivize good
driving.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research develops distributed algorithms for
predictive travel&lt;br/&gt;delay modeling, feedback-based routing, and road
hazard assessment.&lt;br/&gt;It develops privacy-preserving protocols for
capturing and analyzing&lt;br/&gt;data and using it for tasks such as
congestion-aware tolling. It also&lt;br/&gt;develops a secure macro-tasking
software run-time substrate to ensure&lt;br/&gt;that algorithms can be
programmed centrally without explicitly&lt;br/&gt;programming each node
separately, while ensuring that it is safe to&lt;br/&gt;run third-party code.
The research focuses on re-usable methods that&lt;br/&gt;can benefit multiple
vehicular services, and investigates which&lt;br/&gt;lessons learned from this
vehicular CPS effort generalize to
other&lt;br/&gt;situations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Road transportation is a grand
challenge problem for modern society,&lt;br/&gt;which this research can help
overcome. Automobile vendors, component &lt;br/&gt;developers, and municipal
authorities have all shown interest in deployment. &lt;br/&gt;The education plan
includes outreach to local K-12 students and a new &lt;br/&gt;undergraduate
course on transportation from a CPS perspective, which &lt;br/&gt;will involve
term projects using the data collected in the project