* 0931418
* Particle Motion in Colloidal Dispersions:  Microrheology and Microdiffusivity
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* John Brady, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* William Olbricht
* 08/31/2013
* USD 300,000.00

0931418 &lt;br/&gt;Brady &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
The increased demand for knowledge of small scale behavior has made
microrheology a key step in the understanding of biological systems and the
design and use of advanced materials and nano scale devices. Most
microrheological work to date has focused on linear viscoelastic properties, by
correlating the random thermally driven displacements of tracers to the complex
modulus through a generalized Stokes Einstein relation, a process which is well
understood but which is limited in its scope to equilibrium systems. But many
systems of practical interest are driven out of equilibrium and display (indeed,
rely upon) nonlinear behaviors. Recently a body of work has emerged focusing on
this active, nonlinear microrheology. In such a system, tracer particles undergo
displacements due not only to random thermal fluctuations, but also due to the
application of an external force applied directly to the tracer. The dispersion
is driven out of equilibrium, and as with macrorheology, dynamic responses such
as viscosity can be measured. Since the tracer probes the material at its own
(micro)scale, much smaller samples are required compared to macrorheology, and
localized heterogeneity can be explored. Recent experiments confirm the theory;
but in both theory and experiment, the focus thus far has remained on the mean
response of the material the viscosity and little focus has been devoted to
particle uctuations. Just as the shear flow in macrorheology enhances particle
diffusion, an analogous `force induced' diffusivity arises due to the single
particle forcing of active microrheology. This diffusive motion is fundamental
to the motion of an active microscale particle important both for scientific and
technology considerations. The proposed research extends the theory of active
microrheology to the force induced diffusive motion of individual particles, as
well as normal microstress differences. This work will combine theoretical and
computational studies, focusing on colloidal systems because they offer very
well characterized materials, allowing for comparisons to macroscale
measurements. But the impact of this research extends beyond colloids, as the
theoretical foundation and general conclusions are extendable to many complex
materials, especially biomaterials. Other issues such as the effect of tracer
size on the `continuum approximation', and hydrodynamic interactions between
pairs of moving particles leading to structure formation, will be addressed.
This work will expose new material capabilities and ultimately provide a
validation of microrheology as a sound technique, critical for its continued
application and future growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Motion
control for active microscale particles is a major focus in many fields from
biophysics to alternative energy to nanomedicine and it begins with
understanding the fluctuations in particle motion. Since this research provides
the theoretical foundation for new experimental techniques that have widespread
application in science and technology, its impact is both very broad and deep.
This research will develop PhD students into experts in colloid physics,
rheology, and computational methods, who will become leaders in industry and
academia. To aid in the education of future scientists and engineers, a
microrheology section for the Caltech chemical engineering laboratory will be
created. To disseminate the research widely, a publicly accessible website
showcasing research results will accompany publication in technical journals.