* 0931390
* Collaborative Research:  Hygroscopic Properties of Aerosol Organics
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2009,12/31/2013
* Anthony Wexler, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 12/31/2013
* USD 106,822.00

Aerosols contribute to the Earth's radiation balance directly by absorbing and
scattering light and indirectly by nucleating cloud droplets which increase
planetary albedo. Both effects depend on hygroscopic growth, but the
contribution of organics to aerosol hygroscopicity is not well understood--
limiting efforts to model those effects. This study will address several
important questions regarding aerosol hygroscopicity through field measurements,
laboratory experiments, and modeling: (1) What is the contribution of water-
soluble organic carbon (WSOC) to hygroscopic growth under sub- and super-
saturated conditions?; (2) What are the chemical and physical properties of
WSOC?; and (3) How well can Köhler theory and thermodynamic equilibrium modeling
account for observed hydroscopic growth and cloud condensation nucleus (CCN)
activity of mixed inorganic and organic aerosols? To answer these questions,
aerosol samples will be collected at the Desert Research Institute's high-
elevation Storm Peak Laboratory (SPL) during summer. Detailed inorganic and
organic composition of the samples will be measured with state-of-the-art
analytical techniques to identify heretofore unspeciated high molecular weight
WSOC. Water extracts of the samples and isolated WSOC will be re-aerosolized to
directly measure their contribution to hygroscopic growth and CCN activity.
Measured growth factors and CCN activity will be reconciled using Köhler theory
and structure-based thermodynamic activity models. The results of this work will
improve ability to simulate hygroscopic growth for aerosols of mixed inorganic
and organic composition.

The explicit treatment of high molecular weight WSOC compounds produced in this
project will be incorporated into the on-line version of the E-AIM thermodynamic
equilibrium model for use by researchers and students worldwide. Ultimately, the
project's results will provide information that can be incorporated into large-
scale climate models to better predict direct and indirect aerosol radiative
effects, such as hygroscopic-growth curves for water soluble organics and
parameterizations of Köhler theory for aerosols of different inorganic and
organic composition. The research will be incorporated into student projects as
part of the Geoscience Research at Storm Peak (GRASP) activity, which engages
students from underrepresented groups. During the winter of 2010, SPL will also
host atmospheric science field courses for several universities. The project
will allow the students taking these courses to work together with project
researchers during the field deployment. Graduate undergraduate students from
the involved research groups participate in laboratory experiments, data
analysis, and publication of the results.