* 0931839
* Acquisition of a Thermal Ionization Mass Spectrometer for EARTHTIME
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Samuel Bowring, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2012
* USD 496,411.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). This award will provide the funding to acquire a Thermal
Ionization Mass Spectrometer (TIMS) for the Isotope Laboratory in the Department
of Earth, Atmospheric and Planetary Sciences at MIT. With the growing momentum
behind the EARTHTIME initiative, we will purchase a new instrument that will be
optimized for and dedicated to high-precision U-Pb geochronology of uranium-
bearing accessory minerals and fulfilling the mission of EARTHTIME. The
EARTHTIME project is a community-based organization dedicated to establishing a
coordinated international infrastructure and the analytical facilities necessary
to achieve high resolution calibration of the past 800 million years of Earth
history. To achieve this goal, EARTHTIME seeks to reduce geochronologic
uncertainties through a cooperative effort between laboratories and to promote
communication between geochronologists and paleontologists/ stratigraphers. At
present, much of the effort has been directed towards eliminating inter-
laboratory and inter-technique biases for ID-TIMS U-Pb and 40Ar-39Ar
geochronology. The next step for EARTHTIME is to expand the analytical capacity
of NSF-funded labs. This award will permit the expansion of the MIT lab's
capabilities to aid both the PIs own research and to create a dedicated
EARTHTIME lab to serve the greater community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a
dedicated EARTHTIME node, the MIT facility would represent part of a planned
network of laboratories that will accommodate scientists from other
institutions, especially students, who wish to visit and learn the science of
geochronology. The goal is to train a new generation of earth scientists for
whom high-precision geochronology is part of their scientific tool kit, whether
paleontologist, stratigrapher, or petrologist. Several former graduate students
and post-doctoral scholars now play leadership roles in EARTHTIME-related
geochronology in both the U.S. and Europe. As part of our effort as an EARTHTIME
node, Bowring will continue an aggressive program of education and outreach to
teach middle and high school students about the science of geochronology.