* 0931173
* GOALI:  Collaborative Research: Structure, Stability, and Mechanisms of Nonnative Protein Aggregate &amp; Microparticle Formation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Christopher Roberts, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Friedrich Srienc
* 08/31/2014
* USD 257,761.00

0931173/0932155&lt;br/&gt;Roberts/Fernandez&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Inte
llectual merit &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to lay a foundation to
fill key gaps in mechanistic understanding of the formation of nonnative
microparticles vs. soluble aggregates, the thermodynamics of aggregate-aparticle
phase separation, and key interactions that stabilize aggregates / particles and
control their morphology. The model protein systems are alpha-chymotrypsinogen A
(aCgn) and the Fc region of human immunoglobulin gamma-1 (IgG1-Fc). aCgn is a
well-studied starting point, based on its established mechanisms of soluble
aggregate formation, and its empirical ability to form both aggregates and
microparticles. IgG1-Fc is a useful bridge to commercially viable proteins, as
it is a key domain in a range of biopharmaceutical proteins that are based on
either monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) or fusion constructs, and preliminary data
also indicates it readily forms both soluble aggregates and
particles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses a long-standing and
potentially very high impact problem in the biopharmaceutical industry. The
proposed research will result in an improved mechanistic understanding of
aggregation and particle formation; thereby providing a basis for future efforts
in the PI's laboratories and those of others to rationally design and control
aggregation resistance, as well as for control of aggregate and particle
structure / morphology across major classes of biotechnology products such as
MAbs and antibody-fusion proteins. The collaborative research plan involves
significant student mentoring and scientific contributions from the co-PI from
Amgen, including extended student internships and regular team meetings. Through
these collaborations, including work in the academic institutions, this project
will provide a framework for the education and training of graduate and
undergraduate students in the PI's laboratories, with a specific focus on
cutting-edge experimental and modeling tools. As in the past, the PIs at UVA and
UD will involve students drawn from underrepresented groups in science and
engineering. Finally, a set of examples and problems will be developed to
incorporate aspects of this research into the undergraduate curricula, including
computational and modeling activities. These modules will be disseminated to
other faculty via a web-based repository of educational materials led by San
Jose State University that was co-developed by one PI at Virginia.