* 0931539
* Case Based Reasoning and Ethics Instruction: Content and Processing Exercises for Effective Education
* BIO,DBI
* 01/15/2010,12/31/2013
* Lynn Devenport, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Carter Kimsey
* 12/31/2013
* USD 300,000.00

This action funds an Ethics Education in Science and Engineering grant entitled
"Case based reasoning and ethics instruction: content and processing exercises
for effective education" under the direction of Michael D. Mumford at the
University of Oklahoma. Cases are commonly used as a basis for ethics
instruction in the sciences and engineering. Although case-based instruction is
widely applied, little work has examined the key attributes that contribute to
effective case-based instruction. This project addresses two key issues: 1) what
case content should be stressed in instruction and 2) what instructional
activities contribute to effective acquisition of case-based
knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project examines how case material should
be presented to facilitate learning, and transfer of learning, in ethics
instruction and is being conducted within a university-wide ethics instructional
program for all graduate students attending the University of Oklahoma. In the
first phase, variations in presentation of case content are assessed with
respect to instruction stressing 1) causes, 2) goals, 3) restrictions, 4)
contingencies, and 5) social outcomes. In the second phase, procedures, or
processes, for working with case content are examined. More specifically,
instruction examines the effects of exercises calling for 1) case comparison, 2)
case elaboration, 3) case structuring, 4) case-based forecasting, and 5)
situational bounding. The effects of variations in case content and case
processing exercises are assessed with respect to gains in the performance of
students, vis-à-vis the extant ethics program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
demonstrates how case-based instruction can be used to improve ethical decision-
making in the sciences and engineering while providing illustrative
instructional materials to facilitate widespread application of the findings.