* 0931485
* DDIG: Determining the Age and Origin of the Texas Sandy Mantle: Implications for Archaeological Integrity in Upland Settings
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Steve Ahr, Baylor University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2010
* USD 14,999.00

Through the support of the National Science Foundation, Dr. Lee Nordt and Mr.
Steve Ahr at Baylor University will conduct the first systematic, regional-scale
geoarcheological study to explore the age and origin of sandy-mantled uplands in
Texas. This "sandy mantle" contains artifacts representing the last 10,000 years
of human prehistory in North America, at depths of up to 4 meters, and in
correct stratigraphic order. These sandy deposits rest on top of clay soil
horizons that do not contain archeological remains. Often a point of strong
disagreement between archeologists, geologists, and pedologists (soil
scientists), the sandy mantle is a geoarcheological enigma, resulting in wholly
disparate points of view as to its age, origin, and potential to contain
preserved archeological sites. Two models explain how these sandy soils
originated and how the archeological record became buried. The pedogenic model
suggests the sharp boundary between the sandy mantle and clay horizons required
thousands of years of soil weathering and downward movement of fine clay. The
observed archeological stratigraphy is therefore a byproduct of artifacts
shifting down through the soil profile over time, and such sites would exhibit
minimal research value. In contrast, the geomorphic model suggests that the
sandy mantle is a geologic unit that was deposited over the last 10,000 years,
burying and preserving archeological sites soon after they were created. If
correct, these archeological sites may be in their original depositional and
cultural contexts and warrant investigation. Because archeological
investigations are often mandated by various federal and state preservation
policies, previous investigations have been limited to specific archeological
sites. This problem has been compounded by a lack of regional-scale studies, and
widely differing views from archeologists, geologists and pedologists.

This research will investigate five localities of similar topography, age, and
soil parent material to assess whether the sandy soil horizons formed
simultaneously with the underlying clay horizons, or if they were deposited some
time later. Multiple analytical techniques will be used, including assessing
parent material uniformity, identifying lithologic discontinuities,
reconstructing gains and losses of mobile soil constituents, and optically
stimulated luminescence dating.

The intellectual merit of this research is that it will represent a quantum leap
toward unraveling the "sandy mantle mystery" and solving one of the most
controversial aspects of geoarcheology within the Gulf Coastal Plain region of
North America. Furthermore, this study will contribute significantly to
understanding of the genesis of the sandy mantle and provide a much-needed
context to evaluate buried archeological sites. Multiple analytical techniques
applied to carefully selected soils promises to yield the most comprehensive
understanding of this problem to date. Because legal protections and expenditure
of public funds to investigate such sites is tied to their geologic integrity,
this research may result in an overhaul of current archeological practice within
the legal framework of cultural resources management.

The broader impacts of this project are that it will further dialogue between
pedologists, geologists, and archeologists and will lead to significant new data
regarding current models of sandy mantle formation. This research will
facilitate graduate student training, and will result in conference
presentations, a Ph.D. dissertation, and three peer-reviewed journal
publications.