* 0931693
* CPS: Small: Low-Impact Monitoring of Streaming Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Ron Cytron, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore Baker
* 09/30/2013
* USD 575,473.00

The objective of this research is to enable improved performance and application
development efficiency for streaming applications. The approach is to use
architecturally diverse computing engines, such as field programmable gate
arrays and graphics processing units, to execute portions of an application.
This approach is especially well suited to applications that process streaming
data, such as from a sensor array like a telescope or other scientific
instrument.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit. While the use of
architecturally diverse systems has a long history in the world of performance-
critical systems that interact with the physical world, application development
has always been a challenge. This proposal seeks to improve application
development by making significant progress in two essential areas: performance
monitors and debuggers. The approach has the following properties: it is non-
intrusive with respect to the application being monitored and it supports data
collection concerning rare events. In particular, it allows correlation of the
cyber portion of an application with the physical portion in which the rare
events occur.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. Impact on society: The
research can have a dramatic impact on cyber-physical computing applications,
from scientific instrumentation to medical imaging. Improvements in power
efficiency, weight, and volume are all achievable through the use of
architectural diversity. Education: The proposed research will be carried out by
graduate and undergraduate students, both furthering their education and
increasing the nation's trained workforce. Underrepresented groups: Washington
University's Chancellor's Fellowship and Olin Fellowship programs will be
leveraged to attract the participation of individuals from underrepresented
groups.