* 0931749
* ATR-FTIR Spectroscopy of Electrochemical Catalytic Reactions in Aqueous Systems at Doped Diamond Film Electrodes
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2009,04/30/2014
* James Farrell, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* George J. Antos
* 04/30/2014
* USD 352,808.00

0931749 &lt;br/&gt;Schrader &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The
objective of this research is to develop a new methodology for understanding the
mechanisms of electro-catalytic conversions of highly functionalized organic
compounds in aqueous phase systems. To that end, a powerful in situ technique,
attenuated total reflectance Fourier transform infrared (ATR-FTIR) spectroscopy,
will be integrated into the design of an innovative "spectro-electrochemical
cell". This device will be used to study solution/electrode interfaces
systematically (e.g., as a function of electrode potential, solution pH, and
surface functionality). Model organic compounds with key chemical functional
groups will be used as probes for elucidating catalytic charge transfer
mechanisms, primarily under reductive (cathodic) conditions. Additionally, a
series of batch-reaction experiments will be performed in parallel to determine
the kinetics of these reductive conversions, including measurements as a
function of temperature for determination of activation energies. The
experimental data will be complemented with density functional theory (DFT)
calculations to augment and validate the mechanistic insights. The combination
of in situ ATR-FTIR spectroscopy, kinetic measurements, and DFT calculations
will constitute a new methodology for developing a deeper understanding of the
mechanisms of electrochemical reactions in aqueous solutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This new methodology will be demonstrated using conductive
boron-doped diamond (BDD) film electrodes. The main advantages of BDD electrodes
over traditional glassy carbon, noble metal, and metal oxide electrodes are: 1)
high stability under anodic polarization, 2) suppression of water electrolysis
reactions, 3) chemical inertness, and 4) low background current and double layer
charging. These properties also make BDD films an ideal support for studying the
catalytic and electrochemical properties of metal nanoparticles. Although
research on BDD electrodes has increased in recent years, a mechanistic
understanding of the surface chemistry of the BDD surface and supported metal
nanoparticles under in situ conditions has not been developed. The surface
chemistry of the BDD surface can change depending on the applied electrode
potential and solution conditions and is the governing factor for charge
transfer at the solution/electrode interface. These factors dictate the utility
of BDD electrodes for a vast number of applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: BDD electrodes have been successfully
shown to have a variety of technological applications: 1) water disinfection and
treatment; 2) electrochemical sensing; and 3) electro-synthesis of organic
compounds. Their potential use as catalyst supports remains largely untapped,
although their application is highly attractive for systems that may involve
aqueous environments such as bio-feedstock processing for fuels or "green
chemistry" for specialty chemicals production. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will also increase participation of graduate and undergraduate students
from underrepresented groups in engineering research. The graduate students will
participate in the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation: American Indian Graduate
Partnership Fellowships and Arizona Scholars Program. This program is designed
to address the national need for academically - prepared Native Americans who
can help spur economic development in their communities and reservations and
occupy leadership positions in colleges and universities, government and the
corporate world. The project will also provide new expanded opportunities to
involve high school and undergraduates in research through the UA Professional
Internship Program for High School Seniors, the NASA Space Grant Undergraduate
Internship Program, the UA Water Sustainability Undergraduate Fellowship
Program, and the UA Summer Research Institute (SRI). The Chemical and
Environmental Engineering Department is currently the host for an NSF REU and
RET site on "Systems Approach to Sustainability: Manufacturing, Water and
Energy" (NSF# 0649202). The proposed research will involve several
undergraduates and high school teachers from these programs during each year of
the grant.