* 0931413
* Flexible swimmers: reverse engineering a jellyfish
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2011
* John Dabiri, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Horst Henning Winter
* 09/30/2011
* USD 170,000.00

CBET - 0931413 &lt;br/&gt;Dabiri, John O.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is
funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will combine experiments and
computations in the design of flexible propulsors, i.e., to reverse engineer a
jellyfish. To successfully replicate the observed swimming performance of
jellyfish, it is important to first understand the dynamical role of propulsor
flexibility and nonlinear elasticity, characteristics that are ubiquitous in
biological propulsion systems. Jellyfish are a compelling model because they
represent one of the simplest examples of a biological propulsor, and yet
exhibit coupled fluid-structure interactions, large deformations, and nonlinear
elasticity. Hence, the design principles extracted from this study can
potentially be applied to higher organisms and engineered propulsion systems.
Furthermore, a recently compiled morphological database of over 600 species of
jellyfish is available to compare the results of the engineering design
optimization with the solutions found in nature. Experimental tools will provide
essential new data for validation and refinement of the numerical model, initial
inputs to the design optimization, and evaluation of the optimal solutions. In
particular, new experimental protocols have been developed to quantify the
muscle architecture and activation dynamics of live jellyfish. Digital particle
image velocimetry (DPIV) measurements will be collected both simultaneously and
sequentially in multiple planes of the flow field created by free-swimming
jellyfish. Continuing collaboration with Jon Freund at UIUC is expected to add a
computational aspect to this study. The methods developed during this project
will be disseminated via web-based tutorials, as has been done previously by the
PIs. The interdisciplinary nature of this project will be leveraged to expose
students from engineering and biology backgrounds to research methods. A
recently developed course on 'Biological Propulsion' at Caltech will serve as an
educational outlet for this research. The PI will also continue in his role as
Coordinator of the Freshmen Summer Institute (FSI) Research Program at Caltech
that introduces underrepresented incoming freshman to the environment of a
research university. Finally, both PIs will mentor undergraduate and graduate
students in the day-to-day research activities. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;