* 0931587
* Promoting Effects of Anions on Hydrogen Storage Reactions of Li-N Based Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,12/31/2013
* Yun Hu, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 12/31/2013
* USD 304,650.00

0931587 Hu

One important material for hydrogen storage is lithium imide (Li2NH) because it
can reversibly absorb as much as 6.5wt% hydrogen, via the reaction Li2NH + H2 =
LiNH2 + LiH. However, its hydrogenation and dehydrogenation temperatures are
currently too high, about 200C versus 80C required for transportation
applications. The long term goal of this project is to develop high hydrogen
storage capacity materials via doping Li2NH by anions. The PI hypothesizes that
anions doping can be used to tune structures and properties of ionic compounds
(Li2NH and LiNH2), which are key factors controlling hydrogen storage reactions.
The PI bases his hypothesis on the observations that 1) anion/cation
interactions dramatically affect catalyst performance, reaction kinetics, and
reaction selectivity, 2) anion can selectively modify the properties of solid
materials, 3) different Cl= containing promoters exhibit the same promoting
effect on the dehydrogenation of LiNH2/LiH, which is clearly an indication of
anion effects, and 4) Li2NH with O= ion showed much better hydrogen storage
performance than that without O= ion. The specific aims of this experimental
work are to: 1) correlate the effects of doping-anions on the hydrogen storage
reactions of Li2NH with their intrinsic properties; 2) evaluate how anions
doping affects the structures and properties of Li2NH and LiNH2; and 3) examine
the effects of anions doping on the intermediate species of hydrogen storage
reactions of Li2NH.

This research has significant intellectual merit. Although metals and cations
were widely used as promoters, anions have not yet been recognized as effective
components to promote the hydrogen storage materials. Knowledge gained from this
project on how anions doping affect the structures and properties of hydrogen
storage materials could provide a new approach for developing new hydrogen
storage materials. This project also has multiple broader impacts. The highly
effective storage materials developed in this research can lead to low cost
hydrogen storage materials which will impact the commercial feasibility of fuel
cell vehicles, thus reducing the requirement of oil. This research has also
strong impacts on the education of students. A "summer institute in hydrogen
energy" program will be created. This program will promote the knowledge and
skills of hydrogen energy science and engineering into the high school science
classroom via training high school teachers. This project will train one
graduate and one undergraduate student in this area. In addition, the PI is
hoping to use this project to recruit under-represented (female) high school
students as summer interns to his research group.