* 0931195
* CPS: Small: Dynamically Managing the Real-time Fabric of a Wireless Sensor-Actuator Network
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Michael Lemmon, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 08/31/2014
* USD 525,000.00

CPS: Small: Dynamically Managing the Real-time Fabric of a Wireless Sensor-
Actuator Network&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to
develop algorithms for wireless sensor-actuator networks (WSAN) that allow
control applications and network servers to work together in maximizing control
application performance subject to hard real-time service constraints. The
approach is a model-based approach in which the WSAN is unfolded into a real-
time fabric that captures the interaction between the network's cyber-processes
and the application's physical-processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's
approach faces a number of challenges when they are applied to wireless control
systems. This project addresses these challenges by 1) using network calculus
concepts to pose a network utility maximization (NUM) problem that maximizes
overall application performance subject to network capacity constraints, 2)
using event-triggered message passing schemes to reduce communication overhead,
3) using nonlinear analysis methods to more precisely characterize the problem's
utility functions, and 4) using anytime control concepts to assure robustness
over wide variations in network connectivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's
impact will be broadened through interactions with industrial partner, EmNet
LLC. The company will use this project's algorithms on its CSOnet system. CSOnet
is a WSAN controlling combined-sewer overflows (CSO), an environmental problem
faced by nearly 800 cities in the United States. The project's impact will also
be broadened through educational outreach activities that develop a graduate
level course on formal methods in cyber-physical systems. The project's impact
will be broadened further through collaborations with colleagues working on
networked control systems under the European Union's WIDE project.