* 0931992
* CPS: Small:  Collaborative Research: Establishing Integrity in Dynamic Networks of Cyber Physical Devices
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Ulrich Kremer, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 08/31/2013
* USD 355,000.00

CPS:Small:Collaborative Research: Establishing Integrity in Dynamic Networks of
Cyber Physical Devices&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
research is to develop energy-efficient integrity&lt;br/&gt;establishment
techniques for dynamic networks of cyber physical devices. &lt;br/&gt;In such
dynamic networks, devices connect opportunistically and
perform&lt;br/&gt;general-purpose computations on behalf of other devices.
However, some &lt;br/&gt;devices may be malicious in intent and affect the
integrity of computation. &lt;br/&gt;The approach is to develop new trust
establishment mechanisms for dynamic &lt;br/&gt;networks. Existing trusted
computing mechanisms are not directly applicable &lt;br/&gt;to cyber physical
devices because they are resource-intensive and require &lt;br/&gt;devices to
have special-purpose hardware.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is addressing
these problems along three research prongs. &lt;br/&gt;The first is a
comprehensive study of the resource bottlenecks in current &lt;br/&gt;trust
establishment protocols. Second, the insights from this study are
&lt;br/&gt;being used to develop resource-aware attestation protocols for cyber
&lt;br/&gt;physical devices that are equipped with trusted hardware. Third,
the&lt;br/&gt;project is developing new trust establishment protocols for cyber
physical&lt;br/&gt;devices that may lack trusted hardware. A key outcome of the
project is &lt;br/&gt;an improved understanding of the tradeoffs needed to
balance the concerns &lt;br/&gt;of security and resource-awareness in dynamic
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dynamic networks allow cyber physical devices to
form a highly-distributed,&lt;br/&gt;cloud-like infrastructure for computations
involving the physical world. The&lt;br/&gt;trust-establishment mechanisms
developed in this project encourage devices to&lt;br/&gt;participate in dynamic
networks, thereby unleashing the full potential of&lt;br/&gt;dynamic networks.
This project includes development of dynamic networking&lt;br/&gt;applications,
such as distributed gaming and social networking, in&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate
curricula and course projects, thereby fostering the&lt;br/&gt;participation of
this key demographic.