* 0931945
* The Institute for Mathematics and its Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2016
* Fadil Santosa, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 08/31/2016
* USD 20,536,085.00

The Institute for Mathematics and its Applications (IMA) is a research
infrastructure for the mathematical sciences that focuses on interdisciplinary
research. Its goal is to develop transformative mathematical research and to
strengthen the workforce engaged in interdisciplinary research involving
mathematics. The IMA also serves to provide mathematical expertise to academia,
industry, and government, and to communicate the importance of mathematics to
the public. The IMA accomplishes these goals through a variety of programs and
activities. Its annual program draws a large and diverse community of scientists
to the IMA's extremely collaborative environment. Long-term visitors and
postdoctoral fellows form the intellectual anchor of the Institute. Shorter-term
visitors come for week-long workshops organized by scientific leaders. The focus
of an annual program is set either on an application where mathematics is poised
to make important contributions, or on a branch of mathematics and its diverse
applications. The IMA's annual program is complemented by a variety of
thematically independent initiatives, including workshops on rapidly developing
areas, outreach activities, and educational programs. The IMA vigorously seeks
to increase the participation of underrepresented groups in its
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The IMA is a national research institute which
hosts scientific visitors from a variety of backgrounds at its Minneapolis
location to conduct research in a highly collaborative environment. These
visitors include postdoctoral fellows and established researchers who spend
extended periods, as well as those that participate for short programs. The
annually changing research focus draws these participants to the Institute. The
IMA offers educational and training programs for mathematical scientists at
various stages of their careers. It sponsors scientific activities at its
partner institutions' sites. IMA programs involve many branches of mathematics
and address a wide range of applied disciplines. The IMA is a center for
industrial mathematics that offers companies valuable resources through its
programs and vast connections. The IMA's diverse programs address the US
national needs and positively impact on the nation's economic competitiveness.
The institute is a mathematical sciences infrastructure that contributes to the
health, prosperity, and security of the nation.