* 0931107
* Thirteenth International Conference on Approximation Theory for March 7-10, 2010 in San Antonio, TX
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2010
* Larry Schumaker, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 09/30/2010
* USD 30,000.00

Schumaker&lt;br/&gt;DMS-0931107&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The investigator and his
colleague organize an international conference on approximation theory and its
applications, emphasizing recent theoretical advances, emerging areas, and
developments in areas of applications. The meeting includes plenary lectures in
abstract approximation, multivariate splines, nonlinear approximation, radial
basis functions, subdivision methods, imaging and signal processing, and
wavelets. Parallel sessions of minisymposia in emerging areas and of contributed
papers are included. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Roughly speaking, approximation
theory is an area of mathematics that seeks effective representations of one
sort of mathematical object by a combination of other, simpler sorts of
mathematical objects. For instance, a continuous function on an interval can be
represented more or less well by a polynomial function that intersects the
original function, and perhaps better by breaking up the interval into
subintervals and representing the function on each subinterval by a different
polynomial. This idea arises in a great many areas of mathematics and has
application throughout science and engineering. The investigator and his
colleague organize an international conference devoted to approximation theory
and its applications, emphasizing recent theoretical advances, emerging areas,
and developments in areas of applications. The conference brings together
established researchers and students, provides a marketplace for ideas, and
helps identify trends and areas of new opportunity in science, engineering, and
information technology.