* 0931677
* Infrared excitable nanoparticle-based photosensitizers for targeted photodynamic therapy
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2010,11/30/2010
* Peng Zhang, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Semahat S. Demir
* 11/30/2010
* USD 299,794.00

0931677&lt;br/&gt;Zhang&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Photodynamic therapy has
gained acceptance as a technique for cancer treatment in recent years. It
utilizes a photosensitizer to treat the target tissue locally upon the
irradiation with light of appropriate wavelengths. It is generally accepted that
the mechanism of photodynamic therapy is based on the interaction between the
excited photosensitizer and surrounding molecules, generating reactive oxygen
species, which will then cause damage to biological substrates and ultimately
cell death. Yet, photodynamic therapy suffers from major drawbacks and
limitations, and needs improvement in its efficacy to reach the full potential.
The objective of this project is to design and develop infrared excitable
photosensitizers for targeted photodynamic therapy, based on photon upconverting
nanoparticles. It is hypothesized that photosensitizers of the design discussed
in the proposal will (1) have deeper tissue penetration; (2) be highly specific
to the target; and (3) be versatile, with regard to the types of photoactivated
molecules included and of targeting agents attached. This proposal will focus on
the design, engineering and in vitro biological tests of these nanoparticle-
based photosensitizers. This project will be the first study following such
strategy. The development of the proposed nanoparticle-based photosensitizers
would address the tissue penetration depth issue in photodynamic therapy, and
make it more feasible to apply for treatments of deep-tissue
cancers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the advancement of photodynamic therapy drug
development, it will become feasible to use photodynamic therapy for cancer
treatments, especially when in combination with adjuvant therapies. The issues
addressed could set the stage for the development of next generation
photodynamic therapy drugs, and the improvement of photodynamic therapy for
cancer treatment. Results of the research will be disseminated through
contributions in peer-reviewed journals, and conference contributions. Education
will be an integral part of the proposed research by including graduate,
undergraduate students and local high school student(s) in the projects.
Students of underrepresented groups will be recruited to participate in the
research program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;