* 0931748
* CPS:Medium:Cyber-Enabled Efficient Energy Management of Structures (CEEMS)
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Dinesh Mehta, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,406,023.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The objective of this research is the development of methods for the control of
energy flow in buildings, as enabled by cyber infrastructure. The approach is
inherently interdisciplinary, bringing together electrical and mechanical
engineers alongside computer scientists to advance the state of the art in
simulation, design, specification and control of buildings with multiple forms
of energy systems, including generation and storage. A significant novelty of
this project lies in a fundamental view of a building as a set of overlapping,
interacting networks. These networks include the thermal network of the physical
building, the energy distribution network, the sensing and control network, as
well as the human network, which in the past have been considered only
separately. This work thus seeks to develop methods for simulating, optimizing,
modeling, and control of complex, heterogeneous networks, with specific
application to energy efficient buildings. The advent of maturing distributed
and renewable energy sources for on-site cooling, heating, and power production
and the concomitant developments in the areas of cyberphysical and microgrid
systems present an enormous opportunity to substantially increase energy
efficiency and reduce energy-related emissions in the commercial building energy
sector. In addition, there is a direct impact of the proposed work in training
students with backgrounds in the unique blend of engineering and computer
science that is needed for the study of cyber-enabled energy efficient
management of structures, as well as planned interactions at the undergraduate
and K-12 level.