* 0931616
* Using instabilities of fluid interfaces to assemble amphiphilic block copolymers
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2012
* Ryan Hayward, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
*  Ashok S. Sangani
* 06/30/2012
* USD 282,010.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

0931616 Hayward

Intellectual Merit

The goal of this proposal is to develop an understanding of the basic
interfacial and transport phenomena underlying a newly developed processing
route for assembling amphiphilic block copolymers through hydrodynamic
instabilities of immiscible fluid interfaces. Though the instabilities that give
rise to polymer assembly are closely related to well established processes in
small molecule surfactant systems and reactive polymer blends, many fundamental
questions remain about the basic conditions that give rise to the instabilities,
as well as how subsequent deformation of the interface takes place. In the
current proposal, we also seek to understand how this process can be effectively
harnessed to generate polymeric micelles and microparticles with new structures
and unique properties. The proposed research will make the following specific
contributions, which will be of value to the fields of interfacial phenomena,
polymer physics, and biomedicine:

Tests of the validity of the proposed mechanism that the hydrodynamic
instability arises from a vanishing tension of the organic/water interface,
using a systematically varying series of polymer compositions and solvent
conditions.

- A detailed understanding of: (i) how the post instability evolution of the
organic/water interface depends on the properties of the amphiphilic polymer,
(ii) how to tune this behavior using co-surfactants, and (iii) the importance of
mass transport of polymer in this process.

- Well defined routes to prepare new types of polymer assemblies with unique
properties: (i) spherical and wormlike micelles that encapsulate a variety of
functional nanoparticulate species, and (ii) polymer microparticles with nano
and micro textured surfaces that allow tailoring of particle surface properties.

Broader Impacts

This program will have broad impacts, both scientifically and educationally.
Scientifically, the insights into interfacial instabilities will provide
fundamental insights on related processes underlying the technologically
important questions of how soaps achieve optimal detergency, and how immiscible
polymers can best be blended. The simple routes that will be developed to
produce multi functional micelles and textured microparticles, as well as the
understanding that will be gained of the properties of these assemblies, will be
of considerable utility in biomedical contexts for applications in drug delivery
and nano medicine. Educationally, this research program will contribute to the
training of graduate and undergraduate students from diverse backgrounds, both
in a classroom setting and in a multi-disciplinary research environment. The
results will also be communicated to the broader public through a series of
outreach activities, including a partnership with the Boston Museum of Science
initiated by the PI.