* 0931472
* Biomimetic Multifunctional Device for Quantification and Analysis of Circulating Tumor Cells (CTC)
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* David Eddington, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Athanassios Sambanis
* 08/31/2013
* USD 358,250.00

0931472&lt;br/&gt;Hong&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Selective detection and
isolation of circulating tumor cells (CTCs) from blood provide valuable clinical
insight into disease diagnosis and prognosis as CTCs have been demonstrated to
be an independent predictor of disease progression and survival. Additionally,
accurate CTC numbers can be used to manage the disease by monitoring changes in
tumors during treatment. However, CTCs are extremely rare, comprising as few as
one in 109 hematologic cells in the blood of patients with metastatic cancer,
effective recognition and separation of the rare cells remain a tremendous
challenge. The central objective of this proposal is to mimic physiological,
cellular behaviors within a microfluidic chip that can separate and capture CTCs
with high efficiency and specificity. To increase sensitivity and capturing
efficiency of the rare cells, exploiting multivalent effects will be useful
since the effect has been observed to result in an exponential increase of
binding avidity. Controlled immobilization of anti-epithelial-cell-adhesion-
molecule (anti-EpCAM) through polymeric nanolinkers composed of spherical
poly(amidoamine) dendrimers and linear polyethylene glycol will allow control
over the multivalent surface to maximize the trapping of CTCs. Furthermore, as
the first step of metastasis is known to be "rolling" of the CTCs on the
endothelia of blood vessels that express selectins, surfaces coated with the
protein that induces the naturally occurring rolling process will promote
recruitment of the targeted cells out of the flow, thereby further enhancing
specificity against the cells. Hence, here the investigators propose a new
design of a CTC capturing device that mimics two important biological processes:
multivalent binding and cell rolling. In addition, engineered microfluidic
channels will induce rotation of flow that will substantially increases the cell
interactions with the functionalized capturing surfaces. Specifically, the
objectives of this work will focus on: 1) design and fabrication of a biomimetic
microfluidic chip to separate and capture CTCs using rolling and multivalent
strong binding; 2) characterization and optimization of capturing efficiency and
specificity of the microfluidic chip using tumor cell lines.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The present program is unique in that it will mimic
naturally occurring processes for potential diagnostic applications of late-
stage cancer patients. The combined strategies of using the biomimicry and
engineered microchannels will have great implications and potentially high-
reward in the emerging area of rare cell detection in blood. It is hypothesized
that a biomimetic microfluidic chip based on iterative rolling and stationary
adhesion of CTCs will effectively detect and isolate the rare cells. Essential
parameters that will determine the efficiency of CTC trapping are: 1)
multivalent binding between the targeted cells and anti-EpCAM that is locally
concentrated via immobilization through flexible polymeric nanolinkers and 2)
maximized interaction between cells and the functionalized substrate through
flow rotation caused by grooves in the channel ceiling.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will expand the existing education and
outreach activities of the individual investigators, including a high-school
internship program and a research experiences for undergraduates. The University
of Illinois at Chicago (UIC) has a high proportion of women and racial minority
undergraduates, as well as first-generation college students who are projected
to be the backbone of the scientific progress made by U.S. in the 21st century.
The research results and experimental techniques developed in this program will
be integrated into classroom instruction, both at the undergraduate and graduate
levels.