* 0931607
* CPS: Medium: Active Heterogeneous Sensing for Fall Detection and Fall Risk Assessment
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Zhihai He, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,409,963.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to
study active sensing and adaptive fusion using vision and acoustic sensors for
continuous, reliable fall detection and assessment of fall risk in dynamic and
unstructured home environments. The approach is to incorporate active vision
with infrared light sources and camera controls, an acoustic array that
identifies the sound characteristics and location, and sensor fusion based on
the Choquet integral and hierarchical fuzzy logic systems that supports
uncertain heterogeneous sensor data at varying time scales, qualitative data,
and risk factors. &lt;br/&gt;The project will advance the state of the art in
(1) active vision sensing for human activity recognition in dynamic and
unpredictable environments, (2) acoustic sensing in unstructured environments,
(3) adaptive sensor fusion and decision making using heterogeneous sensor data
in dynamic and unpredictable environments, (4) automatic fall detection and fall
risk assessment using non-wearable sensors, and (5) algorithms for cyber
physical systems that address the interplay of anomaly detection (falls) and
risk factors affecting the likelihood of an anomaly event. &lt;br/&gt;The
project will impact the health care and quality of life for older adults. New
approaches will assist health care providers to identify potential health
problems early, offering a model for eldercare technology that keeps seniors
independent while reducing health care costs. The project will train the next
generation of researchers to handle real, cyber-physical systems. Students will
be mentored, and research outcomes will be integrated into the classroom. Novel
outreach activities are planned to reach the elderly community and the general
public&lt;br/&gt;