* 0931978
* CPS:MEDIUM:A Computing Framework for Distributed Decision Making to Ensure Robustness of Complex Man-Made Network Systems: The Case of the Electric Power Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Marija Ilic, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,499,983.00

&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act
of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research
is to develop methods to monitor and ensure the robustness of a class of cyber-
physical systems termed "physical networks," such as electric, water, sewage,
and gas networks. The approach is to analyze such networks using the
mathematical formalism of graphical models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
models a physical network as a graph, whose variables have a concrete physical
interpretation, such as voltage, satisfying known physical laws, such as
Kirchoff laws. The machinery of graphical models is used to develop methods to
monitor and ensure the robustness of such networks, using the electric power
network as a representative. By studying puzzling network-wide interactions, the
project has the potential to clarify the role of complexity in large scale
networks. Potential contributions will be made to the fields of distributed
inference algorithms and fast numerical methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Physical
networks play a crucial role in modern society, and yet, often exhibit fragile
behavior, such as black-outs in electric power networks, resulting in economic
loss, as well as causing a security risk. This project seeks to understand the
robustness behavior of such networks and to train a broad class of students in
their theory and practice. Results from this research are to be incorporated
into courses and disseminated via research publications. The Carnegie Mellon
Conference on the Electricity Industry allows students to interact with faculty
and electricity industry veterans. Interaction with the electricity industry
aims to provide it with an understanding of cyber-intelligence, to ensure
effective robustness monitoring capabilities in the power grid.