* 0931998
* Engineered Nanoparticles for Tumor Targeting
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Esmaiel Jabbari, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Kaiming Ye
* 08/31/2012
* USD 285,000.00

0931998&lt;br/&gt;Jabbari&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although diagnosing
cancer at an early stage can significantly improve survival rate, novel
nanoscale technologies that can selectively target and destroy tumor cells while
leaving normal cells unharmed, will reduce patient suffering and recovery time.
The goal of this project is to develop self-assembled peptide-polymer
nanoparticles that can target a high differential dose of a chemotherapeutic
agent at constant release rate during the treatment schedule to the tumor
support system, thus eliminating harmful side effects and increasing the
efficacy of chemotherapy. It is hypothesized that biodegradable self-assembled
peptide-polymer nanoparticles, based on cystine-
valine(6)-lysine(2)-poly(lactide-co-glycolide fumarate) macromer, due to their
narrow size distribution and constant degradation characteristics, can target a
high differential dose of the drug to the tumor microenvironment during the
course of chemotherapy. To test this hypothesis, the following four tasks are
proposed. In the first task, combination of stochastic molecular dynamic and
Monte Carlo methods will be used to simulate the effect of chemical composition
of the peptide-polymer macromer on particle structure, size, and degradation
characteristics. The simulation results will be used to select a subspace in the
composition space of the peptide-polymer macromer with 50-150 nm aggregate size
and 2-6 weeks degradation time. In the second task, the effect of chemical
composition of the peptide-polymer macromer on release kinetics of the cancer
drug will be investigated experimentally. In the third task, peptidomimetic
nanoparticles will be grafted with the cyclic arginine-glycine-aspartic acid
peptide that binds with high specificity to integrin receptors on tumor cells
and its effect on tumor cell binding will be determined. In the fourth task, the
efficacy of the cancer drug, encapsulated in cyclic peptide grafted
nanoparticles, will be determined in a mouse model of breast cancer. Success
will be judge by the increase in survival rate and reduction in undesired side
effects. The finding of this work has the potential to transform nanoparticle
technology from natural or synthetic polymers to hybrid NPs possessing
engineering properties as well as biological selectivity. Furthermore,
fundamental knowledge will be gained on energetic interaction between the
synthetic macromer and amino acids of the peptide which will ultimately result
in the discovery of biomimetic nanoparticles with novel engineering as well as
biological properties. The intellectual merit is the proof-of-concept that
peptidomimetic nanoparticles with unusually narrow size distribution can
selectively target high differential doses of a chemotherapeutic agent to tumor
microenvironment, while leaving normal tissues unharmed. The broader impact of
this work lies in the application of these ideas to areas other than tumor
targeting, like protein and gene delivery, biological labeling, detection of
pathogens, separation of biological molecules and cells, and as contrast agent
in imaging. The ability to fabricate biomimetic self-assembled nanoparticles
that can selectively target specific biomolecules, organelles, cells, or tissues
not only has the potential for significant breakthroughs in eliminating side
effects of chemotherapy but it also advances our knowledge of the relation
between biomaterial property and biological response. As part of the outreach
program, a doctoral student involved in this project will work with a school
teacher to design experiments related to biological applications of
nanotechnology for middle school students and to discuss its potential impact on
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;