* 0931687
* IDR - Enhanced Near-Infrared Monitoring of Brain Function in Infants
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2015
* Richard Aslin, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 12/31/2015
* USD 375,705.00

0931687&lt;br/&gt;Berger&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to improve the
use of near-infrared light for studying infants' brain activity. Although
current optical methods of monitoring brain activity in infants show promise,
many poorly-corrected variables (physical, physiological, and anatomical) still
corrupt the data from too many infant participants. Through the research team's
combination of expertise in biophotonics, brain and cognitive sciences, and
pediatrics, the sources of noise will be reduced to levels where meaningful
scans can be performed on babies routinely. The method used will be near-
infrared spectroscopy (NIRS), which measures changes in the absorption of light
by blood in the scalp and brain. The instrumentation will include dedicated
"scalp-only" channels whose source-detector separations (~5 mm) are too short to
be sensitive to brain signals. When one of these channels' readout is subtracted
from standard channels (with separations of 20-35 mm), much physiological noise
is cancelled, and stimulus related activations become easier to observe. The
researchers' home-built corrected-near infrared-spectroscopy (C-NIRS) system for
adults will be restructured for infant studies and enhanced with more sources
and detectors, enabling measurements from a stimulated region and concurrent
monitoring of a "control" region. An instrument of this scale designed with
dedicated near-channel noise-suppression will be the first of its kind. In
parallel, a more flexible silicone-based headband will be developed to fit a
range of head shapes, be comfortable and safe for infants, and reduce the
amplitude of motion artifacts in the data. The new instrument will be tested on
a cohort of 60 healthy, alert infant participants (age 6-9 mos.), along with a
commercial near-infrared instrument that lacks correction
channels.&lt;br/&gt;Measurement protocols will focus on well-studied visual and
auditory stimulation paradigms. The reductions in physiological noise and motion
artifacts should yield a higher "hit rate" of meaningful data runs using the
C-NIRS instrument than for traditional NIRS, thereby establishing C-NIRS as a
valuable tool in the arsenal of the cognitive scientist studying infant
development.