* 0931507
* Thermal Transport in Nano-Enhanced Phase Change Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Randy Weinstein, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 07/31/2013
* USD 324,706.00

0931507&lt;br/&gt;Fleischer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phase Change Materials (PCMs)
are used to absorb and release thermal energy during transient heating. PCMs
have been used successfully at small scales for solar energy storage, in energy
efficient building materials, and in cooling portable electronics. In many
larger systems, however, the low thermal conductivity of most PCMs results in
poor utilization of the PCM mass. Recently, a nanoenhanced PCM with embedded,
low cost graphite nanofibers (GNF) characterized large thermal conductivities,
has been developed. The unique nanofibers are synthesized using a catalytic
decomposition process and take the form of concentric basal planes along the
fiber axis. Preliminary results have shown that, when blended into a PCM, the
nanofibers improve thermal performance of the PCM. This research examines the
fundamental nature of thermal transport in nanoenhanced PCMs during melting and
solidification in (1) thin layers (0.5 mm to 5 mm) for use in building
materials, thermal interface materials as well as other thin film applications,
and in (2) thicker layers (20 mm to 200 mm) for solar energy storage,
electronics thermal management and other high power energy systems.
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The fundamental energy transport mechanisms
responsible for the observed improvement in thermal performance of the
nanoenhanced PCM will be determined. Computational research will be conducted by
applying molecular dynamics (MD) modeling to various nanofiber styles. The MD
model will be used to predict the nature of energy transport in the different
fiber styles, and characterize the thermal conductivity of a single fiber.
Stochastic simulations involving specific matrix configurations will be
conducted to determine how the fiber styles affect the thermal performance of
the nanoenhanced PCMs.&lt;br/&gt;Experiments involving PCMs that are embedded
with different types of nanoparticles will be conducted to allow direct
comparison of the influence of each nanoparticle type on the PCMs effective
thermal conductivity. This provides the basis for which the influence of GNFs on
the enhancement of the effective thermal may be compared to that brought about
by other more expensive nanoparticles.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This project
involves dissemination of results through both traditional conference and
journal publication, as well as by way of online communities such as nanoHUB and
thermalHUB. The project provides research opportunities for several
undergraduate and graduate students. The research will be integrated into the
curricula of both the mechanical engineering and chemical engineering
departments at Villanova University through new and existing courses in
nanoscale behavior. Finally, the PIs will partner with the Villanova College of
Engineerings V.E.S.T.E.D. Academy which promotes academic achievement in
mathematics, science, technology, and engineering for at risk middle and high
school students and outreach at local middle schools.