* 0931675
* Individual PAESMEM Award: Marigold Linton, Director of American Indian Outreach
* EHR,DUE
* 04/15/2011,03/31/2014
* Marigold Linton, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 03/31/2014
* USD 10,000.00

Dr. Linton is the Director of American Indian Outreach housed within the Office
of the Provost at the University of Kansas. Dr. Linton was born and raised on
the Morongo reservation in Southern California and is an enrolled member of the
Morongo Band of Mission Indians. Dr. Linton went on to attend the University of
California, Riverside and became the first reservation Indian in California to
attend university. She earned a Ph.D. in Psychology at UCLA and went on to a
successful career in research and teaching at San Diego State University and the
University of Utah. Dr. Linton has mentored underrepresented minority students
in her capacity as President of the Society for the Advancement of Chicanos and
Native Americans in Science (SACNAS). In 1986, Dr. Linton joined the faculty at
Arizona State University (ASU) where she devoted her full professional effort to
developing programs that supported the mentoring and training of American
Indians and other underrepresented students in math and science. At ASU, Dr.
Linton helped prepare minority students to enter the teacher preparation program
and obtain scholarships, trained teacher aides in an on-reservation program for
the White Mountain Apache Tribe, and led ASU's participation in the Rural System
Initiative project funded by the National Science Foundation, which served
schools on 19 reservations. After accepting the position of Director of American
Indian Outreach at University of Kansas (KU) in 1998, Dr. Linton immediately
sought to establish collaborations that would increase and improve mentoring and
training of students underrepresented in the sciences. Dr. Linton's mentoring
initiatives led to five National Institutes of Health funded programs that have
led to the participation and mentoring of more than 200 KU and Haskell students.
Hundreds more students, both minority and majority, have benefited from the
institutionalization of aspects of these programs. Dr. Linton has also been a
forerunner in the national effort to mentor emerging scientists through her
leadership in SACNAS. As President and now as Past-President of SACNAS, Dr.
Linton has worked to develop networking and mentoring strategies that encourage
nationally recognized scientists within SACNAS to mentor thousands of students
at all levels of training from undergraduates through early faculty years.
Currently she works to provide mentoring and leadership training for all levels
of SACNAS members. Dr. Linton has utilized her experiences as a behavioral
scientist of American Indian descent to develop personal mentoring relationships
with a number of the students supported by the projects she initiated.