* 0931914
* CPS:Small:Collaborative Research:Establishing Integrity in Dynamic Networks of Cyber Physical Devices
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Trent Jaeger, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 08/31/2013
* USD 185,000.00

CPS:Small:Collaborative Research: Establishing Integrity in Dynamic Networks of
Cyber Physical Devices

The objective of this research is to develop energy-efficient integrity
establishment techniques for dynamic networks of cyber physical devices. In such
dynamic networks, devices connect opportunistically and perform general-purpose
computations on behalf of other devices. However, some devices may be malicious
in intent and affect the integrity of computation. The approach is to develop
new trust establishment mechanisms for dynamic networks. Existing trusted
computing mechanisms are not directly applicable to cyber physical devices
because they are resource-intensive and require devices to have special-purpose
hardware.

This project is addressing these problems along three research prongs. The first
is a comprehensive study of the resource bottlenecks in current trust
establishment protocols. Second, the insights from this study are being used to
develop resource-aware attestation protocols for cyber physical devices that are
equipped with trusted hardware. Third, the project is developing new trust
establishment protocols for cyber physical devices that may lack trusted
hardware. A key outcome of the project is an improved understanding of the
tradeoffs needed to balance the concerns of security and resource-awareness in
dynamic networks.

Dynamic networks allow cyber physical devices to form a highly-distributed,
cloud-like infrastructure for computations involving the physical world. The
trust-establishment mechanisms developed in this project encourage devices to
participate in dynamic networks, thereby unleashing the full potential of
dynamic networks. This project includes development of dynamic networking
applications, such as distributed gaming and social networking, in undergraduate
curricula and course projects, thereby fostering the participation of this key
demographic.