* 0931576
* CPS: Small: MPSoC based Control and Scheduling Co-design for Battery Powered Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Fumin Zhang, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Baker
* 08/31/2013
* USD 449,999.00

CPS: Small: MPSoC based Control and Scheduling Co-design for Battery Powered
Cyber-Physical Systems

The objective of this research is to develop new scientific and engineering
principles, algorithms and models for the design of battery powered cyber-
physical systems whose computational substrates include high-performance
multiprocessor systems-on-chip. The approach is to design control tasks that
guarantee performance and meet criteria for battery operation time. Task
schedulers are co-designed to balance the computing load across the multiple
processors, and to control the physical plant together with the control tasks.
The controller and scheduler will be integrated with battery management
algorithms through a systems theory approach so that the methods are provably
correct with justfiable performance.

Intellectual Merit: The program will create progress in digital and hybrid
control theory that keeps up with the recent trend of using multiprocessor
systems-on-chips for control and robotic applications. The mechanism for the
migration of control tasks between multiple processors will respect physical and
thermal performance. A novel battery dynamic discharge model is developed, which
may be applied to context when the discharge current of batteries cannot be
predicted by existing static battery models.

Broader Impacts: Collaborations with industrial partners have been set up. The
program offers multidisciplinary training in cyber-physical systems. A teaching
and outreach lab is in place to host K-12 student teams that participate in
robot competitions, and has become an Explorer Post for Boy Scout of America.