* 0931776
* Gordon Research Conference: 2009 Fertilization and the Activation of Development Gordon Research Conference, July 12-17, 2009 at Holderness School, Holderness, New Hampshire
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2009,03/31/2010
* Nancy Gray, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Heinz De Couet
* 03/31/2010
* USD 8,000.00

Generating a new individual in many species requires the fusion of sperm and
egg, the male and female gametes. This crucial event, called fertilization,
involves cellular processes such as differentiation, motility, information
exchange, recognition, fusion and development that lay at the heart of modern
biology. This is an exciting time to hold a conference in the field of
fertilization and early development as some basic concepts in gamete physiology
are being revised. The seventeenth Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on
fertilization and the activation of development will provide a forum for
presentation and discussion of new developments and ideas in this exciting,
rapidly advancing field. This is the only GRC concerned with gamete interaction
leading to the vital process of fertilization and activation of the fertilized
egg to begin the process of embryo formation. It provides an excellent
atmosphere that promotes rich interactions amongst biochemists, cell biologists,
molecular biologists, physiologists, geneticists, and biophysicists working in
the field. This conference has been singularly successful in fostering
collaborations among scientists with widely disparate experience and seniority
and, among research laboratories in this country and in Europe, Japan, Australia
and Latin America. These collaborations have led to many fruitful results. Since
1974, researchers, postdoctoral fellows and students from the field keep
attending this conference; when asked, many indicate "it is the best conference
in the field". Fundamental concepts and insights about the molecular mechanisms
involved in fertilization come out of the sessions and individual discussions
that the format of this meeting promotes. Without doubt, this knowledge
eventually impacts clinical issues in reproduction and human well-being.