* 0931835
* GOALI: Cooperation-based Optimization of the Industrial Gas Supply Chain
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* James Rawlings, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 08/31/2013
* USD 421,801.00

0931835&lt;br/&gt;Maravelias&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To remain healthy in today's
competitive environment, chemical companies must operate their supply chain (SC)
efficiently by simultaneously optimizing multiple levels of operation. This is a
challenging task because supply chains are highly dynamic and interconnected
networks, often comprised of different decision makers. Thus, centralized
approaches cannot be implemented in practice, while existing decentralized
methods yield suboptimal solutions and are insufficient to meet industrial
needs. Accordingly, the goal of this project is to develop a cooperation-based
framework for supply chain (SC) operation planning that considers local
decision-making but at the same time accounts for the interactions between the
nodes of the SC. While initial efforts will focus on the industrial gas supply
chain, this framework should effectively address operational planning problems
in a wide range of manufacturing supply
chains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The intellectual merit of this
project lies in the discovery, development, and analysis of methods for
optimizing large, coupled, networked supply chains using a cooperative
distributed framework. In developing this framework the PIs will focus on
addressing the following three challenges:&lt;br/&gt;1. Formulate local (node)
models as well as models for the entire supply chain that accurately describe
the dynamics of and interconnections among nodes of practical supply
chains.&lt;br/&gt;2. Develop novel cooperation-based methods for improved
decision-making in distributed dynamic supply chains.&lt;br/&gt;3. Assess these
methods using real-world data and develop strategies for successful
implementation of the methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addressing these
challenges, the PIs will combine existing as well as develop new results in the
areas of optimization, control theory and game theory. The integration of these
results will lead to a novel framework for distributed decision-making that has
the potential to transform future supply chains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact: First, the proposed research will improve the efficiency of the
industrial gas supply chain, as well as supply chains in other manufacturing
sectors, thus increasing the competitiveness of American companies. Second, it
has the potential to lead to reductions in a) the overall energy usage in energy
intensive sectors such as industrial gases and steel manufacturing, and b) in
greenhouse gas emissions. Third, the cooperation-based framework will integrate
concepts from optimization, control theory and game theory, thus advancing the
state of the art in the area of distributed decision-making. Fourth, the results
of this research will be used to develop educational material and will be
disseminated through GNU Octave, a freely available dissemination language
developed by the group of one of the PIs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finally, the
research can be transformative because it will quantify the impact of optimizing
the overall supply chain by developing tools to facilitate such an analysis and
developing methods to show how companies, each with their own financial
objectives, can best share the benefit of such collaboration. Such work is
needed to transform the operation of energy intensive industries.