* 0931492
* Collaborative Research:  Investigating Secondary Organic Aerosol (SOA) Formation in Central Los Angeles for Research at the Nexus of Air Quality and Climate Change  (CalNex 2010)
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Rodney Weber, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 08/31/2012
* USD 336,580.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to
identify major sources and physico-chemical processes that produce secondary
organic aerosol (SOA) in a polluted urban atmosphere. The principal
investigators will investigate Los Angeles SOA through participation in the
Research at the Nexus of Air Quality and Climate Change (CalNex) 2010
experiment. This project will support the deployment and application of advanced
instrumentation and data analysis techniques for chemical characterization of
organic trace gases and fine particle organic aerosol in central Los Angeles
during a 6-week period in June and July 2010. Highly detailed in-situ chemical
speciation of organic aerosol by automated Thermal-desorption Aerosol Gas
Chromatograph, and radiocarbon analysis of elemental, organic, water-insoluble,
and water-soluble carbon collected on integrated filters will provide unique
data to identify sources of SOA precursors. Processes and factors affecting
gas/particle partitioning will be explored with instruments capable of measuring
both gas- and particle-phase components. A combination of Particle Into Liquid
Sampler, Mist Chamber and Total Organic Carbon (TOC) analyzer (PILS/MC/TOC) will
comprehensively measure water-soluble gas/particle partitioning. This will be
augmented by chemically specific measurements of gas/particle organic acids
(PILS/MC/Ion Chromatography), and volatile and semi-volatile organic compounds
via high-resolution Proton-Transfer Reaction Time of Flight Mass Spectrometer
equipped with a thermal-desorption inlet. These instruments will add to the
measurement capabilities at the CalNex central Los Angeles ground site and
provide a unique data set for addressing the scientific objective through in-
depth data analysis following the experiment. This project will build upon the
strong collaboration started in the Study of Organic Aerosols in Riverside
(SOAR-2005) to continue investigation of SOA sources and transformation in the
urban environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Development of analytical methods and
measurement capabilities, the operation of a wide range of instruments over
extended periods, and analysis of the large data sets will require a range in
technical ability and make the project well suited for research teams of
undergraduate and graduate students, and post-doctoral researches, and promote
interaction with researchers from diverse backgrounds and disciplinary areas.
Knowledge and experience gained by these co-workers will be valuable to both the
atmospheric chemistry and local air quality communities.