* 0931937
* MSB: Joint United States - European Union Theoretical and Practical Course on Molecular Approaches for in situ Biodegradation
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2010
* Joseph Suflita, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 05/31/2010
* USD 25,000.00

This award provides support for a two-week Environmental Biotechnology course to
be held from May 24th to June 7th, 2009 at the University of Oklahoma. The
course is open to early career scholars who have training in molecular
microbiology and/or microbial ecology and who want to apply those skills to
solving environmental problems. The course is designed to provide hands-on
experience in modern biotechnological methods for the analysis of microbes and
their metabolic activities that are essential for the remediation of polluted
environments. The course will focus instructional efforts on an alluvial aquifer
contaminated by a now closed municipal landfill. This national research site
provides an excellent opportunity to study the spatial and temporal variability
associated with various biogeochemical processes and samples from the aquifer
will be used to investigate the metabolic fate of contaminants under defined
ecological conditions. In order to accomplish these goals, the course is
structured to include a mixture of field- and laboratory-related exercises. In
the laboratory, the students will learn through a combination of practical
lectures, hands-on exercises that introduce the techniques of molecular biology
as applied to environmental matrices, and one-on-one consultation with
distinguished experts in the field of environmental microbiology and
biotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The course will cover an array of chemical,
microbiological, and molecular techniques for the analyses of soils, sediments
and waters. Formal instruction and laboratory activities will be augmented by
seminars from distinguished scientists who will cover a research area related to
what the students are doing in the course. These scientists will also interact
with the students outside the classroom environment to promote discussions and
learning in less formal situations. Lastly, the project will have substantive
broader impacts. One of the central tenets of the project is to bring together
young scientists in a forum that will set the groundwork for future
collaborative interactions. The effort is to differentially select the finest
next generation scholars, equip them with the requisite training and skills, so
that their common scientific background will allow them to collaborate on future
environmental problems. In addition, they will pass this information on to their
charges when they are in future influential positions. There will be no doubt
that the biotechnological techniques and ecological lessons learned in the
course will be readily extrapolated to other ecosystems across the
globe.&lt;br/&gt;