* 0931686
* CPS:Medium: Tightly Integrated Perception and Planning in Intelligent Robotics
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Noah Snavely, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,473,121.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to
develop truly intelligent, automated driving through a new paradigm that tightly
integrates probabilistic perception and deterministic planning in a formal,
verifiable framework. The interdisciplinary approach utilizes three interlinked
tasks. Representations develops new techniques for constructing and maintaining
representations of a dynamic environment to facilitate higher-level planning.
Anticipation and Motion Planning develops methods to anticipate changes in the
environment and use them as part of the planning process. Verifiable Task
Planning develops theory and techniques for providing probabilistic guarantees
for high-level behaviors. Ingrained in the approach is the synergy between
theory and experiment using an in house, fully equipped vehicle.&lt;br/&gt;The
recent Urban Challenge showed the current brittleness of autonomous driving,
where small perception mistakes would propagate into planners, causing near
misses and small accidents; Fundamentally, there is a mismatch between
probabilistic perception and deterministic planning, leading to "reactive"
rather than "intelligent" behaviors. The proposed research directly addresses
this by developing a single, unified theory of perception and planning for
intelligent cyber-physical systems.&lt;br/&gt;Near term, this research could be
used to develop advanced safety systems in cars. The elderly and physically
impaired would benefit from inexpensive, advanced automation in cars. Far term,
the advanced intelligence could lead to automated vehicles for applications such
as cooperative search and rescue. The research program will educate students
through interdisciplinary courses in computer science and mechanical
engineering, and experiential learning projects. Results will be disseminated to
the community including under-represented colleges and universities.&lt;br/&gt;