* 0931463
* CPS: Medium: Learning for Control of Synthetic and Cyborg Insects in Uncertain Dynamic Environments
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Ronald Fearing, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,515,525.00

The objective of this research is to enable operation of synthetic
and&lt;br/&gt;cyborg insects in complicated environments, such as outdoors or in
a&lt;br/&gt;collapsed building. As the mobile platforms and environment
have&lt;br/&gt;significant uncertainty, learning and adaptation capabilities
are&lt;br/&gt;critical. The approach consists of three main thrusts to enable
the&lt;br/&gt;desired learning and adaptation: (i) Development of algorithms
to&lt;br/&gt;efficiently learn optimal control policies and dynamics models
through&lt;br/&gt;sharing the learning and adaptation between various
instantiations of&lt;br/&gt;platforms and environments. (ii) Creation of control
learning&lt;br/&gt;algorithms which can be run on low-cost, low-power mobile
platforms.&lt;br/&gt;(iii) Development of algorithms for online improvement of
policy&lt;br/&gt;performance in a minimal number of real-world
trials.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will advance learning and
adaptation&lt;br/&gt;capabilities of practical cyberphysical systems. The
proposed&lt;br/&gt;approach will be generally applicable and lead to a new class
of&lt;br/&gt;learning and adapting systems that are able to leverage
shared&lt;br/&gt;properties between multiple tasks to significantly speed
up&lt;br/&gt;learning and adaptation.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Success in this
research project will bring society closer to solving&lt;br/&gt;the grand
challenge of teams of mobile, disposable, search and rescue&lt;br/&gt;robots
which can robustly locomote through uncertain and novel&lt;br/&gt;environments,
finding survivors in disaster situations, while removing&lt;br/&gt;risk from
rescuers. This project will provide interdisciplinary&lt;br/&gt;training through
research and classwork for undergraduate and graduate&lt;br/&gt;students in
creating systems which intimately couple the cyber and&lt;br/&gt;physical
aspects in robotic and living mobile platforms. Through the&lt;br/&gt;SUPERB
summer program, under-represented students in engineering
will&lt;br/&gt;experience research in learning and robotics.&lt;br/&gt;