* 0931875
* Multifunctional and tunable lipid-nanoparticle assemblies
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Geoffrey Bothun, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 08/31/2013
* USD 316,388.00

Multifunctional nano scale therapeutics represents a transformative new frontier
in disease treatment. Liposomes provide a versatile and dynamic platform for
encapsulating functional inorganic nanoparticles with different surface
chemistries to achieve multiple therapeutic objectives. This project employs
original approaches to selectively decorate engineered liposomes with inorganic
nanoparticles, and examine how nanoparticle size, charge and hydrophobicity
affect liposome structure and function. Such composite assemblies will play an
important role in therapeutic applications where spatially as well as temporally
targeted delivery is required. Surface functionalized superparamagnetic iron
oxide (SPIO) will be used as model nanoparticles, as they have been successfully
employed as MRI contrast agents and for in vivo hyperthermia, where heating is
achieved using external magnetic fields operating at radio frequencies.
Programmed RF stimulation of the magnetoliposomes will provide a simple yet
robust way to control liposome structure and stability. Through Aim 1,
electrostatically and hydrophobically assembled decorated magnetoliposomes will
be formed and their structure, morphology, and colloidal stability
characterized. In Aim 2, the effect of selective decoration, SPIO nanoparticle
lipid interactions, and RF-heating on lipid phase behavior will be studied. In
Aim 3, selective transbilayer permeability of a molecule encapsulated within the
magnetoliposomes will be demonstrated via controlled-release or a novel burst-
release mechanism through programmed RF
heating.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. The ability to selectively
control phase behavior, heat, and mass transfer in soft colloidal nanoscale
systems is highly desirable for the formation of next generation multifunctional
therapies, nanoparticles, nanomaterials, and nanodevices. Localized RF heating
in bilayers is an original concept that is expected to provide selective control
over bilayer phase behavior, and in turn diffusion. This project will provide
new experimental methods for the synthesis and characterization of hybrid
nanoparticle/lipid assemblies. Hence, the integration of inorganic nanoparticles
and biomolecular systems will be extended to include this unique class of active
nanomaterials. Characterizing thermodynamic and transport properties will
provide a complete picture of the assemblies, which will be needed to determine
their potential as multifunctional therapeutic agents. For instance, the
decorated magnetoliposomes may enhance drug delivery by providing an external
trigger and yielding time and dose dependent diffusion. By inverting the
problem, we also have identified a way to use the magnetoliposomes as a
potential nanoscale temperature sensor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts.
Given the minimally invasive nature and tissue penetration of RF-heating, these
novel carriers would be very effective for manipulating the delivery of
therapeutic agents in vivo. Opportunities are being pursued with faculty from
the College of Pharmacy at URI to identify promising applications. In addition,
these new structures provide suitable model systems for studying nanoparticle
interactions with cellular membranes, including their role in uptake and
potential toxicity. This project will also serve as an educational tool for high
school, undergraduate, and graduate students. Co-PI Bose organizes a summer high
school intern program and both PIs have been contacted by and will work with the
New England LSAMP program to mentor students. Within our diverse laboratory
groups, we intend to pair high school and undergraduate students with graduate
student mentors to conduct independent projects directly related to hybrid
liposomes. This activity will expand the impact of the project to beyond the
traditional and expected research participation. The concepts behind this
project and the results obtained will be used as teaching material in a new
interdisciplinary graduate level Bionanotechnology course offered in the spring
semester, and disseminated freely through a collaborative website.