* 0931145
* Copper Zinc Tin Sulfide Based Solar Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Stephen Campbell, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Ram Gupta
* 08/31/2013
* USD 350,000.00

0931145&lt;br/&gt;Aydil&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Summary&lt;br/&gt;Achieving solar-to-electric
energy conversion using inexpensive, abundant and nontoxic materials is an
important goal. While silicon is a material that fits most of these criteria,
highest efficiency solar cells are made from expensive single crystal wafers.
Solar cells based on thin films of semiconductors are emerging as inexpensive
alternatives to silicon but the two materials that yield the highest efficiency
thin film solar cells, CdTe and CuInGaSe2 (CIGS), have toxic and rare elements
(In and Cd). Finding abundant and nontoxic replacements for In and Cd in CIGS
solar cells, without sacrificing the high efficiencies reached with these
technologies, is a challenge. This work attempts to address this problem.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit - Copper zinc tin sulfide (Cu2ZnSnS4 or
CZTS) is a potential material that has promising attributes for efficient,
inexpensive solar cells made from abundant and nontoxic elements. This proposal
aims at developing well-controlled deposition methods for CZTS that will result
in high quality absorber material for CZTS-based solar cells. We propose to use
a synergistic combination of combinatorial deposition methods and careful
characterization of films that are found to yield high efficiency solar cells to
elucidate the fundamental principles that lead to improvements in efficiency and
film quality. The proposed research is on a new material with very high
potential for use in solar cells. Very little is known about the properties of
CZTS and even less about the process-structure-property-performance
relationships for its use in solar cells. The proposed research will result in
knowledge on how to deposit high quality CZTS films and to make high efficiency
CZTS based solar cells. It will establish the relation between film deposition
conditions and electrical, optical and structural properties of the CZTS film.
The proposed approach balances the need to establish the fundamental science
behind the CZTS solar cell technology and the practical requirement of rapidly
moving towards the region of the parameter space that produces high efficiency
films relevant to solving a very challenging energy problem.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts - First, the proposed research could
provide a solution to the issue related to providing energy to approximately ten
billion people using a sustainable technology. Second, this project serves as a
vehicle for educating next generation of scientist and engineers who must be
trained broadly to function in the increasingly interdisciplinary work place.
The project cuts across traditional boundaries between chemistry, physics and
engineering and the students involved with this research will be educated in a
culture that values interdisciplinary collaboration. Third, the research will be
integrated into the outreach and educational activities beyond the training of
graduate students. The plan includes five components: (i) continued interactions
with Science Museum of Minnesota and Twin Cities Public &lt;br/&gt;Television,
(ii) continued mentoring of undergraduate students, particularly those from
underrepresented groups, (iii) continued mentoring of high school teachers for
developing science content for their classrooms, (iv) insertion of PV content
into a regional center for technical education in nanotechnology and (iv)
volunteering for outreach opportunities that arise in the PIs? local community.