* 0931999
* CPS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Monitoring Human Performance with Wearable Accelerometers
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Jessica Hodgins, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,206,078.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to
develop a cyber-physical system composed of accelerometers and novel machine
learning algorithms to analyze data in the context of a set of driving health
care applications. The approach is to develop novel machine learning algorithms
for temporal segmentation, classification, and detection of subtle elements of
human motion. These techniques will allow quantification of human motion and
improved full-time monitoring and assessment of medical conditions using a
lightweight wearable system. The scientific contribution of this research is in
advancing machine learning and human sensing in support of improved medical
diagnoses and treatment monitoring by (i) modeling human activity and symptoms
through sensor data analysis, (ii) integrating and fusing information from
several accelerometers to monitor in real-time, (iii) validating the efficacy of
the automated detection through assessments applying the state of the art in
diagnostic evaluation, (iv) developing novel machine learning methods for
temporal segmentation, classification, and discovery of multiple temporal
patterns that discriminate between temporal signals, and (v) providing quality
measures to characterize subtle human motion. These algorithms will advance
machine learning in the area of unsupervised and semisupervised learning. The
driving applications for this research are job coaching for people with
cognitive disabilities, tele-rehabilitation for knee osteo-arthritis, assessing
variability in balance and gait as an indicator of health of older adults, and
measures for assessing Parkinson's patients. This research is highly
interdisciplinary and will train graduate students for careers in developing
technological innovations in health and monitoring systems.