* 0931474
* CPS: Medium: Learning to Sense Robustly and Act Effectively
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Silvio Savarese, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2014
* USD 1,466,731.00

The physical environment of a cyber-physical system is unboundedly complex,
changing continuously in time and space. An embodied cyber-physical system,
embedded in the physical world, will receive a high bandwidth stream of sensory
information, and may have multiple effectors with continuous control signals. In
addition to dynamic change in the world, the properties of the cyber-physical
system itself ? its sensors and effectors ? change over time. How can it cope
with this complexity? The hypothesis behind this proposal is that a successful
cyber-physical system will need to be a learning agent, learning the properties
of its sensors, effectors, and environment from its own experience, and adapting
over time. Inspired by human developmental learning, the assertion is that
foundational concepts such as Space, Object, Action, etc., are essential for
such a learning agent to abstract and control the complexity of its world. To
bridge the gap between continuous interaction with the physical environment, and
discrete symbolic descriptions that support effective planning, the agent will
need multiple representations for these foundational domains, linked by
abstraction relations. To achieve this, the team is developing the Object
Semantic Hierarchy (OSH), which shows how a learning agent can create a
hierarchy of representations for objects it interacts with. The OSH shows how
the ?object abstraction? factors the uncertainty in the sensor stream into
object models and object trajectories. These object models then support the
creation of action models, abstracting from low-level motor signals. To ensure
generality across cyber-physical systems, these methods make only very generic
assumptions about the nature of the sensors, effectors, and environment.
However, to provide a physical test bed for rapid evaluation and refinement of
our methods, the team has designed a model laboratory robotic system to be built
from off-the-shelf components, including a stereo camera, a pan-tilt-translate
base, and a manipulator arm. For dissemination and replication of research
results, the core system will be affordable and easily duplicated at other labs.
There are plans to distribute the plans, the control software, and the software
for experiments, to encourage other labs to replicate and extend the work. The
same system will serve as a platform for an open-ended set of undergraduate
laboratory tasks, ranging from classroom exercises, to term projects, to
independent study projects. There is a preliminary design for a very inexpensive
version of the model cyberphysical system that can be constructed from servo
motors and pan-tilt webcams, for use in collaborating high schools and middle
schools, to communicate the breadth and excitement of STEM research.&lt;br/&gt;