* 0931801
* Modeling the Solidification Microstructure in Laser Deposition Processes
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Liang Wang, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 08/31/2013
* USD 325,000.00

0931801&lt;br/&gt;Felicelli &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mechanical properties of
laser-deposited materials depend on the temperature history during the
deposition process. All points in the built part go through many temperature
cycles which cause complex solid phase transformations until the final cooling
to room temperature. The numerical simulation of these transformations is
difficult because they occur under high cooling rates, preventing the use of the
readily available software based on diffusion-controlled transformations. One
aspect of the difficulty is that the initial state, i.e., the microstructure
that results immediately after solidification in the melt pool, is not known.
This research involves modeling the solidification phenomena in the melt pool of
a laser deposition process. The research will attempt a direct numerical
simulation of dendritic solidification in the pool. This is deemed possible
given the small size (approximately 1 mm) of the melt pool in most laser
deposition processes. A new cellular automaton technique coupled with a lattice
Boltzmann method will be developed to handle the huge computational demands
expected from modeling solidification with fluid flow and solute transport in a
complex solid network. The developed model will be used to calculate the solid
structure after solidification, including microsegregation, microporosity and
the eventual presence of eutectic and peritectic phases. A particular
application and validation will be performed for steel alloys deposited with the
Laser Engineered Net Shaping (LENSTM) process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit. The outcome of the research will be a first-time tool to numerically
simulate the growth of a dendritic structure in a macroscale domain under the
effect of strong fluid flow. Because of the high temperature gradients developed
in the melt pool, it is known that intense Marangoni convection occurs, with
velocities in the range of meters per second. The influence of this convection
and of the high cooling rates on dendritic growth in the pool has never been
investigated. The correct determination of the solidification microstructure is
of critical importance to understand the subsequent solid phase transformations
during cooling. The knowledge developed will advance the state of understanding
of solidification phenomena in the microscale and will contribute to improved
numerical predictions of defects like segregation and porosity. The large
computational requirements of the calculations will demand maximizing the
capabilities of forefront methods of interface tracking, microscopic cellular
automata, lattice Boltzmann models, and parallelization algorithms, contributing
to the advance and wider acceptance of these
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. The findings of this research
will directly impact the solidification research community, software developers
and several technologies involving solidification processing. Currently, all
major commercial codes simulating alloy solidification rely on continuum-type
mushy zone models developed in the 1980s that use unrealistic microstructure
approximations based on empirical correlations of permeability. The
incorporation of new numerical developments is needed for more reliable
predictions of defects during solidification. This research will make a
significant contribution to this end, and in particular to the scarcely
investigated area of solidification phenomena in laser welding and deposition
processes. Two students, including one underrepresented minority, will be
supported, and several topics of the research will be included in courses taught
by the PI at graduate and undergraduate levels. Results will be disseminated
into the scientific community through an active collaboration with colleague
researchers, participation in workshops, seminars, and conferences, as well as
through publications in specialized refereed journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is jointly funded by the Thermal Transport Processes (TTP) Program, of
the Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems (CBET)
Division and by the Materials Processing &amp; Manufacturing (MPM) Program, of
the Civil, Mechanical, and Manufacturing Innovation (CMMI) Division, within the
Directorate for Engineering (ENG).