* 0931906
* Promoting Student Education at the 13th Annual Green Chemistry &amp; Engineering Conference in College Park, MD - June 23-25, 2009
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Jennifer Young, American Chemical Society (ACS)
* Standard Grant
* George J. Antos
* 06/30/2010
* USD 30,100.00

0931906&lt;br/&gt;Young&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The annual Green Chemistry and
Engineering Conference (www.GCandE.org) is organized each year by the American
Chemical Society Green Chemistry InstituteÂ®(ACS GCI) with the active involvement
of the American Institute of Chemical Engineers, U.S. government agencies, and
academic and industry organizations. The purpose of the annual conference is to
create interdisciplinary bridges among scientists and engineers who use
chemistry as a tool to develop breakthrough advances for sustainability. Now in
its 13th year, the annual conference focuses on topics that are relevant to
fundamental research in all aspects of chemistry and chemical engineering. The
next conference is scheduled for 23-25 June 2009 and will be held in College
Park, MD, in connection with a ceremony recognizing the winners of the
Presidential Green Chemistry Challenge Awards. The National Science Foundation
granted support for student programming at several previous conferences, most
recently in 2008. In this proposal, ACS GCI requests $30,100 to support student
education and participation in green chemistry and engineering (GC&amp;E)
through educational activities at the conference. This proposal intends to
encourage and increase student (undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral)
involvement in GC&amp;E by providing students with &lt;br/&gt;- travel
scholarships to participate in the GC&amp;E Conference; &lt;br/&gt;- a judged,
student poster session at the GC&amp;E Conference; and &lt;br/&gt;- instructors
for a one-day, free, GC&amp;E Student Workshop preceding the conference, on June
22, 2009.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. Green chemistry and
engineering are important for the future of our society. The science community
must actively recruit the best new minds to this science through education. The
theme of the 13th annual GC&amp;E conference is "Innovating For the Future:
Progress on the Grand Challenges in the Chemical Enterprise". The program will
include cutting-edge research and cross-cutting themes in education, making the
business case, and industrial applications. Students participating in the
GC&amp;E workshop and/or conference will have a unique opportunity to engage in
topics not commonly encountered in traditional university courses and
conferences. Educational workshop discussions and technical conference talks
will be given in diverse areas such as: Transforming Green Chemistry and
Engineering, Lifecycle Analysis and Green Metrics, Toxicology: Environmental
Fate and Effects, Renewable Energy Fuels and Feedstocks, Process Design and
Optimization, Greenhouse Gas Management and Prevention and Integrative Education
in Green Chemistry and Engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts.
Through the design of chemical reactions and processes that reduce or even
eliminate negative impacts on human health and the environment, green chemistry
and green engineering approaches seek to achieve the twin goals of economic
prosperity and environmental sustainability. Green chemistry and engineering are
important tools in preventing pollution at the source and providing solutions to
global sustainability challenges. This highly interdisciplinary workshop and
meeting will be an excellent opportunity for students to learn to present their
research, learn the latest developments in green chemistry and green chemical
engineering, and expose themselves to the broader economic, social and political
context in which these developments occur. Educating the innovators of tomorrow
is a crucial part in securing the well-being of the future.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students will have an excellent opportunity to learn about
the newest research developments in their areas, dialog with other academic,
industrial, and governmental researchers, advance their participation in
professional societies, and expand their network of professional contacts.
Interaction and collaboration will generate new knowledge that will help to
define our sustainable future.