* 0931679
* HBCU-RISE: Modeling and Design of Robust and Scalable Network Architecture for QoS Assured Multi-Service Applications
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Dhadesugoor Vaman, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Victor Santiago
* 08/31/2013
* USD 992,706.00

The HBCU-RISE proposal by PVAMU has an underlying theme to improve the
efficiency of secure multiservice and multi-rate communications in wireless
networks through careful consideration of cross-layer design principles and end-
to-end network optimization. This has brought together faculty from two minority
(HBCU) institutions (PVAMU and Tuskegee University) with expertise in
communications theory, wireless networking, signal processing, and control
theory to apply their joint expertise to solve the proposed research problems in
wireless ad-hoc networks. It is anticipated that the outcomes of this research
will fill some important gaps in the current understanding of the fundamental
limits and design trade-offs in MANET and sensor networks, enabling this growing
field to fully realize its potential.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given that the next-
generation military and commercial wireless communication systems need to
support a multitude of services with a wide range of data rates, reliability,
latency, and security requirements, we believe that successful implementation of
the research project will have a wide ranging impact in the design of future
wireless networks. The proposed project will also provide educational training
to students and professionals through research and hands-on experience. It will
support enhancement and increase the production of graduate (MS and
Ph.D)theses/dissertations and undergraduate senior design projects in electrical
and computer engineering at PVAMU. The proposed collaborative research with
Tuskegee University will strengthen the existing collaborations among faculty
and students at these two HBCUs and will further improve the knowledge base of
women and minority students at the undergraduate, master?s and doctoral levels
of engineering education so that they can compete in the job market in industry,
academia and government.