* 0931198
* Collaborative Research:  CMG--Ensemble Data Assimilation for Nonlinear and Nondifferentiable Problems in Geosciences
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Ionel Navon, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 08/31/2014
* USD 286,191.00

Data assimilation is an essential component of attempts to observe and predict
the state of the atmosphere, defined as the values of temperature, pressure,
humidity, wind speed, and other variables at specific locations. A data
assimilation system typically has two components:1) a set of observations which
are imperfect, unevenly distributed in space and time, and related to the state
in complex ways (e.g. satellites sense radiation which is indirectly related to
temperature and moisture, radar returns are indirectly related to
precipitation); and 2) a complex and imperfect forecast model, which provides a
"first guess" of the atmospheric state. The goal of data assimilation is to
optimally combine the model first guess and the observations to produce the best
possible representation of the state, accompanied by an estimate of the state
uncertainty caused by the limitations of the observations and the forecast
model. Ensemble data assimilation (EnsDA) is a data assimilation method in which
an ensemble of forecasts is used in each assimilation cycle, so that differences
among the forecast ensemble members provide a means of expressing the
probabilistic nature of the model-generated first guess. For example, a single
forecast will predict either rain or no rain at a given location, whereas an
ensemble of forecasts can estimate the probability of
rainfall.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to the complexity of atmospheric variability
and the indirect ways in which observations are related to the state, EnsDA
methods usually require simplifying assumptions in order to be practically
useful. Among the common simplifying assumptions are 1) that the observations
can be related to the state through simple linear functions; and 2) that the
atmosphere evolves smoothly, so that the atmospheric state can be treated as
varying in space and time in a smooth, differentiable way. While convenient,
these assumptions are not physically justifiable, and the research in this
proposal is an attempt to find new EnsDA methods which do not rely on these
assumptions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work begins by quantifying the error in
the estimated atmospheric state using a "cost function", which is minimized to
produce the assimilated state. Nonlinearity and nondifferentiability in the
evolution of the atmospheric state and in state-observation relationships leads
to nonlinearity and nondifferentiability in the cost function. This research
addresses the lack of smoothness in the cost function by 1) evaluating
nondifferentiable cost function minimization methods suitable for EnsDA; 2)
examining the value of hybrid ensemble data assimilation methods for nonlinear
and nondifferentiable applications; and 3) developing and evaluating a nonlinear
and nondifferentiable EnsDA method designed to quantify uncertainty in realistic
high-dimensional geosciences applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is
intended to find better ways to use existing data and models to understand and
predict the behavior of the atmosphere. These efforts will ultimately lead to
better forecasts of severe weather which will benefit society. In addition,
EnsDA techniques developed for the atmosphere will be applicable to the ocean
and to coupled atmosphere-ocean models used to anticipate climate change. The
grant will also contribute to the training of the next generation of scientists,
by funding the education and training of a graduate student.