* 0931504
* Hydrodynamic Crystals: Structural Evolution in Confined Suspension Flows
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2009,12/31/2010
* Jerzy Blawzdziewicz, Yale University
* Standard Grant
*  Ashok S. Sangani
* 12/31/2010
* USD 300,001.00

0931504&lt;br/&gt;Blawzdziewicz&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding of
collective hydrodynamic phenomena in microconfined suspension flows is crucial
in diverse research fields that range from dynamics of bacterial colonies to
microfluidics. Such phenomena, however, are far from being understood. To
elucidate collective hydrodynamics of particulate systems we propose to
investigate the evolution of strongly confined ordered suspensions in parallel
wall channels. We will study two kinds of systems: particle arrays interacting
only via hydrodynamic forces, and flow driven colloidal crystals where particle
ordering stems from potential and hydrodynamic forces. Our preliminary studies
of flow driven ordered particle arrays reveal that these systems show wave
propagation, sudden rearrangements of particle lattice, order disorder
transitions, and fingering instabilities. Using numerical, experimental and
theoretical methods, we will investigate hydrodynamic mechanisms that produce
this rich dynamical behavior. Insights from our studies will shed new light on
basic questions of particulate flows, will be applicable to other ordered
dissipative systems, and will also suggest new strategies for practical
applications (e.g., multidrop microfluidic devices and particulate coating
flows). The proposed numerical simulations will be performed using our novel
Stokesian dynamics algorithm that is accurate and highly efficient. The
experimental part will consist in assembling regular 2D particle arrays using
holographic optical tweezers, and observing changes in suspension microstructure
using confocal microscopy. Our theoretical investigations will involve Fourier
analysis of displacement waves in regular particle arrays and an effective
medium approach to describe the evolution and instabilities of the
arrays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The intellectual value of our
proposed research is both fundamental and practical. We will study an entirely
new class of hydrodynamic phenomena in creeping particulate flows. Our results
will be relevant to nonlinear physics (including dynamics of complex fluids,
structural evolution in dusty plasma, and collective motion of flux vortices in
superconductors). Our results will also have significant impact on engineering
applications, especially in microfluidics. Emerging multidrop microfluidic
applications include tunable optical devices, high throughput lab-on-chip
assays, and manufacturing microstructured materials. Understanding hydrodynamic
mechanisms governing suspension structure under strong confinement conditions is
key in such applications, and our proposed research will uncover such
mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This project will provide
educational and research opportunities for graduate, undergraduate and high
school students. Graduate and undergraduate students will present their work at
New England Complex Fluids Workshops and at national scientific meetings.
Students from under represented groups will be recruited through the STARS
(Science, Technology and Research Scholars) program at Yale. The PIs will
support K-12 education in Greater New Haven by serving as judges in New Haven
science fairs. Interdisciplinary significance of our project consists in
obtaining results that will be used in physics of pattern formation, physical
chemistry, and microfluidic technology. Insights from our research will also be
applicable to biological sciences in investigations involving collective
hydrodynamic effects, e.g., in studies of bacterial motion. Software for
particle tracking and some of the Stokesian dynamics codes will be disseminated
through free websites. This research also involves international collaboration.