* 0931059
* Formation, Structure and Reactivity of Redox Sites in High-Silica H-Zeolites
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Raul Lobo, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* George J. Antos
* 08/31/2013
* USD 299,992.00

0931059&lt;br/&gt;Lobo&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent studies from the PI's group
have shown that Brønsted acid sites (Si-OH-Al) on high-silica zeolites decompose
thermally at temperatures above 550°C producing hydrogen. This reaction leads to
a formal oxidation of the zeolite framework where some oxygen atoms change
oxidation state from 2- to 1-. The observation of this homolytic decomposition
of Brønsted acid sites is a very unexpected result and opens the possibility
that some of what is believed to be acid catalysis at high temperatures in
zeolites is in fact redox chemistry. The aim of this proposal is to establish if
this redox chemistry can indeed have an effect on the selectivity and yield of
hydrocarbon reactions in zeolites at high temperatures and to elucidate the
molecular and electronic structure of these redox
sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The PI will investigate the
decomposition of Brønsted acid sites under inert and oxidative conditions using
Mass-Spectrometry-Temperature-Programmed- Reaction techniques to determine the
conditions that lead to the oxidative decomposition of the Brønsted acid sites.
After decomposition, the samples will be investigated using X-ray absorption
spectroscopy, high-field 27Al MAS NMR spectroscopy, inelastic neutron scattering
and a number of optical spectroscopy techniques to clarify their molecular and
electronic structure. Transient kinetic studies of simple alkanes will be used
to evaluate the effect of these redox sites on hydrocarbon cracking. The
successful completion of the proposed research program will open a new window of
inquiry into the chemistry of zeolites. These findings could have implications
for important catalytic processes such as fluidized catalytic cracking and
enhanced fuel reforming on Rh/zeolite catalysts. Furthermore, the expected
results could also help elucidate similar redox processes observed in quartz and
other minerals that have remained unexplained for
decades.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broad Impact: Three mechanisms are given to reach
out to elementary and junior high-school students and to underrepresented groups
to enhance their understanding of science and engineering and entice them to
think about engineering as a professional future. First, on campus and at local
schools a short talk will be given directed to elementary and junior-high school
students communicating in lay terms the impact that zeolites have on our lives.
This talk will be prepared and delivered several times a year as part of the
outreach activities of the College of Engineering at UD. Second, the PI plans to
participate in the Research Experiences for Teachers program organized by the
college, a hands-on summer research program for high-school science and math
teachers, by hosting one or two of these teachers in his laboratory each year.
Finally, he plans to work with faculty in the department of Chemistry at Lincoln
University, a predominantly African American institution located closely to the
University of Delaware, to bring some of their senior undergraduate students to
participate in the proposed project and other on-going research programs in his
laboratory. He plans to use these collaborative Delaware-Lincoln research
activities to lure students into the benefits of pursuing graduate research
after the completion of their undergraduate degree.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
addition to educating one graduate student using a rich and complex scientific
problem, the PI will also involve two undergraduate students in the research
described here. This will be done through the University Science and Engineering
Scholars Program, one of the hallmarks of Undergraduate Research Program at UDEL
where undergraduates work with individual faculty for two consecutive summers on
a specific research project. Many of these students end up pursuing research
thesis during their senior year.