* 0931956
* CPS: Small: Collaborative Research: Fault Diagnosis and Prognosis in a Network of Embedded Systems in Automotive Vehicles
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Krishna Pattipati, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2013
* USD 550,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this research are to design a heterogeneous network
of embedded systems so that faults can be quickly detected and isolated and to
develop on-line and off-line fault diagnosis and prognosis methods. Our approach
is to develop functional dependency models between the failure modes and the
concomitant monitoring mechanisms, which form the basis for failure modes,
effects and criticality analysis, design for testability, diagnostic inference,
and the remaining useful life estimation of (hardware) components.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the last few years, the electronic explosion in
automotive vehicles and other application domains has significantly increased
the complexity, heterogeneity, and interconnectedness of embedded systems. To
address the cross-subsystem malfunction phenomena in such networked systems, it
is essential to develop a common methodology that: (i) identifies the potential
failure modes associated with software, hardware, and hardware-software
interfaces; (ii) generates functional dependencies between the failure modes and
tests; (iii) provides an on-line/off-line diagnosis system; (iv) computes the
remaining useful life estimates of components based on the diagnosis; and (iv)
validates the diagnostic and prognostic inference methods via fault injection
prior to deployment in the field. The development of functional dependency
models and diagnostic inference from these models to aid in online and remote
diagnosis and prognosis of embedded systems is a potentially novel aspect of
this effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to improve the
competitiveness of the U.S. automotive industry by enhancing vehicle
reliability, performance and safety, and by improving customer satisfaction.
Other representative applications include aerospace systems, electrification of
transportation, medical equipment, and communication and power networks, to name
a few.