* 0931237
* Preparing for College: Using Technology to Support Achievement for Students with Learning Disabilities in Mathematics
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2011
* Beverly Woolf, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 09/30/2011
* USD 120,668.00

The Preparing for College: Using Technology to Support Achievement for Students
with Learning Disabilities in Mathematics project will advance knowledge about
improved learning, motivation and achievement of undergraduate students with
mathematics learning disabilities when using digital interventions. This
demonstration research project will result in pilot-tested interventions, which
will serve as the basis for more advanced studies of how students with learning
disabilities learn math in a cyber-enabled environment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary intervention tool for this project is a cyber-
enabled mathematics tutor, "Wayang Outpost," that helps students solve
challenging test problems, teaches explicitly, and uses visual representations
to help students learn. Modifications to the tutoring system will be piloted
that address cognitive, metacognitive, and affective dimensions of the system,
corresponding to the representation/expression and engagement strands underlying
universal design for learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This demonstration research
pilot project will include testing a series of interventions with undergraduates
in developmental mathematics classes at the University of Massachusetts and at
Arizona State University. The project will target approximately 200
undergraduates, with and without learning disabilities, across four classrooms
in experimental and control conditions.