* 0931038
* Rheology of Nanosize Powder Suspensions
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Mufit Akinc, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 06/30/2013
* USD 300,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)

0931038 Akinc

Intellectual Merit

The rheological behavior of highly loaded, nanosize powder suspensions presents
scientific and technological challenges. As the particle size approaches
nanoscale, the viscosity of the suspension increases sharply. When the solids
content approaches 30 vol, the viscosity becomes intractable. However, we
recently discovered that mono and disaccharides (i.e. fructose and sucrose)
dramatically decrease the viscosity of nano alumina suspensions. The primary
objective of the proposed research is to understand the rheological behavior of
highly loaded nanosize powder suspensions where particle potential fields
overlap, thus flocculation becomes a serious concern. An additional objective is
to understand the dramatic role low molecular weight (MW) saccharides play in
reducing the viscosity. We will investigate the molecular level interactions
between particle surface, water, and saccharide molecules to establish a
relationship between characteristics of saccharide molecule and the viscosity of
the suspension. The intellectual merit of this project lies in the fact that,
upon completion, we will be able to describe the flow behavior of nanosize
powder suspensions in aqueous sachharide solution where surface chemistry plays
a significant role. Specifically, experiments with strain rate programmed
rheometry; sub zero temperature differential scanning calorimetry (SZT-DSC);
colloidal probe atomic force microscopy (CP-AFM); and variable temperature 1H,
1H-27Al, and 13C nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy experiments will
be carried out as functions of solids composition and content, saccharide type
and concentration. Integrating interparticle potential to the viscosity
expression and modifying the particle packing due to clustering and/or bound
water will allow us to quantitatively describe flow behavior of nano powder
suspensions and control of viscosity with saccharide or similar additives.

Broader Impact

Nano owder suspensions find applications in ultra thin dielectrics, solid oxide
fuel cells, membranes, coatings, abrasive polishing, adhesives, and sunscreens,
among others. A practical consequence of this research will be the elucidation
of how the viscosity varies with the solids content and its surface chemistry,
and how low MW saccharides reduce the viscosity. The results from this research
will enable us to control the flow behavior of many nanoparticle suspensions,
and formulate high solids content, low viscosity suspensions that are
consolidated to components with features in the nanoscale. Therefore, this
project has significant broader impacts on diverse industries that have multi
billion dollar revenues. This project will allow education of a graduate student
in the nanosize powder processing science. For this, a domestic female student
will be recruited. Approximately 40% of PIs grad students in the last decade
were female. In addition, undergraduate students preferably from
underrepresented groups will be recruited through Freshman Mentor Program and
the Program for Women in Science and Engineering. Over the years, the PI has
employed, on the average, two undergraduate students per year in his research
group. The PI has produced an educational video Materials Matter to be
distributed ASM International across the country to recruit students to
engineering, in particular MSE. PI has also developed a short video clip based
on the current research topic: Viscosity of Suspensions: Magic or Science. We
intend to make short video clip again to be distributed broadly across the
country via internet. Also an undergraduate laboratory experiment demonstrating
the variation of viscosity with saccharide concentration will be developed and
implemented in Ceramic Processing course that the PI teaches every year. Use of
sub zero temperature DSC, variable temperature NMR, and sophisticated colloidal
probe AFM experiments for measuring interparticle forces directly will allow
scientists in other fields to implement these techniques in broad range of
fields,