* 0931676
* Desalinated Water and Stability of Drinking Water Distribution Systems: Behavior of Corrosion Solids and Metal Release Phenomena
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2009,10/31/2013
* John Ferguson, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* William Cooper
* 10/31/2013
* USD 375,075.00

0931676&lt;br/&gt;Korshin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research Objectives and Approach:
Use of desalinated water is rapidly increasing throughout the world, but
potentially major unintended consequences of its introduction into existing
drinking water distribution systems are unexplored. This study will determine
mechanisms of corrosion of and metal release from iron, lead- and copper-
containing materials exposed to desalinated water and its blends with
conventionally treated water. The objective is to determine how gradual or
abrupt changes of water chemistry (e.g., pH, concentrations of natural organic
matter, NOM, phosphate) associated with the presence of desalinated water affect
the formation and stability of corrosion scales and metal release from them.
Another target is to determine conditions in which rapid destabilization of such
scales can take place. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will examine these
processes based on a consistent approach that addresses: i) transient state and
endpoints of corrosion in desalinated water; ii) kinetics of relevant structural
transformations; iii) role of colloidal phenomena and NOM and iv) specificities
of action of corrosion inhibitors. Work will be carried out using two modes of
corrosion exposures with copper, iron and lead-containing-materials. Experiments
with scales pre-formed in conventionally treated and exposed to desalinated
water, and representative individual solid phases will also be carried out.
Methodologically, the study will rely of diverse methods such as XRD, SEM/EDX,
colloidal (size distribution, Ã¦-potential and sequential filtration)
measurements coupled with analytical determinations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advanced experimental and interpretative methods will be
used to generate knowledge that is indispensable for successful long-term use of
desalinated water, a technology that plays an increasingly critical role in
global sustainability. The intellectual merit of this project is based on 1)
novel approaches to ascertain mechanisms and quantify contributions of physico-
chemical processes (structural transformations, colloidal disaggregation and
others) that are specific to desalinated water; 2) elucidation of critical
indicators of the composition of corrosion scales that determine their
instability and 3) development of approaches to prevent major metal release
episodes in desalinated water. The applicants believe, to the best of their
knowledge, this study is the first to address these issues based on fundamental
science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will provide insight into issues that
are increasingly important and visible not only for environmental professionals
but for the general public in this country and globally. Results of this project
will ultimately help protect public health and ensure sustainable functioning of
drinking water infrastructure, a matter of great societal and economic concern.
This project will also contribute to training, mentoring and overall development
of the UW students, including their exposure to international issues via
cooperation with Australian partner institutions, notably Australian Water
Quality Centre in Adelaide. Results and techniques of this study will be
integrated into the engineering curriculum at the University of Washington,
presented at UW Undergraduate Research Symposium and to the general community at
the UW Engineering Open House and BRIDGE seminars. The graduate students will
enhance their mentoring and teaching abilities by interacting with the
laboratory undergraduates, and by presenting their research at seminars and
conferences. Elements of this research will be incorporated in an international
project-based course (jointly with Tohoku University in Japan) for engineering
freshmen. To increase the participation of underrepresented minority and women
students in Engineering at the University of Washington, they will leverage the
resources of the College of Engineering Advising and Diversity Center with whom
the group has partnered in the past.