* 0931643
* Engineering Senior Design Projects to Aid Persons with Disabilities
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2016
* Mehdi Pourazady, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 08/31/2016
* USD 120,522.00

0931643 Hefzy

This grant will allow senior students from the Department of Mechanical,
Industrial and Manufacturing Engineering (MIME) at The University of Toledo (UT)
to design and fabricate custom made devices for persons with disabilities
identified by the Ability Center of Greater Toledo (ACT).

The ACT is a non-profit center for independent living with a mission to assist
people with disabilities to live, to work, and to socialize in the community. As
part of their training and education, senior engineering students at UT are
required to complete one capstone design course called Senior Design Projects.
During this course, students design, construct and test an original or a custom-
modified device to meet objectives specified by a customer. The objective of
this grant is to support projects performed by undergraduate engineering
students at UT as their senior design projects. The proposed activities will
provide an opportunity for the MIME students at UT to be involved with projects
that are directed to aid persons with disabilities. These projects consist of
the design and fabrication of custom-built devices for persons with
disabilities. These projects will be conducted in collaboration with the ACT.
Ten projects per year will be executed. The user satisfaction and his/her
perception of the degree to which each completed project achieves the desired
goal will be evaluated using the Quebec User Evaluation of Satisfaction with
Assistive Technology (QUEST) tool. Written reports on the completed projects
will be submitted for annual publication in the yearly NSF book for Engineering
Senior Design Projects to Aid Persons with Disabilities. Also, an annual report
that includes a description of the completed projects and the availability of
funds will be provided by the PI by July 1 of each grant year. Students will
also be encouraged to present their completed projects at national conferences
and participate in design competitions. Each student team will prepare a web-
page to disseminate information about their projects.

Intellectual Merit: The intellectual merits of these projects are as follows:

- To enhance the education of student engineers through the experience of
designing and building devices to meet a real need with feedback on how well the
device satisfies the need. - To provide opportunities for UT engineering
students to enhance their understanding of the influences of physiological,
psychological, environmental, and biomechanical factors on the design of
assistive devices for individuals with disabilities.

Broader Impacts: The broader impacts of these projects are as follows:

- These projects will result in the design and construction of devices that will
assist persons with disabilities to better enjoy life and realize their maximum
potential without suffering from the associated financial burdens. Such devices
would be prohibitively expensive if they had to be designed by a professional
and constructed in local shops; in general they are not available ready-made at
any price. - These projects will provide the MIME department at UT and its
students with an opportunity to offer a unique service to the local community. -
At the end of each semester, an exposition is organized to display the
prototypes built by the students along with final presentations. This event is
covered by the local Media to include television, radio and newspapers.
Community leaders, health care providers' representatives, persons with
disabilities and their families, high school students and teachers, local
professional society members, and the UT community attend this exposition. These
activities provide exposure to science and technology for pre-college teachers,
young people, and other nonscientist members of the public, thus contributing to
and impacting education and human resources. - The outreach and impact of these
projects also include allowing the viewing audience in local television, radio
and newspapers: i) To know the types of services provided within the community
to aid people with disabilities. ii) To see what difference an educational
experience can be when community, independent living centers and universities
work hand in hand.