* 0931057
* Marangoni Driven Spreading on Entangled Polymer Subphases with Application to Pulmonary Drug Delivery
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Todd Przybycien, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Eddie Chang
* 09/30/2012
* USD 339,199.00

0931057&lt;br/&gt;Garoff&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will establish the
fundamental wetting mechanisms required to harness surface tension gradient
driven (Marangoni) flows to enhance spreading of drug delivered by aerosols in
the lung. While inhaled aerosol drugs can deliver substantial doses of
medication directly to the lungs, altered patterns of ventilation associated
with diseased lungs cause inhaled drugs to deposit non-uniformly so that some
lung regions receive very high local doses of medication while other regions go
untreated. Preliminary studies suggest that the addition of surfactant to the
aerosol will disperse these drugs more effectively after deposition.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the research, the PIs will identify the characteristics
of surfactant formulations that optimize the efficacy of self-dispersing liquids
for aerosol drug delivery. The research will build on prior research on the
mechanism of spreading of exogenous fluids in the lungs of premature infants
during Surfactant Replacement Therapies (SRT) but will differ in its focus in
three ways. First, we focus on the final spread area of the formulation and,
while not neglecting it, less on the dynamic mechanisms that lead to that final
state. Second, they determine how the surfactant, the aqueous solvent, and the
dissolved or solubilized surrogate drug in the droplets are distributed on the
surface. Finally, the preliminary work strongly suggests a large separation in
the time scales of the underlying processes in the spreading, such that the
final spread droplet state is captured by a quasi-static interfacial tension
balance on a flattened lens of the dosing fluid. The key to the most effective
drug dispersal is to maximize the static lens area.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The discovery of effectiveness of SRT
spawned considerable research into role of Marangoni flows in the airways.
Theoretical analyses explored the ramifications of the complex subphases over
which the transport occurs in the lungs, but experimental research focused on
simpler systems. They will experimentally investigate key predictions of these
analyses on rheologically complex subphases that could fundamentally alter the
surfactant-driven spreading of fluids in the lung. In addition, prior work
placed the emphasis on the dynamics of the initial spreading stages, but they
turn the focus to the mechanisms that dictate the final disposition of the
fluids, especially the dissolved or solubilized dyes that serve as model drugs.
The refocusing of attention on the final state of the spread formulation
represents a novel and potentially transformative approach to the problem.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The results of the proposed research will
guide the choice of surfactant formulations to be tested for self-dispersing
carriers for aerosol drug delivery. This technology will benefit treatment of
any number of obstructive lung diseases, including cystic fibrosis, asthma,
pneumonia and other acute or chronic pulmonary infections. While this research
focuses on fundamental physical mechanisms of enhanced drug spreading, the team
collaborates with pulmonary medicine specialists in the University of Pittsburgh
Medical School where our fundamental findings will guide in vivo studies. By
regularly attending seminars and meetings with clinical investigators, the
engineering and physics graduate students on this project will be trained in a
highly interdisciplinary environment. They will mentor an undergraduate research
student during each academic year and summer and at least two middle school
students each year in the Carnegie Mellon/Colfax Physics Concepts Outreach
Program.