* 0931239
* CPS: Medium: Quantitative Analysis and Design of Control Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Insup Lee, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 08/31/2014
* USD 1,509,319.00

The objective of this research is to develop the scientific foundation for the
quantitative analysis and design of control networks. Control networks are
wireless substrates for industrial automation control, such as the WirelessHART
and Honeywell's OneWireless, and have fundamental differences over their sensor
network counterparts as they also include actuation and the physical dynamics.
The approach of the project focuses on understanding cross-cutting interfaces
between computing systems, control systems, sensor networks, and wireless
communications using time-triggered architectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this research is based on using time-triggered
communication and computation as a unifying abstraction for understanding
control networks. Time-triggered architectures enable the natural integration of
communication, computation, and physical aspects of control networks as switched
control systems. The time-triggered abstraction will serve for addressing the
following interrelated themes: Optimal Schedules via Quantitative Automata,
Quantitative Analysis and Design of Control Networks: Wireless Protocols for
Optimal Control: Quantitative Trust Management for Control
Networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Various components of this research will be
integrated into the PIs' RAVEN control network which is compatible with both
WirelessHART and OneWireless specifications. This provides a direct path for
this proposal to have immediate industrial impact. In order to increase the
broader impact of this project, this project will launch the creation of a
Masters' program in Embedded Systems, one of the first in the nation. The
principle that guides the curriculum development of this novel program is a
unified systems view of computing, communication, and control systems.