* 0931041
* Targeted Delivery of Therapeutic Peptides by Genetically Engineered Biopolymers
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2009,10/31/2013
* Drazen Raucher, University of Mississippi Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Athanassios Sambanis
* 10/31/2013
* USD 308,958.00

0931041 Raucher

The goal of this project is to develop targeted therapeutic carriers for the
treatment of solid tumors. Targeted drug delivery increases the specificity and
efficacy of cancer therapy and thus reduces damage to normal tissues that is
associated with conventional chemotherapy. The proposed carrier is a
genetically-engineered, thermally responsive polypeptide that inhibits the
proliferation and growth of cancer cells. The amino acid sequence of the
polypeptide carrier is based on elastin-like biopolymers that are soluble below
37 degree celsius, but aggregate at temperatures above 41 degree celsius. This
characteristic can be exploited to thermally target the drug carrier to the
solid tumor site. In addition to the elastin-like polypeptide carrier, the drug
delivery vehicle is genetically engineered to contain a short peptide,
Bactenecin, that facilitates cell entry, and a peptide derived from the cyclin-
dependent kinase inhibitor p21, which inhibits the cell cycle and cell growth.

By applying local heat to solid tumors, these polypeptides can be targeted to
and accumulate at the tumor site, inhibiting cancer cell growth. To address this
hypothesis, the following specific aims will be addressed: 1) measure the plasma
kinetics and in vivo distribution of the drug in normal and cancerous tissue and
2) evaluate the therapeutic efficacy of this drug in the treatment of ovarian
tumors in mice through repeated administration of the agent when the tumor is
heated and unheated. This research will provide the in vivo data necessary to
move this therapy towards the translational stage of human therapeutics. In
order to fulfill these scientific aims, a highly structured program will be
created to recruit undergraduate students, especially minorities and members of
underrepresented groups, to this collaborative research endeavor. The state of
Mississippi has the largest percentage population of African American citizens
of any state in the United States, yet remains well below national and southern
state averages in enrollment of African American students into and graduation
from doctoral programs within the state. Active research experience is one of
the most effective ways to attract talented undergraduates to and retain them in
careers in research and medicine. Therefore talented undergraduate students will
be recruited from Tougaloo College and will participate directly in the creation
of this drug delivery vehicle and in the implementation of the specific aims of
this project.