* 0931852
* Institute for Pure and Applied Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2016
* Stanley Osher, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2016
* USD 22,568,740.00

The mission of the Institute for Pure and Applied Mathematics (IPAM) is to make
connections between a broad spectrum of mathematicians and scientists, to launch
new collaborations, to better inform mathematicians and scientists about
interdisciplinary problems, and to broaden the range of applications in which
mathematics is used. Funding from this proposal will support IPAM's mission
through programs that bring together researchers from many different fields for
periods ranging from 1 day to 3 months, as well as a activities aimed at
education and at increasing diversity in mathematics and science. Almost every
program combines mathematics and a field of science or engineering; most
programs include both pure and applied mathematics; IPAM has focused on
important emerging topics, such as proteomics, internet search engines,
compressed sensing, nanosystems, virtual surgery, and document space. In
programs where there is an emphasis on pure mathematics, IPAM works to create
ties between different groups of researchers working on related problems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IPAM's research programs enhance the vitality of
mathematics by promoting interactions between different fields of mathematics
and between mathematics and science; they promote new research collaborations;
they help the career development of graduate students, postdocs and junior
faculty; and they launch both junior and senior scientists on new research
directions. The net effect is to build new scientific communities that can
address the complex scientific challenges of our time. IPAM's education and
diversity activities increase the flow of students into the scientific workforce
and encourage the full participation of women and underrepresented minorities in
mathematics and science. This is of tremendous importance for the vitality of
mathematics and science in the broader community.