* 0931290
* Thermophysical properties of titania nanowires: novel characterization toward high-degree property and structure manipulation in manufacturing
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Xinwei Wang, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 08/31/2013
* USD 266,048.00

0931290&lt;br/&gt;Wang&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Titanium dioxide and other ceramic nanostructures
have broad application in various sensing, energy conversion, and biomedical
device applications. In this research, an experimental technique will be
developed to measure important thermal properties of ceramic nanowires.
Relationships between the processing parameters used to synthesize the wires,
and the nanowire properties will be developed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. Ceramic nanowires will be fabricated
using a sol-gel-electrospinning technique. A laser-assisted, non-contact
approach will be developed to measure the porosity, thermal conductivity and
specific heat of single ceramic nanowires. Specifically, the nanowires will be
irradiated using a modulated laser source, and the time-varying electrical
resistivity of a very thin metallic coating applied to the nanowire will be
measured. The thermal response of the nanowire will be inferred from the
electrical resistivity information. Using a thermal analysis, the porosity,
specific heat, and thermal conductivity of the nanowire will be determined.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The results of the research will be
integrated into existing and new courses at Iowa State University. Undergraduate
participation in summer research will be facilitated through the PERUSE program
at ISU. Outreach to K12 students is included, and will involve supervision of
independent study projects by top students from local high schools.