* 0931739
* Microgranular Adsorptive Membrane Filtration
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Mark Benjamin, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* William Cooper
* 08/31/2013
* USD 503,044.00

0931739 &lt;br/&gt;Benjamin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research will both extend the PI's work on novel, adsorption-based methods to
reduce fouling of microfiltration (MF) and ultrafiltration (UF) membranes, and
explore a more general water treatment approach - dubbed microgranular
adsorptive filtration (ìGAF) - that has emerged from the prior research.
Microgranular adsorptive filtration is, essentially, the miniaturization of
packed bed processes such as granular media filtration or GAC adsorption to a
scale where the whole treatment process takes place in a thin (&lt;500 µm) layer
of powder-sized particles that have been pre-deposited on a membrane surface. In
such processes, the membrane serves primarily as the support for the powder,
rather than in its conventional role as the primary agent for pollutant removal.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will investigate three implementations of
ìGAF: filtration to remove colloidal and particulate matter (i.e.,
miniaturization of a rapid sand filter); adsorption to remove trace inorganic
and organic contaminants (miniaturization of an ion exchange bed or GAC
contactor); and adsorption to remove NOM (replacement of an enhanced coagulation
process with a miniaturized packed bed process). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
experimental procedures will consist of depositing a layer of the microgranular
media on a membrane, passing water through the layer and membrane at a constant
flow rate, and determining both the contaminant removal efficiency and the
buildup of hydraulic resistance. At the end of a treatment step, the membrane
will be backwashed to flush the media out of the system, and a new cycle will be
initiated. Parameters to be varied include the thickness of the deposited layer,
the hydraulic application rate, the length of the treatment step, and the
backwashing time and intensity. Process performance will be assessed based on
the contaminant removal efficiency, the pressure buildup during individual
treatment steps, and the long-term stability of that pressure profile (i.e., the
reversibility of any fouling that occurs). &lt;br/&gt;The potential applications
of ìGAF are enormous, but have not been recognized in the past for two reasons.
First, the tendency to focus on using a single technology to address a single
water treatment goal has led to the use of membranes only as tools for
contaminant removal. And second, until recently, the cost of membranes has made
their use simply as supports for other media economically prohibitive. In prior
research on the use of adsorbents to control membrane fouling, the PI found that
the adsorbents were efficiently removing the contaminants that the membrane was
intended to treat. That led to the realizations that (1) the most efficient
treatment approach was to pack as much adsorbent on the membrane as possible,
and to use the membrane strictly as a support for the adsorbent, and (2) ìGAF
has many potential applications beyond fouling control. These applications,
which include particle removal, trace contaminant removal, and pre-treatment of
water prior to desalination, can potentially reduce the size, energy demands,
and cost of numerous water treatment processes, while simultaneously making them
more efficient. Preliminary tests of a few applications have been encouraging.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposed work derives from
the understanding that it will promote of the behavior of packed layers on
membranes in general, and adsorbent layers in particular. In the past, cake
layers have been investigated almost exclusively in the context of how severely
they foul membranes. This project will introduce the idea that cake layers can
sometimes be enormously beneficial to membrane processes, and in the process
will demonstrate how they can solve specific current problems associated with
membrane fouling, desalination, and control of trace contaminants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The most significant broader impact of the work will be
the dissemination of the whole idea of microgranular adsorptive filtration.
Several applications of ìGAF will be investigated in the research, but many
others will undoubtedly be recognized and pursued by other researchers who have
never previously thought about ìGAF as a realistic process. Beyond this, the
research will advance the arsenal of possible treatment technologies for
improving the quality of impaired water, will train new professionals in the
field, and engage K-12 students in thinking about water supply and water
quality.