* 0931661
* CPS: Small: Fundamental Advances in Control of Wireless Sensor and Robotic Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Nikhil Chopra, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2012
* USD 299,705.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to
investigate fundamental issues in network control and distributed coordination
of wireless sensor and robotic networks. The study of these cyber-physical
systems is important as they find wide applicability in several applications
areas including environmental monitoring, search and rescue, and health care.
The approach is to exploit intrinsic properties of such systems to ensure
stability, high performance, scalability and modularity despite the deleterious
network effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With respect to intellectual merit, the
proposed effort has the potential to lead to a transformational change in the
understanding of the mechanisms for delay instability and spatio-temporal
synchronization in cyber-physical systems. It is expected that this
understanding will help in solving the delay-instability, synchronization, and
coordination problems in wireless sensor and robotic networks without
sacrificing the performance, scalability, or modularity of the system. Specific
expected outcomes include a framework for designing control algorithms for
robotic systems with input/output communication delays, a communication
management module for addressing medium access delays and data losses,
synchronization algorithms for real-time coordination between robotic systems,
and a scheme for ensuring clock synchronization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With
respect to broader impacts, the project has the potential to impact the broad
area of wireless sensor and actuator networks that are important in several
domains. One graduate student and an undergraduate student directly benefit from
the research and it is expected that several undergraduate and graduate students
will benefit from the enriched curricula at University of Maryland. High school
students from underrepresented groups are included in the research effort
through the University of Maryland's ESTEEM program.