* 0931633
* CPS:  Small:  Control Subject to Human Behavioral Disturbances
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Stephen Patek, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2013
* USD 381,602.00

CPS: Small: Control Subject to Human Behavioral Disturbances

The objective of this research is to develop an integrated methodology for
control system design in situations where disturbances primarily result from
routine human behavior, as, for example, in future artificial pancreas systems
where meals and exercise are the main disturbances affecting blood glucose
concentration. The approach is to recognize that human behavioral disturbances
(i) are generally random but cannot be treated as zero-mean white noise
processes and (ii) occur with statistical regularity but cannot be treated as
periodic due to natural variation in human behavior. This emerging class of
problems requires (i) the derivation of new mathematical representations of
disturbances for specific applications and (ii) the formulation of new
stochastic control models and algorithms that exploit statistical regularity in
the disturbance process.

The intellectual merit of the proposed research stems from the fact that it
explicitly recognizes a new class of disturbances, human behavioral
disturbances, seeking to develop an integrated approach to statistically
characterizing and responding to future perturbations, adapting gracefully to
uncertainty about the future. The anticipated research outcomes will be relevant
in diverse fields, including stochastic hybrid control and human automation
interaction.

As a broader implication, the proposed research will enable the design of future
field deployable artificial pancreas systems, potentially improving the lives of
1.5 million Americans suffering from Type 1 diabetes. With help from the two
graduate students funded by the project, the principle investigator will
supervise a ?Capstone? design course, exposing undergraduates to various aspects
of control under human behavioral disturbances.