* 0931985
* CPS: Small: Compositionality and Reconfiguration for Distributed Hybrid Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Andre Platzer, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 08/31/2014
* USD 550,000.00

CPS: Small: Compositionality and Reconfiguration for Distributed Hybrid
Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to address
fundamental challenges in the verification and analysis of reconfigurable
distributed hybrid control systems. These occur frequently whenever control
decisions for a continuous plant depend on the actions and state of other
participants. They are not supported by verification technology today. The
approach advocated here is to develop strictly compositional proof-based
verification techniques to close this analytic gap in cyber-physical system
design and to overcome scalability issues. This project develops techniques
using symbolic invariants for differential equations to address the analytic gap
between nonlinear applications and present verification techniques for linear
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims at transformative research
changing the scope of systems that can be analyzed. The proposed research
develops a compositional proof-based approach to hybrid systems verification in
contrast to the dominant automata-based verification approaches. It represents a
major improvement addressing the challenges of composition, reconfiguration, and
nonlinearity in system models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research has
significant applications in the verification of safety-critical properties in
next generation cyber-physical systems. This includes distributed car control,
robotic swarms, and unmanned aerial vehicle cooperation schemes to full
collision avoidance protocols for multiple aircraft. Analysis tools for
distributed hybrid systems have a broad range of applications of varying degrees
of safety-criticality, validation cost, and operative risk. Analytic techniques
that find bugs or ensure correct functioning can save lives and money, and
therefore are likely to have substantial economic and societal
impact.&lt;br/&gt;