* 0931437
* CPS:Medium: High Confidence Active Safety Control in  Automotive Cyber-Physical Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* John Hedrick, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2012
* USD 1,368,941.00

The objective of this research is to study the formal design and verification of
advanced vehicle dynamics control systems. The approach is to consider the
vehicle-driver-road system as a cyber-physical system (CPS) by focusing on three
critical components: (i) the tire-road interaction; (ii) the driver-vehicle
interaction; and (iii) the controller design and validation.

Methods for quantifying and estimating the uncertainty of the road friction
coefficient by using self-powered wireless sensors embedded in the tire are
developed for considering tire-road interaction. Tools for real-time
identification of nominal driver behavior and uncertainty bounds by using in-
vehicle cameras and body wireless sensors are developed for considering driver-
vehicle interaction. A predictive hybrid supervisory control scheme will
guarantee that the vehicle performs safely for all possible uncertainty levels.
In particular, for controller design and validation, the CPS autonomy level is
continuously adapted as a function of human and environment conditions and their
uncertainty bounds quantified by considering tire-road and driver-vehicle
interaction.

High confidence is critical in all human operated and supervised cyber-physical
systems. These include environmental monitoring, telesurgery, power networks,
and any transportation CPS. When human and environment uncertainty bounds can be
predicted, safety can be robustly guaranteed by a proper controller design and
validation. This avoids lengthy and expensive trial and error design procedures
and drastically increases their confidence level. Graduate, undergraduate and
underrepresented engineering students benefit from this project through
classroom instruction, involvement in the research and substantial interaction
with industrial partners from the fields of tires, vehicle active safety, and
wireless sensors.