* 0931701
* Olefins at the Surfaces of Transparent Oxides Studied With Coherent Vibrational Spectroscopy
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Franz Geiger, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* George J. Antos
* 08/31/2013
* USD 300,000.00

0931701 &lt;br/&gt;Geiger&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal focuses on laboratory measurements
aimed at elucidating the molecular orientation of catalytically relevant
hydrocarbons at oxide surfaces. The PI will determine the molecular orientation
and distributions of common saturated and unsaturated chiral and achiral
hydrocarbons relevant to heterogeneous catalysis (C2 through C6 derivatives as
well as quinuclidine derivatives) on SiO2, Al2O3, and related oxides by
assigning their vibrational surface spectra using vibrational sum frequency
generation in the CH stretching region. He will develop a vibrational mode
assignment strategy for determining the symmetry of a given vibrational mode
from SFG spectra, allowing them to identify whether a given mode is symmetric or
asymmetric. This strategy will greatly facilitate the analysis of the
vibrational spectra and molecular orientation and structure determination of
catalytically relevant hydrocarbon species at catalytically relevant
oxides.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Reactions of inorganic and
organic species on metals and metal oxides have received much attention in
heterogeneous catalysis, culminating in the 2007 Nobel Prize in chemistry. One
of the major recent advances in the field is that it is now understood that the
molecular orientations of the adsorbed organic species are critical for
controlling interfacial reactivity and kinetics in heterogeneous catalysis.
While much work has been carried out on understanding reactivity and kinetics on
metal substrates relevant to catalysis, vibrational studies focusing on the
interaction of hydrocarbons with catalytically relevant oxides are sparser and
tend not to focus on determining the molecular orientations of the hydrocarbon
species at the catalytically relevant surface. Furthermore, while the C-H
stretching frequency region is rich in information content, it is difficult to
interpret using standard vibrational spectroscopy due to spectral congestion.
Both issues are overcome by taking advantage of the surface selectivity and the
coherent nature of vibrational sum frequency generation. Motivated by the lack
of thoroughly assigned vibrational spectra for most catalytically relevant
hydrocarbons adsorbed to oxide surfaces, the PI extends the pioneering surface
spectroscopy experiments on hydrocarbons of others from metal surfaces towards
oxide surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The scientific community,
especially scientists working on heterogeneous catalysis, will benefit from
improved molecular-level information regarding the structure and orientation of
olefins and related catalytically relevant molecules. The spectroscopic and
structural data from this work will allow other scientists in the field to
refine chemical and mechanistic models for describing catalytically important
heterogeneous processes at solid/gas interfaces, obtain molecular-level
information on the molecular orientation of organic compounds at oxide surfaces,
benchmark their spectroscopic and structural data from theory calculations, and
improve the accuracy in predicting catalytic activity. This proposal expands the
fundamental molecular-level understanding of heterogeneous catalysis. It will
also enable advances of existing theoretical and mechanistic frameworks for
interfacial phenomena found in nature. By directly and indirectly interacting
with students and policy makers, the PI's integrated research, education, and
public outreach activities will continue to be powerful tools for communicating
scientific efforts to the general public.