* 0931969
* CPS:Small: Transforming a City's Transportation Infrastructure through an Embedded Pervasive Communication Network
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Shigang Chen, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Baker
* 08/31/2013
* USD 523,818.00

CPS: Small: Transforming a City's Transportation Infrastructure through an
Embedded Pervasive Communication Network

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The objective of this inter-disciplinary research is to develop new technologies
to transform the streets of a city into a hybrid transportation/communication
system, called the Intelligent Road (iRoad), where autonomous wireless devices
are co-located with traffic signals to form a wireless network that fuses real-
time transportation data from all over the city to make a wide range of new
applications possible. The approach is to build new capacities of quantitative
bandwidth distribution, rate/delay assurance, and location-dependent security on
a pervasive wireless platform through distributed queue management, adaptive
rate control, and multi-layered trust. These new capacities lead to
transformative changes in the way the transportation monitoring and control
functions are designed and operated. Many technical challenges faced by the
iRoad system are open problems. New theories/protocols developed in this project
will support sophisticated bandwidth management, quality of service, multi-
layered trust, and information fusion in a demanding environment where critical
transportation functions are implemented. Solving these fundamental problems
advances the state of the art in both wireless technologies and transportation
engineering. The research outcome is likely to be broadly applicable in other
wireless systems.

The economic and societal impact of the iRoad system is tremendous at a time
when the country is modernizing its ailing transportation infrastructure. It
provides a pervasive communication infrastructure and engineering framework to
build new applications such as real-time traffic map, online best-route query,
intelligent fuel-efficient vehicles, etc. The research results will be
disseminated through course materials, academic publication, industry
connection, and presentations at the local transportation department.