* 0931746
* CPS: Small: Control Design for CyberPhysical Systems Using Slow Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Richard Murray, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 08/31/2013
* USD 550,000.00

CPS:Small:Control Design for CyberPhysical Systems Using Slow
Computing&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to develop
principles and tools for the&lt;br/&gt;design of control systems using highly
distributed, but slow, computational&lt;br/&gt;elements. The approach of this
research is to build an architecture that&lt;br/&gt;uses highly parallelized,
simple computational elements incorporating&lt;br/&gt;nonlinearities, time delay
and asynchronous computation as integral design&lt;br/&gt;elements. Tools for
the design of non-deterministic protocols will be&lt;br/&gt;developed and
demonstrated using an existing multi-vehicle testbed
at&lt;br/&gt;Caltech.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The motivation for using "slow
computing" is to develop new feedback control&lt;br/&gt;architectures for
applications where computational power is extremely&lt;br/&gt;limited. Examples
of such systems are those where the energy usage of the&lt;br/&gt;system must
remain small, either due to the source of power available&lt;br/&gt;(e.g.
batteries or solar cells) or the physical size of the device&lt;br/&gt;(e.g.
microscale and nanoscale robots). A longer term application area is&lt;br/&gt;in
the design of control systems using novel computing substrates, such
as&lt;br/&gt;biological circuits. A critical element in both cases is the tight
coupling&lt;br/&gt;between the dynamics of the underlying process and the
temporal properties&lt;br/&gt;of the algorithm that is controlling
it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The implementation plan for this project involves
students from multiple&lt;br/&gt;disciplines (including bioengineering, computer
science, electrical&lt;br/&gt;engineering and mechanical engineering) as well as
at multiple experience&lt;br/&gt;levels (sophomores through PhD students)
working together on a set of&lt;br/&gt;interlinked research problems. The
project is centered in the Control and&lt;br/&gt;Dynamical Systems department at
Caltech, which has a strong record of&lt;br/&gt;recruiting women and
underrepresented minority students into its programs.&lt;br/&gt;