* 0932249
* Hydrogen Sorption Mechanisms in Magnesium-based Nanolayers
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,12/31/2013
* Xinghang Zhang, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 12/31/2013
* USD 301,900.00

0932249&lt;br/&gt;Zhang&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On-board hydrogen storage is
considered to be one of the most challenging barriers to the realization of a
hydrogen economy. Mg is one promising hydrogen storage candidate materials due
to its relatively high hydrogen capacity (7.6 wt %). Unfortunately, hydrogen
absorption and desorption in bulk Mg-based materials is only thermodynamically
possible at temperatures above 573K, outside of desired operating range of PEM
fuel cells. At the same time, the kinetics of hydrogen loading and release are
limited by several factors, including the formation of impermeable barriers, the
low diffusion rate of H inside Mg, the mobility of the metal/hydride interface
during hydrogenation and the limited dissociation rate of H2 molecules on the Mg
surface. While there have been numerous efforts to improve the kinetics of
hydrogen sorption by reducing the characteristic hydrogen transport length as
well as through the incorporation of catalysts, few of these approaches have
been able to lower the temperature necessary for hydrogen desorption as this
necessarily requires the destabilization of the hydrogen-carrying phase.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits: The PIs propose to investigate the
hydrogen storage and release/loading behavior of nanostructured multi-layered
thin films in which stress/strain as well as chemistry can be tuned to optimize
the kinetics of hydrogen sorption and lower the stability of hydrogen-carrying
phases. Tools such as HRTEM, STEM and EELS will be used to understand the
fundamental mechanism of hydrogen sorption at nanometer length scale.
Concurrently, advanced computational methods based on density functional theory
will be used to provide a fundamental understanding of the effects of interface
structure, strain and chemistry on the thermodynamics and kinetics of hydrogen
storage. The specific objectives of this project are to: 1) investigate the
influence of interface area density and structure on hydrogen desorption
kinetics; 2) explore microstructural evolution of the synthesized thin films
during hydrogenation; 3) predict the influence of chemistry, stress and film
structure on the hydrogen diffusion kinetics through computational methods; 4)
investigate the influence of metastable intermediate hydride phases on the
kinetics of hydrogen sorption through characterization and first principles
calculations; 5) explore H sorption at the molecular level through in situ XPS;
and 6) investigate the influence of stress and stress evolution on the
thermodynamic stability of Mg-carrying phases via microstructural
characterization, computational investigation and in situ XPS
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The project will have broader
impact in several areas, such as (a) training graduate and undergraduate
students (NSF-REU) in materials and energy-related research through experimental
and computational approaches; (b) providing students experience of working at
national laboratories, (c) the development of courses at both the undergraduate
and graduate levels; (d) recruiting minority students; and (f) disseminating the
knowledge to broader audience through NSF-RET program.