* 0932173
* Conference Support to Enable Participation of Hispanic Students in Society of Hispanic Engineers (SHPE) 2009 Annual Meeting; Washington, DC; October 28-31, 2009
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2009,02/28/2010
* Olivia Graeve, Alfred University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 02/28/2010
* USD 67,835.00

The purpose of this award is to increase the participation of Hispanic
undergraduate and graduate students in the Society of Hispanic Professional
Engineers (SHPE) 2009 annual meeting in order to enhance their graduate school
and academic prospects. Specifically, this grant proposes to provide travel
funds for students to participate in the SHPE 2009 annual meeting (October 28 ?
October 31, 2009,Washington, DC) for two purposes: (1) to allow students to
participate in the SHPE undergraduate and graduate technical paper and poster
competitions; and (2) to allow students to participate in graduate school and
young investigator workshops, through the Grad Lab and Graduate Institute of the
SHPE conference.

This grant will establish a connection between the Grad Lab, the Grad Institute,
and the paper and poster competitions at the SHPE annual meeting, in order to
enhance the conference experience of students with aspirations towards graduate
school and/or academic careers. The Grad Lab is intended for undergraduate
students who are considering pursuing graduate degrees with workshops such as
funding opportunities and preparation for the GRE examination. The Graduate
Institute is intended for graduate student and post-doctoral researchers who are
considering pursuing academic careers. It will consist of workshops such as
proposal writing, managing a research group, teaching effectiveness, and
work/life issues. By this activity, we hope to have significant impact on the
number of Hispanic students pursuing graduate degrees and/or academic careers.