* 0932810
* Spontaneous and nonphotochemical laser-induced nucleation in levitated supersaturated microdroplets
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Stephen Arnold, Polytechnic University of New York
* Standard Grant
* Eddie Chang
* 08/31/2012
* USD 160,362.00

0932810 Garetz

This project investigats both spontaneous and laser-induced nucleation in
levitated supersaturated microdroplets having diameters ranging from about 5 to
50 Ã¬m, that corresponds to a range of volumes from 0.065 to 65 pL. The small
volumes achievable in microdroplets allow the attainment of significantly higher
supersaturations than in bulk solutions, creating conditions favorable for the
creation of metastable polymorphs. Such microdroplets provide a means of
eliminating impurity induced heterogeneous crystallization, providing a unique
opportunity to study polymorph control by creating designer interfaces using
surfactant molecules.

The principal aim of this projectl is to study polymorph control of organic
compounds in the spontaneous and laser induced nucleation of levitated
supersaturated microdroplets, as a function of microdroplet volume, with and
without surfactants. Surfactants will serve as designer templates for nucleation
of specific polymorphs. It is anticipated that these studies will reveal unusual
and even unknown polymorphs and hydrates, which will be identified by
deliquescence points, Raman spectra and weight changes.

The project brings together a unique combination of expertise: Garetz in the
area of laser-material interactions, and Arnold in the area of microdroplet
levitation, in collaboration with Michael Ward in the area of crystallization
and polymorphism. It differs significantly from Garetz's earlier work on laser-
induced nucleation, in that all experiments will be carried out in the confined
volumes of microdroplets, and many will employ surfactants. Under these novel
conditions, it is anticipated that surfactant monolayers will exert a greater
influence on nucleation compared to bulk crystallization media owing to the
greater surface area volume ratio in microdroplets and the minimization of
interference from adventitious nucleation impurities. While other research
groups have studied the effects of surface monolayers on polymorphism or the
effects of confined volumes on polymorphism, the research proposed herein is
unique in simultaneously combining these two parameters into a single experiment
in an ultraclean environment, in a manner that allows independent control of
each parameter.

Broader Impact:

Although nucleation of crystalline materials has been investigated for decades,
it remains a poorly understood phenomenon that will only be unraveled through
new and innovative methods. If this project succeeds it will open considerable
opportunities for exploring the nucleation, crystallization, and polymorphism of
innumerable organic compounds that are interesting because of their commercial
applications. New polymorphs represent new materials. The methodology developed
in this proposal may provide a unique approach to the discovery of new
polymorphs, which is of vital importance in the development of new
pharmaceuticals. If this project is successful, it could potentially transform
the way new polymorphs are discovered in the pharmaceutical industry.

Both PIs of this proposal have considerable experience mentoring undergraduate
students, and the proposed research lends itself to such training through summer
research internships, funding for which is requested in this proposal.