* 0932925
* Dynamics of capillary threads and high-viscosity droplets in microfluidic systems
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Thomas Cubaud, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Geoffrey Prentice
* 08/31/2012
* USD 240,521.00

0932925&lt;br/&gt;Cubaud&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study describes an integrated suite of activities for
the precise manipulation of high-viscosity fluids in a sheath of immiscible less
viscous fluids at the small-scale. Microfluidics is a fast developing field, yet
investigations of multi-fluids flows with large viscosity contrasts have
remained limited. Numerous industrial and biological fluids such as heavy oils
and solvents, however, exhibit widely varying viscosities. Their manipulation at
the small-scale would provide new capabilities for lab-on-chip devices.
Transparent high-pressure microdevices will display the mechanisms associated
with the lubrication of high-viscosity materials in small fluidic passages. Two
investigations are planned. The first pursues the dynamics of viscous core-
annular flows in diverging-converging microfluidic chambers. Buckling
instabilities of slender viscous structures in diverging microchannels will be
exploited to control the threads morphology and induce breakup. The stability of
thin intercalating films between threads and microchannel walls will be
investigated for formation of ripples and forced wetting phenomena. The second
investigation studies high-viscosity droplets in chambers and physicochemical
stratifications. The hydrodynamic coupling and coalescence between high-
viscosity droplets will be examined in extensional geometries. The PI will
investigate the possibility to enhance micromixing by inducing coalescence
between low- and high-viscosity droplets. Finally, physicochemical
stratifications injected in cross-flow will engineer viscous droplets. This
system will provide a simple model of multi-step flow reactors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program will characterize novel fluid
behaviors in a relatively unexplored region of microscale multi-fluid flows. In
particular, the alteration of convective time-scales using extensional
microgeometries permits the manipulation of complex phenomena such as buckling,
wetting, coalescence, breakup, and relaxation of highly-viscosity
microstructures. Simple flow geometries will elucidate the interrelation between
these phenomena. This study will integrate a systematic experimental approach
with numerical simulations and theoretical predictions to aid development of
next-generation microfluidic devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work combines
research and training of a large spectrum of students, including
underrepresented, high school, undergraduate, and graduate students. A central
objective of the educational activities is to attract and nurture students in
the science and engineering fields. An important aspect of this project is to
devise methods to control novel continuous emulsification processes between
highly viscous oils and solvents, such as ethanol. Thus, the technical expertise
that will be developed can potentially provide disruptive advances for making
more efficient engines, enhancing oil recovery, and developing continuous multi-
step flow reactors for bio-fuel production.