* 0932440
* Research Starter Grant:   Spatial Interactions between Microbes and Organic Matter across Different Scales
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Erika Marin-Spiotta, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2011
* USD 49,992.00

Microorganisms are important drivers of biological and chemical processes that
control the retention and loss of carbon and plant nutrients from terrestrial
ecosystems. It is important to understand the factors controlling microbial
distribution and activity in soil. The physical location, or spatial
organization, of microbes in soil is critical in determining rates of plant
detritus decay, nutrient release, and carbon sequestration. The proposed
research will study how differences in plant type (pasture grasses versus forest
trees) and soil disturbance (grazing) affect interactions between microbes,
plant-derived organic matter, and mineral constituents of soils at multiple
spatial scales, and how these affect carbon and nutrient cycling in soil. This
study will apply new advances in spectroscopy and microscopy, in particular,
secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS) and NanoSIMS, to visualize and chemically
characterize individual biological and physical components in soils at the
micro- and nanometer scales. Differences in microbial community composition and
activity between sites, and within the soil architecture, will be measured using
new methods coupled with NanoSIMS, as well as more conventional enzymatic and
lipid analysis methods.

Microorganisms are crucial agents in ecological processes, but are one of the
least studied components of ecosystems. The study of their distribution and
interactions in soils has been limited by methodological constraints.
Technological advances now allow us to better describe their habitats and
function. An exciting and challenging aspect of this study is the integration of
data across different spatial scales, from that of soil aggregates (centimeters
to millimeters) to that of bacterial cells and their component (micrometers and
nanometers). These new methods have been successfully applied in the medical and
geochemical fields, but there are only a handful of studies currently exploring
their application in soil biology and biogeochemistry. The broader impacts of
this research are many-fold. Accurate predictions of how terrestrial ecosystems
will respond to future climate and land-use changes, and in particular, whether
they absorb or release carbon to the atmosphere, require an understanding of the
biological and physical interactions between microbes, plants, and soil. Soils
are one of the largest and most dynamic terrestrial reservoirs of carbon, much
greater than the atmosphere and land vegetation. Thus, they exert an important
influence on atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse
gases. Another important application of this research is the management of
microbiological processes that contribute to soil fertility for the sustainable
production of food and bioenergy.