* 0932971
* Single-biomolecule detector array based on nanomagnetically stabilized magnetoresistive sensors
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2015
* Richard Willson, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Rajakkannu Mutharasan
* 08/31/2015
* USD 370,996.00

0932971&lt;br/&gt;Litvinov&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF award by the
Biosensing/CBET program supports the research led by Profs. Dmitri Litvinov and
Richard Willson at the University of Houston and by Prof. Chung-Che Chang at the
Methodist Hospital Research Institute aimed at demonstrating a novel biosensor
platform capable of unprecedentedly high sensitivity, potentially at a single-
molecule level, to biomolecular agents such as DNA, RNA, proteins, antibodies,
or pathogens, opening new opportunities in diagnosis and in biological research.
The technology leverages dramatic advancements in nanomagnetic sensor technology
that have brought us high-capacity magnetic hard-drives for data
storage.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the research is to
demonstrate the ability to detect and base biological measurements on only one
or a few biomolecular species, thus improving data quality and reliability by
the complexity of multiple interactions. This transformative outcome is enabled
by the use of a specialized nanomagnetically stabilized ring-sensor geometry to
enable superior functionality (single molecule sensitivity, massive
arrayability, continuous data, low cost). Magnetic reporter labels can serve as
the basis of fully-integrated assays spanning from magnetic affinity capture and
washing of analyte targets from dilute or complex sample matrices, to detection
with unparalleled sensitivity, to magnetic pull-off force stringency for false
positive reduction and maximal specificity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
will significantly advance a new kind of generally-applicable biosensor
technology capable of transformative impact in metagenomics, genomics,
proteomics, molecular diagnostics, and cell biology. The sensor platform's
capacity for extremely sensitive and specific detection will likely find very
broad applications throughout biological research and biochemical technology.
Potential applications include medical diagnostics, pathogen detection in food
safety application, false-positive-proof biothreat detection, rapid drug
screening, and others.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research will also have a
significant societal impact as the University of Houston serves the most
ethnically diverse student body among doctoral-degree-granting institutions. It
is from this diverse student body we draw the bulk of our graduate students.
Furthermore, the program will closely interact with the existing REU, RET,
GRADE, and GK-12 programs at the University of Houston to enhance the
recruitment of underrepresented groups. The program will also provide research
projects for the undergraduate Capstone Design program. Moreover, the knowledge
gained over the course of this program will be disseminated through the
Nanoengineering Minor at the Cullen College of Engineering at the University of
Houston.&lt;br/&gt;