* 0932818
* IDR - Collaborative Research: Evanescent Field-Enabled Atomic Force Microscopy for Nanoscale Imaging of Cell Membrane Dynamics
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Gerald Meininger, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2012
* USD 200,000.00

0932818&lt;br/&gt;Meininger&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative proposal
combines recent advances in the areas of microscale structures possessing
optical resonances and mechano-transduction characterization at the cellular
level to advance understanding of the biomechanics and mechanobiology at the
cell-extracellular matrix interface for cells of the vascular wall. Combining
the biomedical optics knowledge of the Meissner group with the cardiovascular,
cell biology and AFM expertise of the Meininger group will result in the
demonstration of a novel evanescent optical imaging technique that can be
broadly applied to nanoscale imaging in cell biology. Evanescent fields
generated by whispering gallery modes in microspherical structures will for the
first time enable total internal reflection microscopy (TIRFM) imaging and
sensing on the apical surface of cells in culture. With combined expertise in
biomedical engineering and life sciences, the objectives of the collaboration
are first to develop a spatially mobile TIRFM system by coupling resonant
microspheres to an atomic force microscope (AFM) and second to study dynamic
biological processes at the cell-extracellular matrix interface. This project
integrates developments in both engineering and life sciences, and will produce
a new imaging method that will both advance understanding of cell mechano-
sensation and -transduction as well as provide a novel evanescent technique
complementing conventional microscopy by expanding range and resolution used in
nanoscale imaging at the cell membrane surface.