* 0932297
* CPS:Small: A Unified Distributed Spatiotemporal Signal Processing Framework for Structural Health Monitoring
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Qi Cheng, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2013
* USD 326,617.00

CPS: CPS:Small: A Unified Distributed Spatiotemporal Signal Processing Framework
for Structural Health Monitoring&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under
the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to meet the
urgent global need for improved safety and reduced maintenance costs of
important infrastructures by developing a unified signal processing framework
coupling spatiotemporal sensing data with physics-based and data-driven models.
The approach is structured along the following thrusts: investigating the
feasibility of statistical modeling of dynamic structures to address the
spatiotemporal correlation of sensing data; developing efficient distributed
damage detection and localization algorithms; investigating network enhancement
through strategic sensor placement; addressing optimal sensor collaboration for
recursive localized structural state estimation and
prediction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: This innovative unified
framework approach has the potential of being more reliable and efficient with
better scalability compared to the current state-of-the-art in structural health
monitoring. The proposed research is also practical as it allows analysis of
real-world data that accounts for structural properties, environmental noise,
and loss of integrity over sensors. Probabilistic representation of significant
damages allows more informative risk assessment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts: The outcome of this project will provide an important step toward
safety and reliability albeit increasing complexity in dynamic systems. New
models and algorithms developed in this project are generic and can contribute
in many other areas and applications that involve distributed recursive state
estimation, distributed change detection and data fusion. This project will
serve as an excellent educational platform to educate and train the next
generation CPS researchers and engineers. Under-represented groups such as
female students and Native American students will be supported in this project,
at both the graduate and undergraduate levels.&lt;br/&gt;