* 0932137
* "HBCU-RISE Center for Microbial Ecology, Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, and Water Quality
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Henry Williams, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Santiago
* 07/31/2014
* USD 997,214.00

This HBCU RISE proposal seeks support for the Center in the Environmental
Sciences Institute at Florida A&amp;M University devoted to the Study of
Microbial Ecology, Molecular Biology, Biotechnology and Water Quality. The
proposed HBCU-RISE project at FAMU will be in collaboration with researchers at
the University of Southern Mississippi Gulf Coast Research Laboratory (GCRL),
University of North Carolina Institute of Marine Science and the J. Craig
Ventner Institute of Genomic Research. The proposed Center already has an
established foundation upon which to build, the highly productive Molecular
Microbial Ecology Laboratory (MME Lab) initiated in 2005.with support from the
previous 2005 HBCU RISE award. The Center will provide high quality research,
instruction and expertise in microbial ecology linked to molecular biology
techniques and concepts. Two major sub-projects proposed under the overarching
theme are 1) to compare the ecology and role of the BALOs and viruses in
bacterial mortality and the cycling of nutrients and 2) to sequence the genome
of novel BALOs that appear to have an important role in bacterial mortality of
specific species. The results of the Center?s research will be broadly
disseminated through publications and presentations at international and
national conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this proposal
is that it would provide for students extensive learning and training
opportunities in microbiology, aquatic sciences, molecular biology and
bioinformatics. Activities are also included for high school, undergraduate and
pre-college teachers also The BALO?s uniqueness and action packed life style
make them an excellent model for attracting and holding the attention of
students at all educational levels. As such they will enhance the educational
outreach components of the proposed project.&lt;br/&gt;