* 0932209
* CPS:Medium: LoCal - A Network Architecture for Localized Electrical Energy Reduction, Generation and Sharing
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Eric Brewer, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,497,426.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
research is to understand how pervasive information changes energy production,
distribution and use. The design of a more scalable and flexible electric
infrastructure, encouraging efficient use, integrating local generation, and
managing demand through awareness of energy availability and use over time, is
investigated. The approach is to develop a cyber overlay on the energy
distribution system in its physical manifestations: machine rooms, buildings,
neighborhoods, isolated generation islands and regional grids. A scaled series
of experimental energy networks will be constructed, to demonstrate monitoring,
negotiation protocols, control algorithms and Intelligent Power Switches
integrating information and energy flows in a datacenter, building, renewable
energy: farm", and off-grid village. These will be generalized and validated
through larger scale simulations. The proposal?s intellectual merit is in
understanding broadly how information enables energy efficiencies: through
intelligent matching of loads to sources, via various levels of aggregation, and
by managing how and when energy is delivered to demand, adapted in time and form
to available supply. Bi-directional information exchange is integrated
everywhere that power is transferred. Broader impacts include training diverse
students, such as undergraduates and underrepresented groups, in a new
interdisciplinary curriculum in information and energy technologies. Societal
impact is achieved by demonstrating dramatic reductions in the carbon footprint
of energy and its overall usage, greater penetration of renewables while
avoiding additional fossil fuel plants, and shaping a new culture of energy
awareness and management. The evolution of Computer Science will be accelerated
to meet the challenges of cyber-physical information processing.&lt;br/&gt;