* 0932705
* Generation, Characterization, and Atmospheric Aging of Soot Particles from Diesel Combustion
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Renyi Zhang, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Ruey-Hung Chen
* 08/31/2013
* USD 332,000.00

0932705&lt;br/&gt;Zhang &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Soot aerosol produced from diesel
combustion represents one of the major forms of particulate matter pollution,
profoundly impacting human health, weather, and climate. However, few
experimental studies have been carried out to investigate their transformation
and associated variations in chemical and physical properties, because of
difficulties in generation and sampling of diesel soot particles under
controlled laboratory conditions. In this project, a novel approach using a
shock tube is explored to generate soot to mimic diesel-engine combustion.
Laboratory experiments are designed to simulate atmospheric aging of diesel soot
aerosols by exposure to condensable gas-phase species (such as sulfuric acid and
carboxylic acids) and semi-volatile organic compounds generated from oxidation
of anthropogenic and biogenic volatile organic compounds. The changes in
morphology, hygroscopicity, and optical properties of diesel soot aerosols
during internal mixing are measured using a suite of aerosol analytical
instruments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is expected to provide important
information on the particle mass-size relationship, internal mixing of soot with
atmospherically important inorganic and organic species, and variations of
hygroscopicity and optical properties of diesel soot during atmospheric aging.
Results generated from this proposed research can benefit experimental studies,
model simulations, and ambient measurements of soot-containing aerosols. The
results on chemical and physical properties of soot aerosols can be incorporated
into atmospheric models to evaluate their effects on weather and climate. The
information on the morphology and chemical compositions of soot aerosols can
also be employed to assess human-health effects including respiratory and
cardiovascular diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A better understanding of
production and atmospheric transformation of soot aerosols helps to reduce
uncertainties in climate prediction and assessment of human health effects,
which are important for development of control strategies. Hence, this research
is expected not only to advance our knowledge of generation, transformation, and
chemical compositions and contribute to improved model simulations and ambient
measurements of soot aerosols, but also to be beneficial to the public by
identification of potential health issues and to policy decision-makers for
development of effective particulate-matter control strategies. The
multidisciplinary nature of this project combines expertise of combustion
researchers and atmospheric aerosol chemists. The project provides
interdisciplinary research opportunities for undergraduate students, graduate
students, and post-doctoral researchers in the areas of mechanical engineering
and atmospheric sciences. They are expected to present their work at conferences
and build connections within the two scientific communities as part of their
education and training on global environmental change research.