* 0932720
* Photothermal Energy Conversion in Nanofluids
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Patrick Phelan, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 07/31/2013
* USD 325,000.00

AWARD
ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0932720&lt;br/&gt;Phelan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public
Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interaction of thermal radiation with
nanofluids, which are nanoscale colloidal suspensions, has not been extensively
examined. This research deals with fundamental thermal transport phenomena that
occur when sufficiently intense thermal radiation is incident upon a nanofluid.
Specifically, the irradiation will cause localized heating of the suspended
nanoparticles, and, in turn, induce heating or boiling of the liquid. This
proposal addresses the relevant phenomena through a series of experiments and
analyses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. This research addresses
questions such as the rate at which suspended nanoparticles selectively absorb
thermal irradiation. A large component of the research is aimed at determining
whether a vapor bubble nucleates from a heated nanoparticle in the same manner
as compared to from a heated surface. Hence, determination of the incident
radiative flux necessary to initiate boiling will be achieved. The temperatures
obtained by the nanoparticles in response to the thermal irradiation, and the
level of superheat required to initiate boiling at the surface of the
nanoparticle will be determined. The optimum nanofluid particle size and
particle loading distributions to maximize solar absorption while concurrently
minimizing long-wavelength emission, will be sought.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. A promising application development of
nanofluid-based, direct-absorption solar thermal collectors with efficiencies
higher than conventional solar collectors. This may lead to cost effective and
efficient solar energy collection systems. Furthermore, the initiation and
control of novel chemical reactions may be brought about by irradiating unique
nanofluids. High school students will be engaged in solar-energy-based science
projects. Teaching modules will be developed for undergraduate students. An
effort to involve and inform the general public regarding solar energy research
and development will be made through publishing opinion and editorial articles
in the popular media.