* 0932968
* Multi-Scale Modeling of Wax Deposition in Pipelines
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Kang Ping Chen, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 08/31/2013
* USD 325,000.00

0932968&lt;br/&gt;Herrmann&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wax deposition inside crude oil
pipelines can severely hamper oil recovery, and can lead to curtailment of well
production. A fundamental understanding of the mechanisms of wax deposition and
aging (hardening) of the deposited matter on the interior pipe surface is
essential for the optimal design and implementation of wax removal techniques.
This research investigates wax deposition phenomena by employing multi-scale
modeling coupled with laboratory experiments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: The growth rate and microstructure evolution of the wax deposition layer
is predicted through coupled heat transfer, fluid and particle flow, and
kinetics modeling at the micro through macro scales. Velocity distributions and
heat transfer within the bulk liquid and porous wax deposition are described at
the macro scale, while the nucleation, growth and precipitation of wax
particulates are described at the mesoscale. Modeling of the microstructure
evolution within the deposition will provide information on the wax content and
thus the aging process of the wax deposit. Companion experiments will be carried
out at the China University of Petroleum. The morphology of the deposit layers
that are grown in the laboratory will be analyzed using Cross-Polarizing
Microscopy and Differential Scanning Calorimetry. The experimental measurements
will be used to validate the theoretical model. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The research will enable the prediction of wax deposition phenomena,
and the combined computational and experimental approach may lead to scaling
laws that can be applied to field operations. Crude oil production rates might
be improved, while energy costs associated with production will be decreased.
The project will include development of a multimedia web site designed for
students and researchers to promote better understanding of crude oil wax
deposition phenomena. Students will gain valuable experience in global
collaboration. Students from underrepresented groups will be engaged by
utilizing existing infrastructure at Arizona State including the Women in
Science and Engineering Program, the Fulton Undergraduate Research Initiative,
and the NSF-sponsored Western Alliance to Expand Student Opportunities as well
as the Minority Graduate Education Mountain States Alliance.