* 0932740
* Engineering Selective Fuel Cell and Water Treatment Membranes
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Michael Hickner, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Ram Gupta
* 08/31/2013
* USD 314,178.00

0932740&lt;br/&gt;Wang&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Membranes with controllable separation properties
play a vital role in advanced energy and environmental applications. Underlying
mechanisms and structure-property relationships that promote permselectivity
have been explored in great detail for polymer membranes that separate gas
molecules, but for polymers that contain attached ionic groups and absorb water,
such as fuel cell membranes, the underlying molecular concepts of why
selectivity exists in these systems and how selectivity can be enhanced through
rational molecular design are not clear. The fundamental difference between gas
separation membranes and water-absorbing membranes is that the transport
processes in gas separation membranes are dominated by the polymer dynamics
where the water-absorbing membrane transport properties are dominated by the
motion of water within the relatively stationary polymer matrix. Therefore, this
project will focus on the critical role of water-polymer interactions and water
binding and diffusion within the chemical and physical framework of the polymer.
Intellectual Merit: The central theme of the proposed research is to study a
system of end-linked polymers that contain sulfonate groups and to determine the
critical molecular parameters for designing fuel cell and nanofiltration
membranes with tunable selectivity for water, ions, and small molecules. The
tailored materials with well-controlled structural variation will advance our
fundamental understanding of the different routes to increasing selectivity in
sulfonated polymers. The characterization tasks will be intimately integrated
with the synthetic efforts to probe how the molecular characteristics of the
membrane influence binding and diffusion of water, and in turn how the water
properties influence the transport of ions and small molecules. An in-depth
study of membrane and transport properties on the molecular, multi-nanometer,
and membrane length scales will be performed using a combination of
spectroscopy, morphological analysis, and transport measurements, with special
attention paid to the chemical and physical framework and the water binding
within the membrane. By combining both fundamental insights and performance-
specific transport measurements, a complete picture of molecular structure-
transport properties can be formed for these important
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The success of this project
will open a completely new direction in the development of ion-containing
membranes and has profound implications for rational design of nanostructured
membranes with new architectures and superior selectivity and transport
properties. Future scientists capable of working in the interdisciplinary field
of polymer membranes and fuel cells will be trained and educated within this
program. Undergraduates and minorities will be integrally involved in the
research program. The "Materials + Creativity + Community = Energy" modules
including lecture materials, handouts, slides, and hand-on experimental
demonstrations will be created and deployed in campus open houses, during
student group activities on and off campus (seminars, student club gatherings,
high school visits), and during two new summer residential camps including Penn
State Science Workshop for grades 9-12 teachers and ASM Materials Camp for high
school students.