* 0932777
* Predictive Multi-scale Modeling of Shape-Selective Adsorption and Reaction in Acid/Base Zeolite Biofuel Catalysts
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Scott Auerbach, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* George J. Antos
* 09/30/2013
* USD 300,002.00

0932777 Auerbach

Intellectual Merit: Objectives: The PI will continue developing and applying
methods of theoretical chemistry to assist in the design of zeolites as biofuel
and bioproduct catalysts. In previous work, he has modeled the spectroscopic
signatures and formation/stability kinetics of nitrogen-containing zeolites
X/Y/ZSM5 - i.e., zeolites with some bridging oxygens replaced with bridging
amine (-NH-) groups - which show promise as shape-selective base catalysts for
biofuel production. In this work he will continue study of nitrogen-containing
zeolites by directly modeling size- and shape-selectivity of aldol condensation
(a carbon-carbon bond forming reaction) in both acidic and basic zeolites
X/Y/ZSM5, to identify how zeolite chemistry impacts catalyst selectivity and
activity. In a new direction, he will perform cutting-edge modeling to
investigate size- and shape-selective adsorption in these zeolites under the
high-temperature conditions of catalytic fast-pyrolysis (CFP), a process that
Huber has shown converts cellulose directly into biofuels. He will quantify
thermal distortions of the sizes and shapes of zeolite pores, and how such
distortions impact adsorption and diffusion of relevant biofeeds and biofuels.

Approaches: (i) Aldol Condensation: The PI will model the aldol condensation of
furfural (C5) and acetone (C3) to the C8 product (so-called "monomer"). He will
also model an additional condensation of C8 monomer and furfural to a C13
"dimer" product. Such reactions are promising routes for upgrading biomass-
derived feeds into gasoline-range fuels. He will learn how to tune the
monomer/dimer selectivity by computing the reaction pathways in medium-pore
(ZSM5) and large-pore (X/Y) zeolites. He will learn how to tune activities by
modeling these reactions in both acidic and basic versions of these zeolites.
Electronic energies will be computed using embedded cluster (QM/MM) techniques;
complex reaction pathways will be discovered using the "climbing image nudged-
elastic band" method, which he has recently implemented in an efficient way with
the Gaussian computational chemistry program. (ii) High-temp Adsorption: The PI
will perform periodic electronic structure calculations with various unit cell
sizes to parameterize a new forcefield that reproduces zeolite thermal
expansion. Using this new forcefield, he will perform statistically rigorous
constant-pressure simulations to determine how zeolite distortions may
accommodate the adsorption of relatively large molecules such as glucose and
levoglucosan, and the formation of relatively large species such as naphthalene,
during CFP.

Scientific Impacts: The PI's computational studies of aldol condensation will
shed light on how to exploit the shape-selective properties of zeolite catalysts
to produce biofuels of desired lengths. His work will directly impact, and will
benefit from, collaboration with the Huber group at UMass (see support letter),
which is experimentally studying these same reactions. His modeling of high-
temperature adsorption will help to explain whether CFP products such as
naphthalene are formed inside or outside of zeolites, providing the insights
necessary to further improve and optimize CFP. This project will directly
impact, and benefit from, our collaboration with the Grey group at SUNY Stony
Brook (see support letter), which is using X-rays to measure zeolite expansion.

Broader Impacts: The PI will continue to recruit under-represented students to
this program, exploiting existing NSF-funded REU and NEAGAP programs at UMass.
He will continue to collaborate with the Center for Talented Youth to engage in
middle-school outreach using Biofuels as the hook for young minds. The PI will
deliver an undergraduate course on Renewable Energy in Fall 2009, in which
Biofuels will play a prominent role. In parallel, the PI is leading a committee
at UMass to develop a new interdisciplinary concentration (like a minor) on
Renewable Energy. This proposal will support undergraduate research as a
capstone experience of the Renewable Energy concentration.