* 0932823
* Self-Organized Structures from Nanoparticles and Proteins
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,02/28/2013
* Nicholas Kotov, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Eddie Chang
* 02/28/2013
* USD 299,998.00

0932823&lt;br/&gt;Kotov&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proteins,
DNAs and viruses have the capability to self-assemble into ordered morphologies
due to interfacial interactions of these basic biological building blocks.
Water-soluble inorganic nanoparticles (NPs) have similar dimensions, chemistries
on their surface, and, hence, analogous inter-NP interactions. Indeed, they also
have the ability to self-organize. Here, we will explore a hypothesis that NPs
and proteins can form hybrid assemblies with new morphologies and topologies,
which probably have similarities with those made by proteins and those made by
NPs. Besides establishing profound fundamental analogy between two principally
different classes of macromolecules, the motivation for this work comes from the
need to find methods to make complex NP structures in many instances mimicking
the biological counterparts. One characteristic example for this need is the
replication of the photosynthetic center of plants and bacteria for solar energy
conversion. As well, it will also be interesting to design media-responsive
dynamic NP assemblies that can serve as photonic systems, sensors, and
micro/nano scale gating systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, in this
project, the combination of CdTe NPs and Cytochrome C (Cyt C) will be used. Both
of the components have strong dipole moments and can potentially self-assemble
due to dipole-dipole interaction. The products can be nanowires (NWs),
nanosheets (NSs), nanohelixes (NHs) and possibly other superstructures. Once the
assemblies are well-characterized for the incorporation of biomolecules, the
conformational change of the integrated proteins will be used to tune the
overall morphology. The study will also focus on the experimental modulation of
the morphological structures of the bio-nanocomposites based upon temperature
change and pH effect as two primary control parameters. Conditions leading to
reversible transformations of the NP-protein nanocomposite from 1D to 2D and 3D
structures will be tested.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research effort will be complemented by the
strong outreach component. The project will provide an energetic and stimulating
environment for students with introduction to the toughest problems of chemical
engineering and interfacial science. The educational impact of the proposal will
be enhanced by the possibility for students to interact with industrial
researchers in the development of new applications of nanotechnology. Due to the
relative simplicity of materials design techniques as well as chemical safety of
the individual components of the composites to be used in the proposal, we plan
to involve summer high school students from Michigan thereby disseminating the
knowledge on nanotechnology and expanding the breadth of educational impact of
the research. University of Michigan is well known for its large-scale diversity
effort and recruitment of highly qualified minority students at all levels. This
proposal integrates these efforts through campus- and state-wide programs and
will have both ethnic and gender minorities immersed in the project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Different protein structure similar to size of NPs and DNA
molecules in various lengths will be also employed for similar studies. The
assemblies of inorganic materials with DNA will be similarly exploited and
characterized for the mechanism of reversible morphologies. By improving the
understanding for the bio-nanocomposite formation and further alteration of
advanced assemblies will offer the opportunity to design new architectures with
higher control compared to the current methods available. Achieving ordered
structures by this method in a reversible fashion will also open a new route for
designing materials for specific electronic, sensing and diagnostic application.