* 0932991
* Multiscale Modeling of Bifunctional Catalysts for the Water-Gas-Shift Reaction
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Andreas Heyden, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* George J. Antos
* 07/31/2012
* USD 300,000.00

0932991 &lt;br/&gt;Heyden&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit - For heterogeneously catalyzed
reactions with more than one key surface intermediate, it is likely that
multiphase catalysts have a significant advantage over conventional monophase
catalysts since each phase can potentially be adjusted independently to activate
a key reaction step. At the same time, understanding of bifunctional multiphase
systems is relatively poor. It is the objective of this proposed research
program to significantly enhance molecular understanding of heterogeneous
catalysis at the three-phase boundary (TPB) of a gas-phase, a reducible oxide
surface, and a noble metal cluster. To enable this theoretical investigation of
chemical reactions at the TPB, the PI and his students propose to develop and
validate a highly efficient and accurate computational strategy for these
systems. It is their firm belief that only with a more accurate computational
multiscale strategy that permits the reliable investigation of reactions on
strongly correlated reducible oxide surfaces and metal clusters, will it be
possible to truly understand the nature of the active sites, the origin of
catalytic activity, and the reaction mechanism at the TPB under reaction
conditions. As a model system for computational study, they intend to
investigate the water-gas-shift (WGS) reaction on titania and ceria supported
mono- and bimetallic clusters of Au, Pt, and Pd. Their computational strategy
and study of the nature of the active site at the TPB is not limited to the WGS
reaction but is likely more general as it has been shown that reducible oxide
supported noble metals are highly active for various reactions such as the
selective hydrogenation and oxidation of unsaturated hydrocarbons. Their
computational strategy involves state-of-the-art periodic slab calculations to
build and validate a periodic electrostatic embedded cluster model that is used
for the study of various reaction pathways. Unlike periodic slab models, the
periodic cluster model permits the use of modern doublehybrid density
functionals with significantly improved accuracy for modeling chemical reactions
on reducible oxide surfaces and metal clusters. Having determined reasonably
accurate reaction energies and barriers, they intend to develop a microkinetic
reactor model based on data obtained only from first principles and absolute
rate theory. With the help of the microkinetic model, they will be able to study
the effect of temperature and chemical potential of the gas phase on the
reaction mechanism and key reaction intermediates. Furthermore, they will be
able to determine the origin of the activity of the active sites by analyzing
how the electronic structure is altered with changes in noble metal cluster and
reducible oxide and by using NÃ¸rskov's method to distinguish electronic effects
from geometric or structural effects. Finally, it is noted that the
computational models and methods outlined in this proposal have not been used
previously in the study of heterogeneous catalysis and collaboration with
experimentalists such as Dr. Amiridis and Dr. Chen at USC is proposed to
validate and test the computational predictions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact, Science - The development of a more accurate computational strategy for
studying reactions at the TPB of a gas-phase, a reducible oxide surface, and a
noble metal cluster will significantly increase the reliability of theoretical
investigations of these surprisingly catalytically active systems that are
computationally very difficult to describe. Furthermore, understanding of the
origin of the unique catalytic activity of these systems will likely aid the
development of improved catalysts for various reactions that can be selectively
activated by oxide supported noble metals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact,
Education - The graduate and undergraduate students directly involved in the
proposed research will be exposed to a comprehensive set of theoretical tools
that will allow them to study most issues in catalysis and material science. In
addition, the results of the proposed research will be integrated in a joint
graduate and undergraduate course "Multiscale Modeling: From Electrons to
Chemical Reactors" that is currently being developed by the PI.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Community Outreach - The graduate student involved in this
research will spend one Fall semester in the Partners in Inquiry program at USC.
She will assist a science teacher from a local middle school (82% African
American or Hispanic origin) to integrate engineering and science content
(including her research) and problem solving methods into the science
curriculum. Finally, the PI is involved in the Enhanced Learning Experience
(ELE) program at USC, in which high school students interested in chemical
engineering are given a one day hands-on learning experience.