* 0932433
* IRES:   U. S.-New Zealand Collaboration on Applied Geothermal Exploration and Assessment
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* George Jiracek, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* R.  Clive Woods
* 08/31/2013
* USD 148,851.00

0932433&lt;br/&gt;Jiracek&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: IRES: U.S.-New Zealand Collaboration on
Applied Geothermal Exploration and Assessment&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
International Research Experiences for Students (IRES) project is funded under
the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). The award
is made to Professor George Jiracek in the Department of Geological Sciences at
San Diego State University. The participating U.S. graduate and undergraduate
students will collaborate with researchers at the Institute of Geological and
Nuclear Sciences (GNS) in Avalon, New Zealand, which is one of the world?s
premier organizations committed to sustainable management of renewable
geothermal energy. Their foreign collaborators at the Institute are Dr. T. Grant
Caldwell and Dr. Stephen Bannister. The students will focus on enhanced
exploration aimed at the development of geothermal energy for electricity
generation, industrial processes, and buildings by assisting in field
experiments, data reduction, and interpretation. Specific research projects will
include: 1) Geophysical monitoring of re-injection and production drilling; 2)
Characterization of deep geothermal resources; 3) Characterization of Fracture
Systems; and 4) MT (modeling techniques), Seismic, and Hydrothermal 3-D
Modeling. Results from any of these research projects will provide important
findings for the world-wide geothermal community and provide excellent source
material for papers at professional meetings and in scientific journals. The
students will also visit New Zealand?s Taupo Volcanic Zone for a geologic
overview in one of the world?s most famous geothermal setting followed by a
visit to an operating geothermal power plant where they will be taking hands-on
geophysical measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major emphasis of the project
is to engage U.S. students in meaningful projects with international students
and faculty. Students will work closely with researchers with different
scientific backgrounds and will learn field and laboratory techniques that will
enhance their research skills. Altogether, these experiences will increase the
networking and international competitiveness of the student participants. By
intentionally creating opportunities for first-generation, minority, and female
students, the research program will have broad impacts on geological education
and research.