* 0932834
* Epitaxial Oxides by ALD
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Brian Willis, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 08/31/2013
* USD 259,059.00

0932834&lt;br/&gt;Willis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI is planning an experimental research program
to investigate the growth of epitaxial crystalline oxide layers on semiconductor
substrates by atomic layer deposition. Crystalline oxides are an important class
of materials that exhibit a rich variety of functional electronic, magnetic, and
optical properties, including ferroelectricity, pyroelectricity,
piezoelectricity, and ferromagnetism. In addition, oxides can be doped like
elemental and compound semiconductors and they can be insulating, conducting,
semiconducting, and superconducting. In order to realize the full promise of
crystalline oxides, it is necessary to advance the growth engineering, and
integrate oxides with semiconductor substrates to make hybrid semiconductor/
crystalline oxide devices. The PI's process is based on the unique properties of
the alkaline earth metal oxides and the precision of atomic layer deposition to
grow epitaxial oxides on semiconductor substrates including Si, Ge, and GaAs.
The process has several advantages over the existing state-of-the-art that is
based on molecular beam epitaxy. These advantages include process economics
including increased throughput, and lower capital and operating costs, as well
as simplifications of the processing due to unique aspects of the atomic layer
deposition chemistry. Successful execution of the research program will lead to
transformative impacts on the field of electronic materials by enabling a new
class of devices based on oxide electronics, and stimulating industrial
interest. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits of the research are to
discover a reactive process based on fundamental chemical interactions and
atomic layer deposition to grow epitaxial oxides on semiconductor substrates.
The research could advance the knowledge of deposition processes, surface
reactions, and materials engineering. It utilizes state-of-the-art concepts in
electronic materials and advances the capability for engineering a useful class
of materials. The research will also advance understanding of the chemical and
structural interactions at semiconductor/ oxide interfaces, which are of
interest to modern microelectronics technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of the research include technology advancement, K-12 education
enhancement, and outreach to underrepresented groups. The PI plans an outreach
program that will impact high school teachers, high school students, and
underrepresented and underprivileged student populations. He will develop a
workshop based on microelectronics for the da Vinci program at UConn to provide
an inspirational and learning experience for high school teachers from diverse
backgrounds. The program will reach out to the Magnet schools of Hartford to
promote the underutilized talents of inner city teachers and students. The work
will also educate a PhD graduate student and provide research experiences for
undergraduate students. Lastly, the work will be integrated into teaching as an
educational vehicle for Chemical Engineering and Materials Science students.