* 0932712
* Applying Virtual Worlds to Ethics Education in Science
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Larysa Nadolny, West Chester University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2013
* USD 299,383.00

The literature is replete with examples of scientists' inattention to ethical
issues. Too often scientists and other academicians think of ethics as something
outside the realm of their concerns; required courses in higher education
frequently do not discuss ethical issues at all. In this project the focus is on
facilitating ethics education for scientists by utilizing the heretofore
untapped power of interactive technologies such as Second Life. The PI argues
that the hands-on and exciting nature of virtual worlds is uniquely suited to
maximizing the effectiveness of ethics education, by increasing the ethical
engagement of students and faculty. Second Life, the most popular virtual world
in the academic arena, hosts hundreds of colleges and universities. Yet none of
those member institutions have developed sites committed to ethics education.
The PI and her team will develop interactive ethics modules in Second Life, for
use in the content of graduate-level science courses. To this end, they will
assemble a dedicated group of science faculty who teach graduate-level courses
and graduate students in the sciences, who will participate in summer workshops
in order to design and implement the online ethics modules. Four main features
of ethics training particularly conducive to the virtual world, as confirmed in
the research literature, will be addressed: the training will be context- or
discipline-specific to increase its effectiveness; the modules will emphasize
the ambiguity of the ethical context, helping to free participants of the
inevitable bias that comes with the awareness of being studied; the hands-on
nature of virtual worlds correlates well with the most successful conditions for
increasing ethical awareness; because those in leadership positions (faculty,
lead researchers, laboratory supervisors, etc.) have the largest impact on the
development of ethical behavior in subordinates, the virtual world modules
developed will be able to encourage simulations of those interactions,
increasing the likelihood of the success of such training. Data collected during
the piloting of the modules will be utilized for improving them. The PI team has
been carefully selected to include members with diverse expertise that includes
teaching ethics courses, training in ethics, teaching science courses,
developing effective curricula, analyzing qualitative and quantitative data, and
creating content in virtual worlds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This
project reaches far beyond the walls of West Chester University students and
faculty. The partnering organization for the project is Cheyney University of
Pennsylvania, the oldest historically black post-secondary institution in the
United States. In addition to the diverse nature of the partnering
organizations, the results of research and educational efforts will be
disseminated through publications, conferences and web-based activities. Due to
the global and self-perpetuating nature of Second Life, the completed modules
will be available world-wide, far beyond the time-frame of the life of the
grant.