* 0932339
* Integrating High Performance Computing in Research and Education for Simulation, Visualization and Real-Time Prediction
* EHR,HRD
* 08/15/2009,09/30/2013
* Mehdi Shadaram, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Victor Santiago
* 09/30/2013
* USD 5,000,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Texas at San Antonio
(UTSA) will create the Center on Simulation, Visualization and Real-Time
Prediction (SiViRT Center) to integrate the simulation-based research activities
in the Colleges of Engineering and Sciences at UTSA, provide computational
infrastructure and intellectual leadership for developing outstanding
interdisciplinary programs in computationally related research and education,
and develop collaborative relations within UTSA, the University of Texas Health
Science Center (UTHSCSA) and other regional, national, and international
institutions. The SiViRT Center will also attract minority undergraduate and
graduate students to engineering and science careers, enhance diversity in UTSA,
improve the retention of under-represented minority students and prepare the
next generation of scientists and engineers to meet the challenges of solving
scientific and engineering problems using reliable, high-performance
computational systems and simulations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SiViRT Center
will include three interacting and interdependent research teams in the areas of
imaging, real-time prediction and uncertainty quantification. The imaging team
will be responsible for the creation of new theory as well as efficient methods
and procedures for imaging processes, high fidelity filtering, and image fusion
to be used in real-time simulations and control processes. The real-time
prediction team will establish a general framework for real-time control and
prediction with applications in cancer treatment modeling, surgical control,
neuro-biological response simulation and intelligent unmanned vehicles. The
uncertainty quantification team will create a general framework for uncertainty
quantification in diverse engineering systems and applications of this framework
will be sought in engineering fields such as: mechanics of bone fracture; heat
transfer with nanofluids; and fate and transport of nanoparticles.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three teams are complementary and support the vision
of the SiViRT Center: to be in the forefront of research and to significantly
enhance the integration of research and education at UTSA. The multidisciplinary
effort on fundamental scientific and engineering research will result in
noteworthy technological developments and significant creation of knowledge by
bringing together experts from the disciplines of Engineering, Science,
Statistics, Biology and Medicine. The Center's educational programs will become
the focus of attraction for high school students who will follow science and
engineering careers; will provide encouragement and incentives for undergraduate
students to pursue research; and will attract, encourage, support, advise,
mentor and assist in the placement of doctoral students, who will become the
next generation of researchers and university educators.