* 0932536
* Rapid Electrophoretic Sorting of DNA using Nanoemulsion Tags
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* James Schneider, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Eddie Chang
* 07/31/2012
* USD 329,999.00

0932536&lt;br/&gt;Schneider&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators propose a novel method of rapid
DNA electrophoresis that uses dilute suspensions of nanoemulsion droplets that
transient bind to DNA in the sample. To encourage interaction of the DNA with
the nanoemulsion droplets, DNA is end modified with various nonpolar groups.
This alkylated DNA (aDNA) can then be used as a primer for a standard Sanger DNA
sequencing process. Separations are carried out using capillary electrophoresis
(CE), a standard vehicle for many types of biomolecular characterization and DNA
sequencing. Because the electrophoretic separation does not require the use of
polymers or gels as a sieving matrix, we expect to provide run times that are
10-100 times faster than can be achieved by the current state-of-the-art,
capillary gel electrophoresis (CGE). In addition, much longer DNA can be
analyzed, greatly reducing the enzymatic work that must be performed in the
Sanger process. Finally, difficulties encountered when introducing viscous
polymer solutions into capillaries or microchannels are avoided using these
dilute surfactant solutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The
process proposed is an extension of end labeled free solution electrophoresis
(ELFSE), an existing DNA separation technique that covalently attaches uncharged
polymer or protein drag tags to DNA populations so that their free solution
mobility is a function of DNA length. While this would remove the requirement of
a sieving matrix, ELFSE methods have not been competitive with CGE as the tags
need to be prohibitively monodisperse to be effective. In this system,
interactions between aDNA and droplets or micelles are frequent and short lived,
so that each aDNA swaps tags millions of times during the run. This confers a
highly uniform average drag upon the a DNA, even though the droplets may be
polydisperse. Tags can also be swapped during the run as required for separation
of a given length of DNA. The research plan involves developing nanoemulsion
preparation methods that are compatible with electrophoresis, quantifying and
maximizing the peak resolution in high electric fields, and establishing means
of switching tag sizes during the run for greater sequencing throughput.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: DNA sequencing is a tremendously valuable
bioanalysis method that has revolutionized the study of biological processes,
microbial diversity, and evolution. This method will dramatically reduce the
cost of these methods and bring them to bear on a wider range of problems.
Insights into the dynamics of solubilization and droplet hydrodynamics in
electric fields will also be revealed from the work. DNA electrophoresis is a
ubiquitous process in modern biology labs and the method is likely to have a
large impact in other arenas as well. The investigators will also sponsor
several undergraduate research projects and develop a new lab for a graduate
course focused on methods of colloidal characterization. Finally, they will
develop a series of hands on demonstrations for the Summer Academy for Minority
Students (SAMS), which exposes minority high school students to opportunities in
science and engineering. The demonstration will involve using PCR methods to
quantify the amount of DNA in an unknown sample.