* 0932904
* An Annual Review of Engineering Senor Design Projects to Aid Persons with Disabilities, 2007
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2011
* John Enderle, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Ted A. Conway
* 06/30/2011
* USD 75,283.00

PI: Enderle, John&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
0932904&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The objective of this proposal is the
continued publication for an additional one year of an annual review of
completed senior design projects for persons with disabilities that have been
supported by the NSF through the Research to Aid Persons with Disabilities
(RAPD) program. The academic years to be funded include 2006-2007. Previous
editions have been compiled annually since 1989. A total of 18 books have been
published (1989-2006). Over 2,200 projects have been detailed in these
publications between 1989 and 2006, involving over 6,000 students. The projects
described are custom designed to address the specific needs of the persons with
disabilities, serving over thousands of persons with disabilities. Publication
in this annual publication is required of all senior design projects funded by
the NSF for persons with disabilities. Each annual review begins with a title
page, a table of contents and a forward describing the history of the program.
Following the introduction and several chapters on best practices in design and
assessment are the project description chapters. Each project description
chapter is devoted to one of the participating schools in the RAPD program. The
first project of each chapter is described with more detail than the projects
that follow so that the analytic content of the project can be more fully
described. Due to space constraints, the remainder of the chapter includes one-
or two-page reports for each of the completed projects. For ease in reading,
each report uses a consistent format: Introduction, Summary of Impact, and
Technical Description. At the end of the book, an index is provided so that
projects can be easily identified and cross-referenced. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
WWW site was created at http://nsf-pad.bme.uconn.edu to boost the dissemination
of these publications. The entire site is fully searchable for ease in locating
projects of interest for all published books. In the past, 600 copies of each
edition have been printed using a soft cover and heavy weight glossy paper. Now,
25 copies of the book will be printed, along with 600 professional quality CDs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. The annual review of NSF funded
projects to aid persons with disabilities serves as a handbook for future design
projects to aid persons with disabilities and acts as a reference for
individuals dealing with implementing the Americans with Disabilities Act and
related legislation. The web feature of the publication makes it easy to locate
projects or ideas for persons working in the field of rehabilitation
engineering. The annual publication has also been used by the NSF to brief
Congress on NSF funded projects that impact the lives of persons with
disabilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. The annual review of NSF
funded projects to aid persons with disabilities has motivated universities to
participate in this program because of the potential benefits to the students,
individuals with disabilities, colleges and universities, and communities. Over
6,000 students have participated in the publications, including many from
underrepresented groups. The books are broadly distributed throughout the US to
those working with persons with disabilities. For universities participating in
this program, the books provide substantial guidance to instructors and teaching
materials for future design projects. It also has inspired all individuals to
work more actively in the field of rehabilitation, leading to an increased
technology and knowledge base to effectively address the needs of people with
disabilities. The projects reported have had a tremendous impact on thousands of
persons with disabilities.