* 0932449
* The Effects of Viscoelasticity on Filament Thinning & Drop Breakup in Microfluidic Devices: Single Molecule Experiments
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2012
* Paulo Arratia, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
*  Ashok S. Sangani
* 06/30/2012
* USD 300,156.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

0932449 Arratia

Complex fluids are a broad class of materials that are usually homogeneous at
the macroscopic scale and disordered at the microscopic scale, but possess
structure at an intermediate scale (e.g., colloids, blood, and polymers). The
rheology and bulk flow behavior of such fluids are strong functions of their
intermediate or structural scale. A prime example of this is the stretching and
alignment of flexible polymer molecules in fluid flow, which has been connected
to turbulence drag reduction, hydrodynamic instabilities, and enhanced
viscosity. In the particular case of drop breakup in two phase flows, the
presence of polymer molecules can lead to many interesting phenomena such as
enhancement in fluid filament lifetime and ?beads on string. The increase in
fluid filament lifetime is often credited to the stretching of molecules, which
is related to both the fluid relaxation time and extensional viscosity. In this
proposed work, we aim to understand the drop breakup process of polymeric fluids
in a simple microfluidic device by visualizing the conformation dynamics and
statistics of fluorescent DNA molecules. Using such methods, we will be able,
for the first time, to address many outstanding questions such as: i) What is
the critical strain rate for the coil stretch transition in two phase flows ii)
Are the molecules fully stretched or only partially stretched during the
filament thinning process iii) How do the molecules behave during the iterated
stretching instability, which gives rise to the beads-on-string phenomenon iv)
Is there molecular scission during the filament thinning and/or breakup process
v) How do the dynamics of molecules in the fluid filament relate to measurements
of extensional viscosity and fluid relaxation time. Experiments will be
performed in a cross slot microfluidic device. Drops will be formed using
hydrodynamic focusing. We will use mineral oil as the continuous phase and
dilute polymeric solutions and DNA suspensions of various concentrations as the
dispersed phase. All fluids will be characterized using conventional rheometers.
DNA will be visualized using a fluorescent microscope and a CMOS camera. We will
measure the molecule extension and conformation as a function of strain rate and
viscous drag. By combining currently developed single molecule imaging methods
with controlled fluid flow, it is possible to assess the dynamics of molecule
stretching inside a fluid filament undergoing thinning and breakup.

Intellectual Merit: The studies proposed here are the first fundamental
investigations of the mechanisms by which the conformation dynamics of flexible
molecules affects the filament thinning and drop breakup process of viscoelastic
fluids using direct visualization of molecules. The parallel pursuit of bulk
flow behavior and direct molecular visualization will give rise to a
comprehensive view of the molecular interactions with the applied fluid
stresses. This, in turn, will lead to the development of more realistic and
accurate theoretical and molecular models for the drop breakup process of
viscoelastic fluids. The use of microfluidics allows for an excellent test-bed
for single molecule experiments since flows can be very wellcontrolled. In
addition, it is expected that the experiments will lead to accurate measurements
of important fluid rheological properties such as fluid relaxation time and
extensional viscosity.

Broader Impact: This proposal outlines an integrated research and educational
program that includes: i) training graduate students by offering new graduate
level courses in complex fluids, rheology, and multiphase flows as well as
research opportunities in these areas. A main goal is to increase the
participation of historically under represented minorities such as females,
African Americans, Native Americans, and Hispanics in research; ii) recruiting
undergraduate students for summer research internships from Historically Black
Colleges and Universities that do not possess an engineering graduate program.
The PI will also take advantage of the University of Pennsylvania's strong
outreach infrastructure to involve K-12 teachers and high school students from
West Philadelphia in the research program; iii) finally, the results of this
research and educational program will be broadly disseminated and will have
potentially important benefits to society. In particular, the results will offer
new knowledge in multiphase and complex fluid flow phenomena.