* 0932397
* CPS: Medium: A Logical Framework for Self-Optimizing Networked Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Carolyn Talcott, SRI International
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 08/31/2014
* USD 1,494,776.00

A Logical Framework for Self-Optimizing Networked Cyber-Physical
Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to develop
foundations for the newly emerging&lt;br/&gt;generation of networked cyber-
physical systems. The approach is based on a&lt;br/&gt;distributed logic of
cyber-physical systems together with distributed&lt;br/&gt;cross-layer control
and optimization strategies to enabled local actions to&lt;br/&gt;maintain or
improve the satisfaction of system goals. The framework will
be&lt;br/&gt;implemented first in simulation, then on one of SRI's robot
platforms, and&lt;br/&gt;demonstrated in the context of networked mobile robotic
teams, a particularly&lt;br/&gt;challenging
application.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Networked cyber-physical systems present many
intellectual challenges&lt;br/&gt;not suitably addressed by existing computing
paradigms. They must&lt;br/&gt;achieve system-wide objectives through local,
asynchronous actions,&lt;br/&gt;using distributed control loops through the
environment. A key&lt;br/&gt;challenge is to develop a robust computational
foundation that&lt;br/&gt;supports a wide spectrum of system operation between
autonomy and&lt;br/&gt;cooperation to adapt to uncertainties, changes, failures,
and resource &lt;br/&gt;constraints, in particular to limitations of
computational, energy, &lt;br/&gt;and networking
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results will have a variety of applications
including distributed&lt;br/&gt;surveillance, instrumented pervasive spaces,
crisis response, medical&lt;br/&gt;systems, green buildings, self-assembling
structures, networked&lt;br/&gt;space/satellite missions, and distributed
critical infrastructure&lt;br/&gt;monitoring and control. There is also
potential for integration&lt;br/&gt;into SRI's commercial robotic platform.
Results will be publicly&lt;br/&gt;available from a project web site, and
tutorial material will be&lt;br/&gt;developed for students and researchers. A
multi-disciplinary research&lt;br/&gt;seminar will be sponsored by SRI. The coPI
is female with a strong&lt;br/&gt;record of mentoring female students and young
researchers, including&lt;br/&gt;the project's female postdoc.