* 0932526
* Granular Nanocomposites for Improved Thermoelectric Performance: Theory and Experiment
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Lilia Woods, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 07/31/2013
* USD 248,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;AWARD
ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0932526&lt;br/&gt;Woods&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Waste
heat can be directly converted to electrical energy through use of various
thermoelectric materials. A need persists to develop predictive models that can
be utilized as design tools for development of nanostructured bulk
thermoelectric materials, which can be formed quickly and, potentially,
inexpensively. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Two-component granular
nanocomposites will be investigated from analytical as well as experimental
perspectives. A microscopic model will take into account the electronic
structure properties of the materials, as well as granular characteristics such
as the interface barrier and size. Of particular importance will be the
interplay between electronic structure changes due to doping of the individual
components, and the scattering from the grain interfaces. The experimental
research will involve synthesis and characterization of these materials.
Measurements will serve as benchmarks for the proposed theory, and will also
guide the research. The systems to be investigated are two-phase granular
nanocomposites such as lead telluride/europium telluride, lead telluride/bismuth
telluride, lead telluride/metal, and bismuth telluride/metal.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Development of inexpensive, highly
efficient thermoelectric materials is a key to realize large scale conversion of
waste heat to high grade electrical energy. Other potential benefits include,
for example, displacement of compression air conditioners in automobiles,
possibly leading to substantial reductions in leakage and emissions of harmful
refrigerants into the atmosphere. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;