* 0932948
* Uncertainty Quantification for Systems Governed by Partial Differential Equations; May 2010; Edinburgh, Scotland
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2010
* Max Gunzburger, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 09/30/2010
* USD 44,100.00

In deterministic modeling, complete knowledge of input parameters is assumed.
This leads to simplified, tractable computations and produces simulations of
outputs that correspond to specific choices of inputs. However, most physical,
biological, social, economic, financial, etc. processes involve some degree of
uncertainty. Uncertainty quantification (UQ) is the task of determining
statistical information about the outputs of a process of interest, given only
statistical (i.e., incomplete) information about the inputs. The particular
focus of the workshop are processes governed by partial differential equations
(PDEs). It has long been recognized that mathematical models need to account for
such uncertainties. However, the science of UQ in many application areas is
still in its infancy. There is much current activity in disparate areas of
mathematics, statistics, science, and engineering that is relevant to UQ.
However, fundamental and challenging mathematical issues remain unsolved, in
particular combating the "curse of dimensionality" attendant to solving problems
in high dimensions remains an unresolved issue. The workshop is meant to help
ameliorate this situation. The workshop brings together experts in all areas of
mathematics and statistics relevant to UQ as well as scientists and engineers
working in application areas. The objectives of the workshop are as follows: to
review developments in this rapidly developing field; to bring together
internationally leading experts working in relevant fields of mathematics,
statistics, and other areas and enable an effective dialogue between them; to
expose industrial researchers to the recent developments in the field and
mathematical scientists to the important problems facing industry; to promote
communication between the various relevant mathematical disciplines (e.g.,
numerical analysis, probability theory, statistics, high-performance computing);
to encourage junior researchers to work in the field; and to strengthen
interactions between researchers coming from different areas of research. The
workshop commences with three short courses that are meant to get everyone up to
speed on the disparate aspects of UQ and stochastic PDEs considered in the
workshop. Although the short courses are of value for everyone attending the
workshop, they are especially valuable for junior researchers. The workshop
closes with a session devoted to a discussion of future directions in stochastic
PDE and UQ research with a special emphasis on the outstanding open problems
that need to be solved in order to make stochastic PDE-based UQ a tool that is
easily, routinely, and readily available to those in government and industry
that have to make decisions in environments involving risk and uncertainty.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Uncertainty quantification (UQ) is the process of
accurately assessing the uncertainties in predictions made by scientists and
engineers about physical, biological, social, economic, financial, military,
etc. processes. For example, predicting hurricane paths, the structural
integrity of a bridge or airplane, future prices of financial instruments, and
the lifetime to failure of military equipment are all subject to uncertainty.
Thus, accurately quantifying that uncertainty is of paramount importance to
engineers in the design process, to government officials when making policy
decisions including those related to homeland security and military strategies,
to response teams assessing dangers and remedies in natural and man-made
disaster situations, and in many other settings. The workshop objective is to
advance the state of the art of the science of UQ. The objective is met by
bringing together mathematicians, statisticians, engineers, and scientists from
universities and industry to exchange ideas and to develop new methodologies. A
significant and effective transfer of knowledge to the users of scientific UQ is
also affected. The organizers of the workshop are committed to include a
diverse, with respect to rank, gender, age, and ethnicity, set of participants
in the workshop. There is also a well-formulated plan for the timely and
effective dissemination of information about developments occurring at the
workshop. The workshop closes with a session devoted to a discussion of future
directions in UQ research with a special emphasis on the outstanding open
problems that need to be solved in order to make stochastic PDE-based UQ a tool
that is easily, routinely, and readily available to those in government and
industry that have to make decisions in environments involving risk and
uncertainty.