* 0932413
* U.S.-France Dissertation Enhancement: Dislocation Induced Backstresses in Crystalline Materials
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Michael Kassner, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 08/31/2012
* USD 15,000.00

Backstresses, or long-range internal stresses, have been suggested to exist in
plastically deformed crystalline materials for decades. However, until recently,
unambiguous evidence of this phenomenon has been absent. It is believed that
these stresses are associated with dislocation heterogeneities in the deformed
microstructures. The heterogeneities include cell and subgrain walls in
monotonically deformed materials, and edge dislocation dipole bundles (veins)
and edge dipole walls of persistent slip bands (PSBs) in cyclically deformed
materials. Very recent (not yet all published) x-ray microbeam diffraction
experiments performed using a synchrotron are able to determine the elastic
strains within the dislocation cell interiors and cell walls. These are
accomplished using, oriented, monotonically and cyclically (presaturation, i.e.,
no PSBs) deformed Cu single crystals. The results suggest that measurable long-
range internal stresses (LRIS) are present in cell interiors and cell walls.
These LRIS vary substantially from cell to cell as 0-50% the applied stress.
Cell interiors have stresses of roughly 0.13-0.29 the applied stress and cell
walls have stresses of opposite sign to interiors at roughly 0.07 the applied
stress, although the latter value is preliminary (unpublished). Peter Geantil, a
University of Southern California (USC) graduate student, will be performing
detailed transmission electron microscopy on the dislocation substructure at USC
as part of his dissertation research. Through collaboration with researchers at
the Laboratoire d'Etude des Microstructures at CNRS-ONERA in France, this
dislocation information will be substituted into the powerful dislocation
dynamics code microMegas, in an effort to verify the experimental LRIS
measurements. There is a two-fold benefit in performing this experiment. The
dislocation dynamics simulations will verify the experimental data obtained, and
dislocation modeling must model physical phenomena accurately, so the exercise
will be a test of the model itself. Our understanding of plastic deformation
will be enhanced. Additionally, the dislocation dynamics simulations will show
analytically the origin of these stresses, and aid in developing the theory
behind this phenomenon. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves
collaboration between two leading research groups in an effort to explore
important questions in the field of strength of materials. University of
Southern California PhD student, Peter Geantil, will be sent to a major research
institution, CNRS-ONERA in Paris, France. He will collaborate with some of the
worlds leading experts in the area of modeling the mechanical behavior of
materials to resolve important questions regarding details of the strength of
materials. The project also involves collaboration with three US government
laboratories: NIST, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, and the Advanced Photon
Source at Argonne National Laboratory. This project will provide a deeper
understanding of plastically deformed materials. More specifically, this work
will lead to a deeper understanding of fatigue, the cause for most structural
material failures. A better understanding of the details of fatigue will in turn
lead to stronger, more reliable, materials. This collaboration consists of the
best experimental effort that characterizes the variation in stress-states in
materials microstructures, with the best theoretical / computational group in
the same area.