* 0932812
* Multiscale Modeling of Molecular Transport in Graphene Nanopores and Nanotubes
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Petr Kral, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Horst Henning Winter
* 08/31/2011
* USD 125,000.00

CBET - 0932812 &lt;br/&gt;Kral, Petr&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded
under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Driven molecular transport around active nanostructures,
such as functionalized graphene nanopores, internally-excited polarizable
nanotubes and novel molecular nanodevices is an important area to study. The
research objectives of the PIs are to: 1) develop self-consistent methods for
modeling of molecular passage through polarizable nanopores and nanotubes, 2)
describe molecular drag on nanotubes with passing ionic solutions, 3) perform
experiments with nanopores and nanotubes and 4) discover molecular transport
phenomena and regimes. The research approach is to apply molecular dynamics
simulation methods with ab initio electronic structure methods and quantum
transport techniques, and perform experimental tests in a variety of fundamental
problems at the nanoscale. This research program is conceived as a multi-level
sequence of goals, where important scientific problems are identified, new
theoretical methods are developed and tested on model systems, and preliminary
practical structures are prepared and modeled in collaboration. The planned
theoretical methods are of general relevance across many research fields. Their
application in modeling of molecular transport around active nanostructures has
a potential impact in fluidics, biology, chemistry, physics, materials,
medicine, pharmacology, and related interdisciplinary fields. The preliminary
results obtained in the PI's research group, which were published in leading
journals, demonstrate the novelty and relevance of the planned studies, as well
as the feasibility of this study. The PI's students created Wikipedia web pages
related to nanofluidic transport. The theoretical methods to be developed in
this study will be applied in modeling of transport phenomena relevant for
molecular delivery, separation and desalination. The research is expected to
have major practical applications in real life and in society at large. The
educational objectives of the PI will be realized through: 1) preparing the next
generation of professionals in nanoscience by direct teaching and research
experience for graduate students, undergrads and high school teachers, 2)
Visualization Lab for the Nano World, a computational and visualization facility
established by the PI in the Chemistry Department, will provide hands-on
activities for groups in various disciplines by creating continuous display
content and demos for visitors at all levels, from college students to inner-
city school children, 3) communication of Nanoscience to the general public, 4)
reaching women students at all levels through the WISE (Women in Science and
Engineering) program at UIC, which includes the WISE Wing inhabitants and the
K-12 teachers and students in the WIN (Women in Nanotechnology) program with
Motorola and the US Department of Labor.