* 0932761
* Engineering Electrolyte Materials in Energy Storage Devices
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,07/31/2016
* Jane Chang, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2016
* USD 363,324.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION&lt;br/&gt;The global annual energy consumption is
increasing at an unprecedented rate, yet the conventional energy sources are
becoming more limited and the general energy use is getting more expensive.
Therefore, creative solutions in more efficient energy conversion, storage, and
saving become much more critical in the coming decades. In addition, to exploit
alternative energy sources, new energy-saving technologies using renewable power
sources and more efficient energy storage systems are emerging. Solid oxide fuel
cells are regarded as the highest in efficiency amongst all fuel cells and have
the promise of low cost in numerous applications. Rechargeable lithium-ion
batteries, which have dominated the market in portable electronic industry, are
viable candidates for powering an increasingly diverse range of devices. In this
proposal, we aim to synthesize and optimize a critical and active component in
these energy storage devices at miniaturized scales, the electrolyte, to further
improve the energy storage density and improve the device performance. The
proposed research will serve as a training platform for future generations of
engineers, who are not only experienced with cutting-edge research techniques,
but are also creative, conscientious and committed to solving the global energy
crisis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS &lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
research is to synthesize metal oxide based electrolyte materials in
miniaturized energy storage devices and investigate their structural properties
and ionic conductivity to understand the microscopic pathways governing their
performance as an electrolyte, thereby controlling and improving its efficiency.
To rationally design an effective electrolyte material with a large contact area
with the electrodes, this work will elucidate the growth mechanism of these
materials by atomic layer deposition and its effect on controlling the
electrolyte?s composition and microstructure and integrate these thin film
materials conformally over miniaturized three-dimensional complex structures and
assess their ionic conductivity and efficiency. As these metal oxide materials
find broader applications in areas including electronics, optics, sensors, and
energy storage, this research is transformational in realizing design and
optimization of materials with multiple functionalities. This research has a
broader impact through the education and training of the future generations of
engineers who are skilled with state-of-the-art research techniques and are
conscientious, creative, and committed to solve the global energy crisis.
&lt;br/&gt;