* 0932673
* Nanoporous Silicon Optical Waveguide Cavities for Real-Time Biological Sensing
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Thomas Murphy, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Revzin
* 07/31/2012
* USD 316,822.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-
5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0932673&lt;br/&gt;Murphy&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&g
t;This NSF award by the Biosensing /CBET program supports work by Professor
Murphy at University of Maryland College Park to develop a label-free biosensor
that uses optical waveguides and resonant cavities comprised of nanoporous
silicon. Nanoporous silicon is a unique material with several features that make
it attractive for biological sensors, including a very high surface area to
volume ratio, simple and inexpensive fabrication techniques, and suitability for
integration with silicon electronics. The proposed sensor is designed to measure
small changes in the refractive index of porous silicon waveguides that occur
when biological molecules attach to the internal surfaces. In addition to the
promise of improved sensitivity, this approach could be faster and less
expensive than conventional techniques that require fluorescent labels. As a
target application, they will explore the possibility of detecting prions, the
protein molecules responsible for transmissible spongiform
encephalopathies.&lt;br/&gt;Beyond these intellectual goals, the project will
also provide summer research opportunities for undergraduate students, mentoring
for high-school students, and will promote multidisciplinary collaboration
between chemists, biologists and optical engineers.&lt;br/&gt;