* 0932509
* GOALI- Fuel Cell Performance and Tolerance in Dead-Ended Anode Operation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Chris Gearhart, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Ram Gupta
* 08/31/2013
* USD 300,000.00

0932509&lt;br/&gt;Stefanopoulou&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to develop an
understanding of the coupled electric, poroelastic, and transport behavior under
extreme spatial and temporal variations such as the ones encountered in dead-
ended-anode operation of a polymer electrolyte membrane (PEM) fuel cell (FC).
In-situ measurements with neutron imaging of the liquid water accumulation in
the fuel cell and mass spectroscopy measurements of the gas concentration in
several locations along the fuel cell channels will be used in combination with
ex-situ postmortem micro-structural evaluation of the catalyst and the membrane
degradation. The measurements will be used through our international
collaboration to calibrate and validate a computational physical model for the
prediction of the spatio-temporal patterns and their impact on degradation and
catastrophic FC failures. The model will be used and extended through our
industrial collaboration to predict the non-equilibrium conditions during FC
start-up and shut-down which are critical for automotive stack life under flow-
through and recirculated anode operation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
merits: The anticipated intellectual merits of this project include the
investigation of spatiotemporal varying patterns of two-phase water, inert
nitrogen and reactants in FC operation. The transport and accumulation of water
and nitrogen from the cathode to the anode through the membrane in a FC
operation under dead-ended mode provides controllable and statistically
significant patterns which will be used for the modeling and assessment of the
catalyst and membrane degradation mechanisms in a FC plate-to-plate operation.
Several fundamental issues such as the tolerance of carbon-supported catalysts
to non-equilibrium electrochemical potential, the liquid-to-liquid transport
mechanisms of polymer electrolyte membranes, and the effects of gravity in the
observed FC channel distributions will be addressed via the combination of the
proposed experimental and modeling tasks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts:
The anticipated broader impacts of this project include the training of two
undergraduate students from under-represented minorities and a PhD student. The
international and industrial collaborations will embed the students in a very
dynamic and stimulating environment that will nurture their leadership and
scholarship. The developed methodologies will be integrated in a graduate course
on "Control of advanced power systems" which is regularly taught by the PI to
on-campus and distance-learning students from industry. The research results
will be disseminated through webinars, lectures, mini-courses and presentations
in US and EU workshops associated to renewable energy utilization. Last but not
least, the PI and her students will organize educational visits to high schools
in urban Detroit with demonstration kits of controlled electrochemical systems
such as fuel cells and batteries. Our objective is to expose diverse students to
the highly interdisciplinary area of FC systems and advanced measuring
techniques. The proposed research combines computational techniques,
experimental methodologies, and industrial participation for the improvement of
fuel cell systems which are important for global sustainable energy.