* 0932360
* CPS:Small:Collaborative Research:Localization and System Services for SpatioTemporal Actions in Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Rajesh Gupta, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 08/31/2012
* USD 249,962.00

CPS: Small: Collaborative Research: Localization and System Services for
SpatioTemporal Actions in Cyber-Physical Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this research is to develop models, methods and tools for capturing
and processing of events and actions in cyber-physical systems (CPS) in a manner
that does not violate the underlying physics or computational logic. The project
approach uses a novel notion of cyber-physical objects (CPO) to capture the
mobility and localization of computation in cyber-physical systems using recent
advances in geolocation and the Internet infrastructure and supports novel
methods for spatiotemporal resource discovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project
innovations include a model for computing spatiotemporal relationships among
events of interests in the physical and logical parts of a CPS, and its use in a
novel cyberspatial reference model. Using this model the project builds a
framework for locating cyber-physical application services and an operating
environment for these services. The project plan includes an experimental
platform to demonstrate capabilities for building new OS services for CPS
applications including collaborative control applications drawn from the
intermodal transportation system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will enable
design and analysis of societal scale applications such as the transportation
and electrical power grid that also include a governance structure. It will
directly contribute to educating an engineering talent pool by offering
curricular training that range from degree programs in embedded systems to
seminars and technology transfer opportunities coordinated through the CalIT2
institute at UCSD and the Institute for Sensing Systems (ISS) at OSU. The team
will collaborate with the non-profit Milwaukee Institute to explore policies and
mechanisms for enterprise governance systems.