* 0932484
* Environmental Sustainability: Analysis, Allocation, and Assessment of Land Use for Sustainability
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* H. Scott Matthews, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2014
* USD 299,997.00

0932484&lt;br/&gt;Matthews&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An inventory of land
use in the United States based on publicly available data will be created that
will assign the land used to produce commodities in the U.S. economy. These data
will then be incorporated into a hybrid process - economic input-output life
cycle assessment framework to evaluate the importance of land use across the
supply chain of production. Unique challenges associated with the inclusion of
land use in life cycle analysis will be considered, most importantly allocation
issues. Completion of a land use inventory and development methods to accurately
include land use in life cycle assessment will permit an in-depth analysis of
land use for many sustainability research questions. The inventory and resulting
data will be made available on the Internet so that it is accessible to other
land use and sustainability researchers. A number of case studies using the
newly created data set will be conducted to quantify the implications of land
use change within the U.S. as well as globally. For these, the focus areas will
be on increased use of biofuels production (to assess food versus fuel debates)
and on the effects of urbanization by considering the total land footprint of
metropolitan areas. This project will serve the environmental sustainability
community by adding a relevant and significant category (land use) to the
existing focus areas of energy, air and water emissions, and toxic releases. The
project will develop course modules on land use sustainability that will be
disseminated via the Internet.