* 0932901
* Particles at polymer/polymer interfaces: Interfacial phenomena and morphology control in immiscible polymer blends
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Sachin Velankar, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* William Olbricht
* 08/31/2014
* USD 317,837.00

&lt;br/&gt;09329091 &lt;br/&gt;Velankar &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Particles that are
partially wetted by oil and water are well known to adsorb at oil/water
interfaces. Such interfacially adsorbed particles can stabilize emulsions of oil
and water, and these emulsions are called Pickering emulsions. We seek to
transplant this idea of Pickering emulsions to polymeric systems: specifically
to create stable morphologies composed of two immiscible homopolymer phases and
interfacially adsorbed particles. Previously we have shown that particles
readily adsorb at the interface between a variety of polymers, and that even a
small fraction (well under 1 vol. %) of particles can greatly affect the
morphology of droplet/matrix polymer blends. Furthermore, when particles are
sufficiently crowded at the interface, they jam the interface into a solid like
state that prevents interfacial tension driven changes of the morphology. Here
we propose a comprehensive experimental study of the effects of interfacially
active particles in immiscible polymer blends. We hypothesize that particles
that adsorb at the interface between two immiscible homopolymers can be used to
control the morphology of the blend, in particular they can control the
sizescale of the morphology, create highly anisotropic (cylindrical or lamellar)
morphologies, as well as generate a new type of layered
structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research Proposal: Experiments will be conducted
on a model pair of homopolymers,(crosslinkable polyisoprene (PI) and
polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS)), and silica particles that are surfacemodified to
adsorb at the PI/PDMS interface. In situ flow visualization experiments will be
conducted under shear flow conditions to characterize the morphology. Particle
scale imaging will be performed ex situ by crosslinking the PI, washing away the
uncrosslinked PDMS, and then conducting SEM of the particle laden interface. In
initial research, we will devise flow protocols that induce the particles to
rapidly adsorb at the interface, and induce them to crowd at the interface to
cause interfacial jamming. We will also examine whether particles aggregate or
spread on the interface, and whether they reduce the interfacial tension. The
core of the research then is to test the above hypothesis about morphology
control. The effect of particles on the flow induced morphology will be examined
as a function of the relative volumes of the PI and PDMS, the particle loading,
and the wettability of the particles. The ability of the particles to control
the sizescale of the morphology and their ability to stabilize anisotropic
morphologies by interfacial jamming will be examined. Finally, at high particle
loadings when the particles tend to form layers in shear flow, we will examine
whether these particle layers can template a PI/PDMS alternating lamellar
morphology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: This proposal unites
knowledge in three different areas: interfacially adsorbed particles in
oil/water systems, polymer compatibilizers at polymer/polymer interfaces, and
the flow induced morphology in polymer blends. These ideas are combined together
to develop particulate compatibilizers particles that act as interfacial
modifiers in polymeric systems in a fashion similar to block copolymer
compatibilizers. Such particulate compatibilizers have the potential for
achieving morphology control far beyond what is possible with conventional block
copolymer compatibilizers. During the course of this research, we will also
address several practical and fundamental issues such as how to rapidly adsorb
the particles on the interface, and whether particles reduce the interfacial
tension of polymeric interfaces. Finally, the PI has had success with
transplanting several concepts from oil/water systems to polymeric systems, and
this proposal goes considerably further in that
direction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: This proposal will develop a new
mechanism to precisely control the morphology of polymer blends, and develop a
new type of particle templated morphology composed of alternating layers of two
immiscible polymers with particles at each interface. One graduate student and
several undergraduates will be trained. The PI will develop a new hour long
undergraduate level module on wetting phenomena for engineers combining hands on
experiments with theoretical discussion. This is a part of a series of modules
on soft matter that will be made available publicly.