* 0932438
* Starter Grant: Testing simulation models of animal movement under thermoregulatory constraint
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2009,02/28/2010
* Michael Sears, Bryn Mawr College
* Standard Grant
* Richard K. Zimmer
* 02/28/2010
* USD 49,250.00

Extending classical ecological theory to include spatial dynamics represents one
of the most exciting areas of contemporary ecological research, potentially
changing our fundamental understanding of many systems. This notion is
particularly true with regard to how animals respond to variation in
temperatures found within the environment, both at small spatial scales within
an animal's home range or over large spatial scales across an animal's
distributional range. Because many animals rely on environmental sources of heat
to regulate their body temperature, when and where such heat sources are
distributed in natural environments will determine whether an animal can persist
in a particular area or how animals might disperse across different patches of
habitat. Recently, computer modeling techniques have been developed to predict
how animals should move through complex thermal landscapes based on
physiological rates and thermal preferences. These models suggest that
environments with more variable environmental temperatures, or with more
isolated favorable habitat patches, should incur higher energetic costs for
thermoregulating organisms because animals will have to move longer distances
while searching for favorable habitat. This study will test such theoretical
models with real data in living organisms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using
Sphaerodactylus geckos (one of the smallest vertebrate organisms on Earth),
behavioral data on temperature regulation and dispersal will be collected in a
controlled laboratory setting where the complexity of environmental temperatures
can be precisely manipulated. This experimental setup represents a model system
whereby potential animal responses to changes in temperature can be evaluated.
Results from this work will help researchers evaluate the influence of changing
climates on animal populations in nature. Potential applications include
predicting the suitability of altered habitats, predicting species ranges based
on distributions of environmental temperature, or predicting potential impacts
on migration routes due to changing environmental temperatures.