* 0932428
* CPS: Small: Random Matrix Recursions and Estimation and Control over Lossy Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Babak Hassibi, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2013
* USD 508,094.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many of the future applications of
systems and control that will pertain to cyber-physical systems are those
related to problems of (possibly) distributed estimation and control of multiple
agents (both sensors and actuators) over networks. Examples include areas such
as distributed sensor networks, control of distributed autonomous agents,
collision avoidance, distributed power systems, etc. Central to the study of
such systems is the study of the behavior of random Lyapunov and Riccati
recursions (the analogy is to traditional LTI systems where deterministic
Lyapunov and Riccati recursions and equations play a prominent role).
Unfortunately, to date, the tools for analyzing such systems are woefully
lacking, ostensibly because the recursions are both nonlinear and random, and
hence intractable if one wants to analyze them exactly. The methodology proposed
in this work is to exploit tools from the theory of large random matrices to
find the asymptotic eigendistribution of the matrices in the random Riccati
recursions when the number of states in the system, n, is large. In many cases,
the eigendistribution contains sufficient information about the overall behavior
of the system. Stability can be inferred from the eigenanalysis. The mean of the
eigenvalues is simply related to the mean of the trace (i.e., the mean-square-
error of the system), whereas the support set of the eigendistribution says
something about best- and worst-case performances of the system. Furthermore, a
general philosophy of this approach is to identify and exhibit the universal
behavior of the system, provided such a behavior does exist. Here, "universal"
means behavior that does not depend on the microscopic details of the system
(where losses occur, what the exact topology of the network or underlying
distributions are), but rather on some simple macroscopic properties. A main
idea of the approach is to replace a high-dimensional matrix-valued nonlinear
and stochastic recursion by a scalar-valued deterministic functional recursion
(involving an appropriate transform of the eigendistribution), which is much
more amenable to analysis and computation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
include course development and the recruitment of women and minority students to
research. It will also make use of undergraduate&lt;br/&gt;and underrepresented
minority student researchers through Caltech's SURF and MURF programs.