* 0932955
* URM:   Mentoring Program in Neural Circuits and Behavior at the University of Puerto Rico
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Mark Miller, University of Puerto Rico Medical Sciences Campus
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 08/31/2015
* USD 603,000.00

An award has been made to the University of Puerto Rico Medical Sciences Campus
to establish an NSF Undergraduate Research and Mentoring (URM) program at the
institution, in order to provide opportunities for undergraduate students to
obtain research and mentoring experience in the field of neurobiology. Each
year, for the first four years of the project, four students will be recruited
to participate in the program, and the students will be provided NSF support for
a period of two years. Over the five-year period of the grant, a total of
sixteen students will participate in the program. Students from groups that are
under-represented in neurobiology will be recruited following their second year
of undergraduate study. Existing local networking mechanisms will be utilized to
identify students from universities throughout Puerto Rico. Students will be
engaged in ongoing faculty research programs on a year-round basis, with the
objective of getting students to present and/or publish their work. The areas of
research cover a broad range of topics, but are unified by the interdisciplinary
goal of using the methods of neurobiology to increase our understanding of
nervous system structure and function. Each program investigator has
considerable mentoring experience, and the structure of faculty research
programs enable undergraduate students to become rapidly involved in
publication-quality research. The program mentoring strategy consists of
personalized "hands-on" technical guidance that exposes students to state-of-
the-art physiological, molecular and imaging approaches and equipment. Students
are mentored in the scientific method, learning how to formulate hypotheses that
are testable and appropriate to the questions they wish to answer. They are
involved in all aspects of the research effort, including design of experiments,
data collection, analysis, and communication of results. The importance of
trust, cooperation, and teamwork within the "laboratory culture" is emphasized
throughout the students' training. This individual mentoring experience is
integrated within a highly interactive group setting that conveys and instills
the excitement and enthusiasm of scientific exploration. Additional information
is available at http://www.neuro.upr.edu/nsf-urm.html, or by contacting Dr. Mark
Miller, at mark.miller@upr.edu.