* 0932300
* NEXT GENERATION COMPOSITES CREST CENTER, NextGenC3
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2016
* Guoqiang Li, Southern University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Santiago
* 08/31/2016
* USD 5,100,000.00

Proposal Title: Next Generation Composites CREST Center,
NextGenC3&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Southern University and A&amp;M College, Baton
Rouge (SUBR)&lt;br/&gt;Abstract Date: 7/27/09&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With NSF
support, Southern University and A&amp;M College, Baton Rouge (SUBR) will
undergo the development of strong collaborative, innovative, and self-sustaining
research and education in the establishment of the proposed Next Generation
Composites CREST Center (NextGenC3). This Center will be a leading entity that
promotes the creation of new knowledge in collaboration with scientists and
researchers in institutions, research centers, national labs, and industry, and
will serve as a beacon for the education of future scientists and engineers with
diverse, competitive, and well-trained populace in the area of next generation
composite materials and technology. The major objectives of the CREST Center
will be to provide excellent educational opportunities to traditionally
underrepresented students in the Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics (STEM) disciplines and to produce synergistic understanding of next
generation composites through the development of integrated and pioneering
research. The NextGenC3 CREST Center will investigate three research focus
areas: Development of Multifunctional Composites and Structures: Sensing, Damage
Tolerance, and Vibration Damping; Grid Confined Shape Memory Particulate
Composites for Impact Mitigation and Self-Healing; and Synthesis of the Next
Generation Composites: Cure-On Demand Coatings, Self-healing, and Sensing
Polymers. The development of NextGenC3 will yield new opportunities by providing
researchers at SUBR with infrastructure and resources that will immeasurably
enhance their research capabilities. The NextGenC3 will play an important role
in the training of minority students to become future Materials Scientists and
Engineers. The research and educational activities of the center includes
stress-strain analysis, optimization, and failure criterion of multifunctional
composites; kinetics of new resin systems, interfacial bonding strength
development and evaluation, damage mechanics based structural analysis,
integration of sensing and healing ability to composites, failure criterion,
development of high damage tolerance; and thermo-electro-mechanical response of
polymer composites, and design and modeling for optimum
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed NSF CREST Center will have broader
impacts on research, research productivity and capabilities, and education in
material sciences &amp; engineering at Southern University. The development of
cutting edge interdisciplinary research based on next generation composites and
educational activities through this Center will provide students traditionally
underrepresented in the STEM disciplines with more meaningful research
experiences at a readily accessible advanced research facility. The Center will
help develop the necessary technical knowledge and skills so that qualified
minority students will be produced to fill positions in the field of materials
science and engineering. The increasing use of composites in applications, such
as automotive, naval, aerospace, energy generation, and transportation
structures, where light weight, damage tolerance, and multifunctionality are
major factors, has highlighted the need for better materials research. The
innovation and research at this Center will provide new and more durable
multifunctional materials to advance the infrastructure of our
nation.&lt;br/&gt;