* 0932786
* Collaborative Research: GOALI: Design of Chemically Self-Regulated, Acrylic Coatings Processes through Iterative Use of Chemical Quantum Calculations and Spectroscopic Methods
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Andrew Rappe, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Burka
* 08/31/2012
* USD 234,234.00

0932786 Rappe

Intellectual Merit

The PIs' previous study of free-radical solution homo- and co-polymerization of
a class of alkyl acrylates, such as ethyl and n-butyl acrylates, revealed very
substantial, spontaneous thermal polymerization at 120-180oC in the absence of
added thermal initiators. Monomers such as styrene and many methacrylates, not
alkyl acrylates, had been known to undergo spontaneous polymerization. In their
work, they carried out laboratory experiments and identified several factors
influencing the initiation step in the spontaneous polymerization. They have
also made advances in efficiently using chemical quantum-level computations on
supercomputers to study the kinetics of polymerization reactions.

Building on these successes, they plan to employ an iterative research strategy
that includes first-principles density functional theory (DFT) calculations,
design of experiments, batch laboratory experiments, and spectroscopic analyses.
It is aimed at quantitatively understanding the kinetics, the reaction
mechanisms, and the relevant intermediates and transition states for initiation
and chain transfer in spontaneous thermal polymerization of methyl, ethyl, and
n-butyl acrylates using this integrated research strategy, with the ultimate
goal of designing "chemically self-regulated" polymerization processes for the
production of high-performance acrylic resins. It will involve a broad spectrum
of activities such as: (i) proposing initiation model mechanisms, (ii)
estimating molecular geometries of reactants, transitions states, intermediates,
and products using DFT calculations on supercomputers, (iii) validating and
calculating reliable thermo chemistry using Gaussian-n theory, (iv) designing
laboratory batch polymerization experiments to capture the initiating and
product species and to verify the controlling nature of the species and
mechanisms, (v) conducting polymerization experiments, (vi) conducting
spectroscopic analyses, (vii) comparing end group structures from the chemical
quantum calculations and spectroscopic analyses, (viii) calculating reaction
rate coefficients from the quantum chemical data, (ix) comparing the theoretical
predictions with values obtained from the experiments, and (x) validating the
control living species.

Broader Impacts

The potential impacts of this project are societal (through improved safety),
environmental, economic, and in human resource development. Spontaneous thermal
polymerization allows for the production of higher quality, environmentally-
friendlier solvent-borne paints and coatings at lower operating costs. Low
molecular weight, polymer and oligomer solutions even at high weight percent
solids have adequately low viscosity, thus requiring less organic solvents to be
sprayable and brushable. The use of less or no added thermal initiators
(normally the most expensive component of a resin formula) and significantly
shorter reaction times lower the operating costs. The presence of less residual
groups from azonitrile and organic peroxides thermal initiators (which adversely
affect polymer properties such as resistance to UV radiation) in the final
product and the use of the quantitative understanding in optimal control of
molecular properties improve the resin quality. The PI and Co-PIs will train and
mentor two doctoral research assistants as well as six undergraduate (REU)
students, who will participate in broad range of research activities from
quantum-level computations and supercomputing to laboratory experiments and
spectroscopic methods, some of which will be conducted at DuPont Marshall
Laboratory. The project results will be released to the public at conferences
and in journal and conference proceedings papers. Students from under-
represented groups will be selected, trained and mentored in this project.