* 0932928
* Collaborative Research: IDR-Model-based Feedback Control of Transient Growth in a Laminar Boundary Layer: Bridging the Gap between CFD and Experiments
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Clarence Rowley, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2013
* USD 314,735.00

The objective of this research award is the elimination or weakening of
disturbances during the linear stage of roughness-induced transient growth.This
collaborative research is motivated by feedback control of the transient growth
of disturbances that cause the boundary layer to transition from a laminar to
turbulent state over a rough surface or beneath a turbulent freestream. In
particular, the research seeks to address open fundamental challenges in the
path of attaining model-based feedback control of transient growth in a Blasius
boundary layer based on closely coupled experiments and computations. The basis
for the control is balanced-truncation low-order dynamical modeling of the fluid
dynamics equations based on Balanced Proper Orthogonal Decomposition (BPOD) and
eigensystem realization algorithm (ERA) coupled with arrays of wall-shear-stress
sensors and plasma actuators. This research is multidisciplinary involving fluid
dynamics, feedback control and dynamical systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
direct impact of this research will be to experimentally demonstrate multi-
modal, bypass-transition feedback control based on reduced-order flow
estimation, modeling of the governing equations and distributed sensing and
actuation. If successful the proposed research will have significant impact on
energy conservation and environmental protection in a host of engineering
applications. These include, but are not limited to, transport systems,
propulsion and power generation systems, and long pipe lines. This study will
educate Ph.D. students, involve undergraduate students in research, and outreach
to K-12 students.