* 0932131
* Engineering enhancement of endothelial cell retention on arterial substitutes
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Shu Liu, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Athanassios Sambanis
* 08/31/2013
* USD 299,541.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-
5)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0932131&lt;br/&gt;Liu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biomaterial-
based arterial reconstruction is an effective approach for the treatment of
atherosclerosis, the leading cause of human death. However, biomaterials induce
thrombosis and intimal hyperplasia, vascular disorders contributing to the
failure of reconstructed arteries. While seeding endothelial cells to arterial
substitutes is considered a potential approach for preventing these disorders,
endothelial cells often detach from the arterial substitute. Thus, an important
issue in arterial reconstruction is to enhance the retention of endothelial
cells on arterial substitutes. The objective of the proposed research is to
establish a molecular engineering approach to enhance endothelial cell
retention, reduce thrombosis and intimal hyperplasia, and improve the
performance of arterial substitutes. This investigation is focused on two
specific aims: enhance endothelial cell retention on biological matrix scaffold-
and polytetrafluoroethylene-based arterial substitutes by siRNA-mediated
suppression of adhesion-inhibiting molecules, and test the effectiveness of this
approach in a rat model of arterial reconstruction. In addition, we propose to
improve education technologies by applying the "lab-lecture integration" concept
to biomedical engineering curriculum. The intellectual merit of this research
stems from the fact that the proposed work may improve the performance of
reconstructed arteries by using novel technologies, providing fundamental
information for the development of therapeutic approaches for human arterial
disorders. This research will exert broad impacts in the following aspects.
First, given the high failure rate of reconstructed arteries, results from this
research may potentially benefit a large number of patients. Second, the cross-
disciplinary collaboration between investigators in biomedical science and
bioengineering will broaden the impact of the proposed research and facilitate
engineering-life science integration in research and education. Third, this
investigation will provide information for improving bioengineering education
technologies by integrating research components and lab experiments into lecture
topics, an approach potentially influencing future scientific and non-scientific
communities through undergraduate and graduate education.