* 0932499
* Capsule Dynamics in Channels
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2013
* Nivedita Gupta, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Dimitrios Papavassiliou
* 05/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

CBET- 0932499&lt;br/&gt;Nivedita R. Gupta&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This award is
funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will perform a comprehensive
computational study on the role of membrane elasticity, non-axisymmetry, and
particle-wall interactions on capsule dynamics. Manipulation of single cells in
microfluidic devices has gained momentum in the last decade with the development
of novel microdevices for in vitro fertilization, cell-culture studies, forensic
analysis, and diagnosis of diseases such as cancer, diabetes, and malaria. A
better understanding of the dynamics of natural cells and artificial capsules in
a microfluidic device will lead to engineering of specialized biomedical
microdevices. The overall research objectives of this project are to determine
the effects of inertia on the three-dimensional non-axisymmetric motion of
capsules in channels and of a nonuniform confining wall on capsule dynamics. The
research objectives will be accomplished by developing a 3-D numerical model for
the pressure-driven motion of non-nucleated cells and capsules in microchannels
filled with a Newtonian liquid. The effect of the confining wall will be
determined by studying flow in a rectangular channel, a sudden expansion or
contraction with circular and rectangular cross-sections, and a corrugated tube
with circular cross-section. A volume-of-fluid (VOF) method in conjunction with
a front-tracking scheme explicitly tracks the membrane location. This numerical
scheme accurately predicts the interfacial topography and stresses allowing
simulations of capsules with large deformations as they squeeze through
channels. The method can also easily be extended to consider multiple
interacting capsules. Various constitutive equations describing the behavior of
the biological cell membranes and artificial capsules will be considered.
Critical conditions for the breakup of the capsules will also be identified. The
ability to relate the shapes and velocities of cells in microfluidic devices to
the mechanical properties of the membrane opens up exciting possibilities for
the development of novel single-cell microdevices as a diagnostic tool for
various diseases. In addition to advancing the field of interfacial phenomena in
microfluidic devices, the results from this research will be incorporated in a
new elective course on "Microfluidics: Theory and Applications" taught by the PI
and an existing biomedical engineering course in the chemical engineering
curriculum. The PI will also invite high school students to the lab through
Project SMART to encourage students to pursue science and engineering careers.
Finally, the PI will encourage the involvement of women and members of minority
groups in her research and in the field of science and engineering in general.