* 0932235
* Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement Grant: Uncovering the First South Asians: The Prehistoric Colonization of Coastal Western India
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,02/29/2012
* Jeanne Sept, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/29/2012
* USD 12,581.00

Under the direction of Dr. Jeanne Sept, Mr. August Costa will collect data for
his doctoral dissertation. His research will address the questions: Who were the
first South Asians and when did they settle the Indian subcontinent? Such are
among the most critical unresolved problems in South Asian anthropology. The aim
of this research is to provide an archaeological test of the southern dispersal
hypothesis, which suggests that anatomically and behaviorally modern humans Homo
sapiens first colonized South Asia via a coastal route from Africa more than
50,000 years ago. The southern dispersal gained popularity in recent years due
to genetic studies suggesting an antiquity of up to 70,000 years for some South
Asian populations. Direct fossil and archaeological evidence for this scenario,
however is currently lacking in South Asia and recent studies have not targeted
sites of the appropriate age. In sum, no one has yet tested this migration
scenario by searching for dated evidence of modern humans along the South Asian
coast. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mr. Costa will address this issue by
reinvestigating known (&lt;125,000 year old) archaeological sites located along
the coast of the Saurashtra peninsula in Gujarat, Western India. This setting is
one of few places in South Asia where Stone Age sites have been dated. Moreover,
Saurashtra is the only place in South Asia where coastal Stone Age sites are
known. This study will be accomplished by 1) reevaluating known sites from
Saurashtra; 2) surveying Saurashtra, for new coastal sites (&gt;50,000 years
old); and 3) assessing artifacts from the area for attributes indicative of
modern humans (e.g. symbolism: jewelry and art, technological and economic
innovations: complex stone and bone tools, long distance trade). In contrast to
other Late Pleistocene populations (e.g. Neanderthals), present day humans'
direct ancestors exhibited certain novel behaviors (e.g. artistic expression,
complex hunting) which are often apparent from the archaeological record. If the
southern dispersal hypothesis is correct, Mr. Costa should find evidence of
anomalous behaviors compared to the norms of indigenous pre-modern South Asians
which heralds the emergence of our species in the region.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will hopefully illuminate the origins of modern
people in a nation, which constitutes a geographical missing link to the story
of human evolution. If confirmed this research would show that early humans
settled India tens of thousands of years before their arrival in Europe and
radically alter notions of who the earliest Eurasians were. This study would
also have important implications for the peopling of Australia, Southeast Asia
and East Asia. This research will help promote meaningful scholarly dialogue and
further the role of India in prehistoric studies. The results of this work will
raise awareness about the archaeological record of India among Western
archaeologists through peer-reviewed publications and presentations of this
research at scholarly meetings. Finally, this research will form the foundation
of Mr. Costa's future career in Stone Age archaeology by establishing a study
area, lab resources and a network of Indian researchers with whom he can
continue to work with in the future.