* 0932719
* Micropatterned and NanoTextured Surfaces: From Self-Cleaning to Selective Particle Direction
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Jeffrey Davis, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Eddie Chang
* 08/31/2011
* USD 211,167.00

0932719 Santore

This project creates materials that steer flowing particles over their surfaces,
along different paths depending on particle type. The surfaces will be
selectively adhesive and self cleaning, with the potential to generate particle-
sensitive optical signals. The program employs models for a variety of particles
(reactive capsules, drug delivery vehicles, cells, bacteria), 0.1 ¡V 25 Ým
(micron) in size. The surfaces, which contain patterns at a variety of length
scales set the particle direction, path, and motion signature (rolling,
slipping, skipping, arrest). The engineered surfaces will find use in
microfluidic schemes for continuous on-line sorting and separation of cells and
other particles based on size, shape, softness, and surface chemistry.

Intellectual merit: The program develops a mechanism that results from combined
hydrodynamic and interfacial forces, where the latter uniquely result from
chemical nanotextures and nano-topographical features that interact with the
particles. These nanotextures impart selectivity (based on local particle
curvature, softness, and chemical functionality) and control the motion
signature of flowing particles that encounter the surface. An important regime
for these surfaces is that where sustained rolling occurs over nanotextures.
Here dynamic adhesion with selective and reversible binding allows particles to
be continuously processed over the surface. Then the addition of micron-scale
patterns of varied surface chemistry (including the nanotextures on some
patterned regions) or topography, allows different particle populations,
distinguished by their adhesive character and net contact area with the surface,
to be steered in different directions over the surface. This program will
develop patterns which direct different types of particles along different
surfaces paths, as a means to separate particles based on subtle differences in
their character: size, local shape / roughness, near-surface modulus, net
charge, and distributions in surface charge. The program combines experiments
and simulation to develop application-driven design rules and maximize
separation efficiency.

The novelty of this program lies in the use of surface patterns and nanotextures
to manipulate particles by combined hydrodynamic and surface interactions. The
paradigm of continuous particle rolling over a surface for manipulation and
separation of particles is a new and powerful idea which exploits a new
interfacial mechanism. To date, the mechanism has been modeled in simple
treatments but has not been confirmed experimentally. In addition to being
scientifically complex, controlled particle rolling is technologically
transformative because it facilitates continuous rather than batch-mode
processing. Further, the state space approach to describe adhesive behavior in a
complex multi-dimensional variable space is highly transformative as an
engineering method. The surface force / flow problem is not generally amenable
to simplification through dimensionless groups, and the state space approach
provides the opportunity to develop simple scaling laws useful for application-
driven designs.

Broader Impacts: In addition to the transformative methods to study complex
dynamic problems at the interface between materials and transport-engineering,
the program will transform technologies that demand precise separation and
characterization of micron scale objects. Biomedical and pharmaceutical
applications will benefit through the ultimate development of portable cell-
sorting devices requiring minimal support instrumentation and technician time.
The program also has the potential to overhaul strategies for the design of
marine-anti fouling coatings through its incorporation of hydrodynamic
considerations in materials design.

The program supports the continued development of multidisciplinary fundamental
coursework at the intersection of materials and engineering. Efforts to maintain
diversity and improve the participation by underrepresented and economically
disadvantaged groups will be facilitated through participation with several
existing organizations and groups at UMass (MRSEC, ICE, NEAGEP), that host
recruiting trips and workshops.