* 0932586
* Designing carbohydrate nanoparticles for prolonged efficacy of bacteriocin against food pathogens
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2013
* Arun Bhunia, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Friedrich Srienc
* 12/31/2013
* USD 327,603.00

Intellectual merit &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful control of food pathogens
such as Listeria and Salmonella requires the development of new methodologies.
Emerging food nanocarriers warrant great potentials for controlled antimicrobial
delivery to reduce the risk of pathogen contamination. In the long run, the
methodology of nanoparticle-based delivery of antimicrobials may complement or
partially replace film-based active packaging. In this project, the goal is to
establish a novel strategy to reduce the risk of pathogen contamination in food
through carbohydrate nanoparticle-mediated delivery of bacteriocin. Listeria
monocytogenes and Salmonella Typhimurium will be used as the Gram-positive and
Gram-negative bacteria models, respectively. Nisin, an FDA approved potent food-
grade antibacterial peptide, will be used as bacteriocin model. Phytoglycogen, a
food-based dendritic carbohydrate, will be used to prepare water-soluble
functional nanocarriers that are able to absorb nisin for controlled delivery.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The implementation of
this project will integrate nanotechnology with national food safety and
security, and create new education opportunities for cutting-edge concepts and
practices in food chemistry, food microbiology, and food processing. The outcome
of this research will contribute to the reduction of food contamination by
pathogens such as Listeria and Salmonella and may help to save lives. Beyond the
food area, the knowledge generated from this research will benefit other fields
such as the controlled delivery of drugs and nutraceuticals. In an effort to
accomplish educational goals, great efforts will be taken for mentoring and
training at the high school, college, and industrial levels. This project will
provide precious training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students
involved as well as for hundreds of industrial personnel attending the
Carbohydrate Short Course hosted by the Whistler Center for Carbohydrate
Research at Purdue. In addition, the PIs have established a relationship with a
local high school for mentoring students in their Science Research course. This
project will provide opportunities for these students to work in the real world
and to learn from real scientists. To ensure the benefit of this project to
underrepresented groups, the PIs will collaborate closely with Purdue
administration to identify and recruit minority undergraduate and graduate
students for inclusion in the proposed research.&lt;br/&gt;