* 0932989
* Electroactivated Peptides for Dynamic Functionalization
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Laurie Gower, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Revzin
* 09/30/2013
* USD 299,427.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

0932989 Gower

This NSF award by the Biosensing/CBET program supports work by Professors Laurie
Gower and David Norton, Materials Engineers at the University of Florida, to
explore the feasibility of a new biopanning approach for electroactive peptides.
The phage display combinatorial system will be used to screen for inorganic-
binding peptides that have reversible binding properties so that an electric
field can be used to trigger the sorption and/or desorption of the peptides from
an electronic material's surface. These peptides can then serve as linkers to
attach other components of interest, such as bioreceptors for biosensor arrays,
or nanoparticle "cargo" for lab-on-a-chip configurations. The experiments
proposed here will lay the groundwork for such future applications, by first
exploring different electronic configurations to determine which mode of
stimulus can provide the best reversibility without adversely affecting the
peptide or attached biocomponent.

While the "molecular biomimetics" approach is already being considered for the
development of multicomponent systems, where peptide linkers can be screened to
have selective binding affinity to different inorganic materials, the system
being explored here will bring this technology to a whole new level because it
could provide a means for dynamically patterning a multicomponent surface.
Static micropatterned surfaces have already brought significant advances to the
biotechnology arena; the ability to provide both spatial and temporal control
over a surface's functionality could be the next revolutionary advance for
bionanotechnology.

For the next generation of XYZ-microsystems, it is desirable to capitalize on
the small size and high efficiency of microelectronics, in combination with the
high sensitivity and selectivity provided by biological systems. The grand
challenge is in integrating non-electronic components (such as bioreceptors)
with the electronic transduction elements. The work proposed here will provide
not only a linkage between the organic-inorganic interface, but a linkage that
is responsive to the device itself, for truly smart systems that assemble on
command. One could envision changing a surface pattern in real time for contact
guidance of cells, or directed polymerization of tracks for biomolecular
shuttles (e.g. in smart dust biosensors). Another exciting advance that could
result from electroactivated peptides is the self-cleaning capability of device
surfaces. This could enable continuous biosensing, where a flow-through system
could be designed that is triggered to release clogged receptors, followed by
replacement with fresh receptors which self-assemble onto the de-activated
surface. Thus, these exploratory studies will lay the groundwork for a whole new
technology, which could lead to commercializable applications ranging from the
military to private health care sectors.