* 0932391
* Simple, Inexpensive, High-Yield Process for the Production of Motor Fuels from Cellulose
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Mark Mascal, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Ram Gupta
* 09/30/2012
* USD 300,001.00

0932391 Mascal

Summary

Intellectual Merits: The cost-effective conversion of plant biomass into liquid
motor fuels with the capacity to impact the nation's petroleum demand has become
a central scientific and economic objective. Although research is being done in
this area and progress made, no economically sustainable approach to the mass
production of biofuels has yet emerged. This proposal addresses this challenge
by efficiently deriving high-energy furan-based liquids from glucose, sucrose,
glucitol, cellulose, and raw lignocellulosic biomass. The proposal is founded on
preliminary data which demonstrates the proof-of-principle, i.e. that simple
sugars and cellulose can be converted in a biphasic acid//solvent reactor into
furanic materials with demonstrated biofuel potential in remarkably good yield.
From there, the first project (a) undertakes a study of the interrelationship
between the reaction parameters (concentration, extraction rate, extracting
solvent, and agitation) and its effect on the reaction kinetics. Since waste
biomass is our ultimate focus, in part (b) we study the scaled up process using
corn stover, wood chips, straw, and newsprint as the raw material for conversion
to fuels. In many approaches to the exploitation of plant biomass, the potential
of the hemicellulose component is not effectively realized. To draw on this vast
resource, we adapt our process to co-convert the C5 sugar fraction into
furfural, thereby achieving total glycan utilization of biomass in the
production of both liquid fuels and value-added products. In part (c), we
consider whether furfurals, with their multiple degrees of unsaturation, may
prove to be credible media for chemical "hydrogen storage." The C-C coupling of
sugars to give chain extended C12 molecules is a key goal in the eventual
sourcing of useful hydrocarbons from saccharides, and this is explored via
reductive electrochemical coupling of the C=O functions of our derived furfural
products in part (d). Finally, our biphasic dehydration-halogen-substitution
chemistry is applied to glucitol and its cyclization products, potentially
leading to new generations of furanic biofuels.

Broader Impacts: The broader impacts resulting from the proposed activity are
manifold. First, its bearing on the alternative energy landscape and hence on
society as a whole will be substantial. Research which brings to the fore the
relevance of chemistry in tackling real-world problems is ideal for integration
into high school research projects (Project SEED), undergraduate research,
freshman seminars, undergraduate laboratory courses, and public K-12 science
outreach lectures. The PI and co-PI are committed to aggressive educational
outreach activities as well as encouraging the participation of underrepresented
groups through this research program. Finally, this research also lends itself
well to eventual partnerships with the private sector. The mentoring dimension
of this proposal is broad. Specific activities include postdoc co-supervision of
junior members of the group, co-drafting of publications and grant proposals,
attending grant-writing workshops, formal training in professional ethics, and
participation in the UC Davis Professors of the Future (PFTF) program.