* 0932814
* Making Superior Alumina Thin Films via Ozone Oxidation of Aluminum: Correlation between Oxidation Mechanism and Nanoscale Atomic Structure in Amorphous Oxide Films
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Guangwen Zhou, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 08/31/2013
* USD 330,846.00

0932814 Zhou

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Although the formation of amorphous oxide thin films by low-temperature
oxidation of metals is of significant importance for many technological
applications including heterogeneous catalysis, electronics, corrosion
protection, and surface coatings, the field of low-temperature oxidation and the
fundamental understanding of the mechanism of amorphous oxide formation have
been experimentally handicapped by a lack of extensive data on simple systems.
Several reasons contribute to this paucity of data: the difficulty of
measurements due to slow oxidation kinetics at low temperatures, little control
of impurities, incomplete characterization of the original surface, and the
longstanding challenge in structural characterization of amorphous oxides. The
limited understanding of low temperature oxidation has also been hindered by the
inability of traditional experimental techniques to perform in situ measurements
of the structure and reaction kinetics at the nanoscale as the oxidation
progresses. The main thrust of this project is to investigate the microscopic
processes of amorphous oxide formation by utilizing the strong oxidation power
of ozone (O3) to enhance the rate of oxide formation on metal surfaces and
employing in situ ultrahigh vacuum (UHV) scanning probe microscopy to monitor
the reaction sequence from oxygen surface chemisorption to oxide nucleation and
growth. The in situ visualization experiments will be complemented by
fluctuation electron microscopy for establishing the correlation between
oxidation mechanism and nanoscale atomic structure of the amorphous oxide films.

Intellectual Merit: This work will provide new mechanistic insights into the
behavior of amorphous oxide formation, which are needed not only for
construction of hierarchical multi-scale oxidation models that naturally link
different oxidation stages, but also for advances toward practical applications
where the controlled growth of amorphous oxide films is critical. Experiments
will be performed on the simple model system of single-crystal aluminum (Al),
which will lead to clear interpretations and the establishment of fundamental
concepts. Based on in situ visualization of O3 oxidation of Al and ex situ
characterization of nanoscale atomic structure of the oxide films, the following
issues will be addressed: (1) the migration and chemisorption of O atoms
dissociated from trapped O3 molecules on Al surfaces; (2) the nucleation and
growth kinetics of amorphous Al2O3 islands; (3) the microscopic origin of pore
formation in amorphous Al2O3 films; (4) the effect of kinetic roughening on the
growth of continuous amorphous oxide film; (5) the effect of oxidation
parameters on the nanoscale atomic structure (i.e., medium-range order) of
amorphous oxide films. Because the project addresses fundamental issues that
help to understand the correlations among surface structure, reactivity, mass
transport, growth morphology, and nanoscale atomic structure, the findings will
shed light on other material systems (e.g. Cr, Ta, Zr, Si, Ge) and reactions
(e.g. anodic oxidation), where the prototypes of basic processes governing the
formation of amorphous oxide films exhibit great similarity to the low-
temperature oxidation of aluminum.

Broader Impact: This research focuses on in situ visualization of nanoscale
oxide formation via nanoscale imaging techniques, thus qualifying it as a
vehicle to carry out planned nanoscale science education activities. As part of
this research program, students at the graduate and undergraduate levels will
learn about new microscopy techniques and materials issues that are at the
forefront of current materials research. In addition to the development of new
courses in materials science curricula focusing on nanoscience and
nanotechnology, the PI will develop a new website dedicated to the
instrumentation development in in situ SPM techniques and the novel applications
of these techniques to various research fields, which will have broad impact for
serving as a communication tool and a medium for facilitating public education
on nanoscience. To bridge the gap between current progress in nanotechnology
research and secondary science content, the PI will establish a "High-School-
Science-Day" (HSSD) program by bringing together science teachers, graduates,
and high school students in a multi-level learning experience. This HSSD program
will be designed to excite the natural curiosity of high-school students through
demonstration of state-of-the-art instruments, presentations on the latest
progress in nanotechnology research, and real-life research experience. The
involvement of science teachers in this program will lead to the development of
new educational modules to be subsequently taught to students in their
classrooms and therefore have significant amplification effect.