* 0932666
* Rational Design and Synthesis of Targeted Nanostructures in Organic Photovoltaics
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Bamin Khomami, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 08/31/2013
* USD 301,999.00

0932666 Dadmun

Intellectual Merit - Conjugated polymers (CPs) are a promising class of
materials for use in the conversion of solar energy to electricity. For optimal
performance in bulk heterojunction CPs, the morphology of the donor and acceptor
materials must form percolating interpenetrating networks maximizing interfacial
contacts w/ length scale of ~10 nm. Currently, we lack the fundamental
understanding to guide the formation of bulk heterojunctions to these targeted
nanoscale morphologies. In this collaborative proposal, an understanding of the
fundamental driving forces that govern the nanoscale self-assembly and
interfaces in conjugated block copolymer (BCP) thin films will be developed in
order to enable the rational design and fabrication of the targeted bicontinuous
nanoscale morphologies. This will be realized by completing an interdisciplinary
research program that will detail the thermodynamic driving forces that control
the formation of a bicontinuous interconnected percolated morphology in a thin
film of conjugated BCP with controlled rigidity on a surface that is patterned
incommensurately to the periodicity of the diblock copolymer as well as the
synthesis and thin film structure of conjugated diblock polymers that exhibit
traditional diblock morphologies. Therefore upon completion, we will attain an
understanding of the thermodynamics that control the assembly of these systems
in thin films; enabling the reproducible creation of the desired bicontinuous
interconnected morphologies with this structure, providing a transformative
method to rationally design, tailor and fabricate nanoscale morphologies with
exquisite control of size and thickness for CP systems. The successful
completion of these experiments will broaden the range of nanoscale thin film
morphologies that can be targeted and rationally tuned in conjugated polymer
thin films, and thus allow a systematic study of CP morphology on organic
photovoltaics, a critical area in their optimization, yet a parameter that is
not currently controllable experimentally.

Broader Impact - This project is an integrated collaborative effort between
Chemistry, Chemical Engineering, and Materials Science research groups at the
University of Tennessee. The broader impacts of the proposed program are
embodied in this interdisciplinary collaboration, as well as the educational
experiences to which it will lead. In the course of this project, the PIs will
continue their outreach programs and use their research to provide training
experiences for undergraduate and high school students and K-12 teachers, as
well as provide input to their own teaching and exciting areas for discussion at
K-12 visits. The execution of this collaborative project will also develop an
interdisciplinary system of instruction, via classroom and laboratory, for
training graduate and undergraduate students in chemistry, materials science,
and mathematics who will be equipped to tackle modern science and engineering
challenges. This project will also further develop the sustainable research
infrastructure in Tennessee, an EPSCOR state, and will be implemented to ensure
the participation of underrepresented groups in this research.