* 0932389
* CPS:Small:Cyber-physical system challenges in man-machine interfaces: context-dependent control of smart artificial hands through enhanced touch perception and mechatronic reflexes
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Stephen Helms Tillery, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2013
* USD 549,999.00

CPS: Small: Cyber-physical system challenges in man-machine interfaces: context-
dependent control of smart artificial hands through enhanced touch perception
and mechatronic reflexes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is
to integrate user control with automated reflexes in the human-machine
interface. The approach, taking inspiration from biology, analyzes control-
switching issues in brain-computer interfaces. A nonhuman primate will perform a
manual task while movement- and touch-related brain signals are recorded. While
a robotic hand replays the movements, electronic signals will be recorded from
touch sensors on the robot?s fingers, then mapped to touch-based brain signals,
and used to give the subject tactile sensation via direct cortical stimulation.
Context-dependent transfers of authority between the subject and reflex-like
controls will be developed based on relationships between sensor signals and
command signals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Issues of mixed authority and context
awareness have general applicability in human-machine systems. This research
advances methods for providing tactile feedback from a remote manipulator,
dividing control appropriate to human and machine capabilities, and transferring
authority in a smooth, context-dependent manner. These principles are essential
to any cyber-physical system requiring robustness in the face of uncertainty,
control delays, or limited information flow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The resulting
transformative methods of human-machine communication and control will have
applications for robotics (space, underwater, military, rescue, surgery,
assistive, prosthetic), haptics, biomechanics, and neuroscience.
Underrepresented undergraduates will be recruited from competitive university
programs at Arizona State University and Mexico?s Tec de Monterrey University.
Outreach projects will engage the public and underrepresented school-aged
children through interactive lab tours, instructional modules, and public
lectures on robotics, human-machine systems, and social and ethical implications
of neuroprostheses.&lt;br/&gt;