* 0932311
* Collaborative Research: Electron Transport Membranes using Nanostructured Block Copolymer Assemblies
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2009,12/31/2012
* Malika Jeffries-EL, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Eddie Chang
* 12/31/2012
* USD 195,861.00

0932311 Jeffries-EL

Intellectual Merit:

Nanoscale control of conjugated (conducting) polymers is especially important as
the morphology of such functional materials plays a significant role in device
performance, influencing properties such as conductivity, thermal stability,
processability, and mechanical integrity. The goal of this proposal is to create
new polymeric network materials for organic electronics devices, with improved
performance due to the formation of well defined and continuous nanoscale
conducting pathways. This goal will be achieved by combining the synthesis of
near monodisperse conducting polymers (regioregular poly(3-alkylthiophenes)
(rr-P3AT)s ), with the natural self assembly of block copolymers (BCPs) to
create novel polymeric materials with the ability to form multiply continuous
assemblies. There are two specific aims of this proposal. First, novel network
forming ABC triblock copolymers containing an electrically conductive block will
be synthesized. These materials will be designed such that they contain the
block copolymer volume fractions necessary to generate the interfacial curvature
and saddle surfaces, which are a hallmark of nanoscale networks. In addition,
the chemical connectivity of the polymer will be designed such that
crystallization of the conducting (rod) block is confined in order to maintain
the network morphology. Next, membrane structures will be characterized by
scattering, microscopy, and mechanical analysis techniques; membrane
conductivity (and mobility) also will be examined using four point probe
measurements, and dielectric spectroscopy. The proposed nanoscale network
morphologies have superior mechanical attributes, relative to layers and
cylindrical channels, and their percolating interconnected domains and large
interfacial area present the opportunity to create conducting materials with
tailored transport, chemical, and mechanical properties. These factors will lead
to a dramatic improvement over polymer blend systems, where the creation of
uniform-sized continuous pathways for conduction and transport is a key hurdle
to improving the efficiency of polymeric devices.

Broader Impact:

The ability to create continuous nanoscale conducting pathways in organic thin
films is crucial for further development and use of organic materials because
poor electronic properties at domain boundaries often limit overall device
properties. This is of particular concern for light emitting diodes (LEDs),
thin-film transistors (TFTs), and photovoltaics (PVs), where improved transport
is essential in the electronically active layers of these devices. While the
synthesis of rr-P3AT BCPs has been reported in the literature, this work seeks
to innovate their design. Specifically, the copolymers described above will
contain one block that imparts toughness; a second block to provide confinement
of the crystallizable block; and a third block that is crystallizable and
conducting. A novel aspect of this work is that the chemistry of the conducting
rr-P3AT block has been modified to lower the crystallization temperature, so
that crystallization does not alter the overall self assembled block copolymer
structure. The proposed research will provide new insights into the interplay
between rod coil block copolymer composition, morphology and electronic
properties. Collectively, this is expected to result in the optimization of CP
morphology and electronic properties. Furthermore, this interdisciplinary
project will train graduate and undergraduate students to address key scientific
and engineering challenges in nanotechnology. Specific broader impact and
educational initiatives are focused on increasing the participation of under
represented groups. These include: providing summer research and mentorship
opportunities through the PI's involvement with the ACS Diversity Partner
Program and Minority Scholars Program. Additionally, the co-PI's involvement
with several programs at Iowa State University [ISU] (AGEP, Freshman Honors, and
NOBCChE) will be used to recruit graduate students from under represented groups
to ISU. Finally, we propose the exchange of students between the University of
Delaware, Chemical Engineering Department, and the ISU, Department of Chemistry,
to broaden their research knowledge base.