* 0932600
* A New Stress Bearing Mechanism in Non-Newtonian Fluids
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Robert Deegan, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Dimitrios Papavassiliou
* 09/30/2013
* USD 301,999.00

Deegan &lt;br/&gt;0932600&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI discovered two phenomena,
persistent holes and negative flows, which together suggest that shear-
thickening complex fluids possess a vibration-activated stress-bearing
mechanism. A persistent hole can maintain a stable free surface oriented
parallel to gravity. Negative flows are flows that are opposite to the mean
applied stress. Laboratory experiments and modeling will reveal the origin of
these phenomena which the PI believes have the same physical origin. The PI will
study the two classes and develop a rheological model based on these results in
collaboration with Ronald Larson and develop and validate a free surface model
based the flow measurements and the rheological model in collaboration with Rich
Kerswell. The experiments will be conducted on a vibrating test platform and in
a custom built shear cell using Particle Image Velocimetry. The rheology will be
characterized with a commercial stress-controlled rheometer. The fluid structure
will be characterized using particle tracking, light scattering microscopy, and
confocal microscopy. The flow field measurements combined with the rheological
model will help build and validate a hydrodynamic model of persistent holes and
negative flows. The structural characterization will reveal the link between the
microscopic structure and the rheological behavior. The results of this study
will be of interest broadly to complex fluids community and specifically to the
shear banding, shear thickening, and jamming communities. It will also be of
interest to the many industries - from plastics to cosmetics to pharmaceuticals
- in which non-Newtonian fluids are commonly used. This study has the potential
to reveal a fundamental mechanism in complex fluids which may be as significant
as normal stress or extensional viscosity. The PI's educational program builds
on his YouTube video of persistent holes, that has been viewed over 2.5 million
times and on an exhibit in the final stages of development at the San Francisco
Exploratorium. In addition, the PI will develop and teach a new laboratory
course on nonlinear science in the interdisciplinary Center for the Study of
Complex Systems. Undergraduates participating in summer internships in the PI's
lab will benefit from an increased awareness of career opportunities in science
and competitiveness for graduate school entry.