* 0932289
* CPS:Medium:Collaborative Research:Infrastructure and Technology Innovations for Medical Device Coordination
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Daniel Andresen, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 08/31/2013
* USD 851,548.00

The objective of this research is to develop a framework for the development and
deployment of next-generation medical systems consisting of integrated and
cooperating medical devices. The approach is to design and implement an open-
source medical device coordination framework and a model-based component
oriented programming methodology for the device coordination, supported by a
formal framework for reasoning about device behaviors and clinical workflows.

The intellectual merit of the project lies in the formal foundations of the
framework that will enable rapid development, verification, and certification of
medical systems and their device components, as well as the clinical scenarios
they implement. The model-based approach will supply evidence for the regulatory
approval process, while run-time monitoring components embedded into the system
will enable "black box" recording capabilities for the forensic analysis of
system failures. The open-source distribution of tools supporting the framework
will enhance its adoption and technology transfer.

A rigorous framework for integrating and coordinating multiple medical devices
will enhance the implementation of complicated clinical scenarios and reduce
medical errors in the cases that involve such scenarios. Furthermore, it will
speed up and simplify the process of regulatory approval for coordination-
enabled medical devices, while the formal reasoning framework will improve the
confidence in the design process and in the approval decisions.

Overall, the framework will help reduce costs and improve the quality of the
health care.