* 0932781
* Collaborative Research:  A Polymer Synthesis/Membrane Characterization
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2009,02/28/2013
* Todd Emrick, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Rosemarie D. Wesson
* 02/28/2013
* USD 176,999.00

0932781/0931761 Emrick/Freeman

The PIs propose collaborative fundamental research centered on the preparation,
application, and characterization of polymer coatings for water purification
membranes. The PIs recognize that advancing water purification membranes and
processes is a critically important scientific and technological challenge of
the 21st Century, and that the combination of population growth and increasing
strain on fresh water supplies poses a serious societal threat, both in the
United States and worldwide. Accelerating discoveries that improve water
purification membranes is accomplished in this proposal through a polymer
synthesis and membrane characterization collaboration, which will enable a rapid
and effective testing of novel polymer materials used to prepare membranes and
to modify membrane surfaces. The research plan optimizes anti-fouling coatings
for water purification membranes, focusing especially on robust polyolefin-
graft-PEG copolymers as a platform polymer to act as a coating for membranes. A
new proposed polymer syntheses for coatings and characterization methods that
evaluate the effectiveness of the new coatings in preventing membrane fouling is
proposed. Zwitterionic polymers, such as phosphorylcholine and sulfobetaine
structures, as well as poly(dopamine) coatings, form the basis of these efforts.
The strategies elucidated for anti-fouling membranes are extended to the problem
of biofouling, which is important for advancing the utility of membrane
bioreactors.

Broader impact and education efforts that are designed to maximize the impact of
the research, and excite the general public, the polymer/engineering
communities, and disadvantaged and minority community members about materials
and engineering research that carries societal importance through its objectives
of water purification. The PIs will emphasize efforts that impact both the
research community and the general public, including: 1) Organization and
leadership roles in research conferences that are devoted, in whole or in part,
to polymer membranes and water purification. Prominent among the activities will
be membrane sessions at semi-annual National meetings of the American Chemical
Society, including sessions at the Salt Lake City ACS meeting (March 2009) and
the Macromolecular Materials Gordon Research Conference in Ventura, CA (January
2011). 2) Activities geared towards the education of undergraduates, female and
minority students, the general public, and physically challenged (hearing
impaired) students. Activities will include the creation of a water purification
activity cluster designed for use at the Austin Children's Museum's Science
Sundays, and participation of students from the Texas School for the Deaf (TSD)
in the UT laboratory for a research experience in membranes and separation. 3)
Technology transfer strategies that generate and sustain relationships between
the PIs and the private sector, and that streamline discoveries towards
potential commercial impact, contributing to American competitiveness in the
global scientific community. The PI's prior technology transfer experience
accelerate this process, as will their participation in semi-annual meetings of
the Center for UMass-Industry Research on Polymers.