* 0932517
* Molecular Design of Nano-Carrier Materials for Reactions Catalyzed by Multi-Enzyme Complexes
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Reuben Peters, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Eddie Chang
* 09/30/2013
* USD 335,961.00

0932517&lt;br/&gt;Mallapragada&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of
this proposal is to design and investigate novel active flexible and semi
flexible polymeric nano-carrier platforms that will enable nanoscale spatial co-
localization of multiple active enzymes. Several multi-enzyme complexes found in
Nature are designed to ensure rapid transport of each intermediate in the
reaction to the next neighboring active site, since the intermediates are often
unstable. Thus, it is critical to molecularly co-localize these enzymes in nano-
carriers so that the reactive intermediates can find the next active site for
the desired products to be formed. While there have been numerous studies
dealing with enzyme immobilization, there are no studies of using nanomaterials
to co-localize multi-enzyme complexes, especially with reactive intermediates.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thus, the focus of this proposal is to create active
nanostructured environments that can modify the direction of complex conversions
by confinement of the active catalytic functionality within both spatial and
temporal scales. We will investigate the biosynthesis of flavan-3-ol, whose
production is mediated by two enzymes with a highly reactive intermediate.
Flavan-3-ols, such as (-) epicatechin, are flavonoid natural products with
powerful antioxidant properties and are the major contributors to the
cardioprotective and anticancer activity of various foods such as green tea and
dark chocolate. The specific goals of the project are to: 1) Design and
characterize novel nano carrier platforms based on self-assembling ionic and
degradable copolymers to co-localize and stabilize multiple enzymes with
reactive intermediates; and 2) Investigate enzymatic activity and flux in nano-
carriers for flavon-3-ol biosynthesis. A diverse and interdisciplinary team of
researchers has been assembled to address this
problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: New bioinspired robust active
nano carrier platforms with tailored chemistries will be designed to enable
nanoscale spatio-temporal control of multiple enzymes. These materials form
various stable nano-compartments/nanostructures. These platforms have been
chosen to investigate how the flexibility of the nanostructure affects the co-
localization and catalytic activity of the enzymes. This confinement is also
expected to increase the stability of relatively delicate enzymatic
biocatalysts. The structure, dynamics, transport properties, and thermodynamic
interactions of the nano-compartments with enzymes will be investigated using
experimental nanoscale tools and computational methods to obtain insights into
the mechanisms of activity. This approach will facilitate rational design of the
active nano-carrier platforms. These insights will be used to investigate the
effects of nano-encapsulation on the enzymatic activity of, and product flux
through, a multi enzyme complex in flavan-3-ol
biosynthesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The nano carrier platforms
can be extended to effectively mediate many other important multi enzyme
reactions with reactive intermediates (e.g., the tricarboxylic acid cycle) and
channel reactions towards desired products that might not otherwise be possible.
The dual functions of enzyme stabilization and improved flux provided by the
environmentally responsive nano-carrier platforms will provide a general
strategy for industrial use of enzymatic biocatalysts in cascade reactions,
including their efficient (re)use under nominally harsh conditions. The
nanoscale probes developed to elucidate fundamental nanostructure function
relationships can be readily applied to other material/biomolecule systems. This
proposal integrates research and educational initiatives to provide students
multifaceted and interdisciplinary learning experiences. A diverse group of
students will be proactively recruited. This work will have a nation-wide impact
through the dissemination of problem-solving rubrics and bioethics case studies.
This proposal will impact K-12 students through research experiences and several
outreach mechanisms. Results from the project will be disseminated broadly
through sessions on enzyme nanocatalysis at professional meetings, workshops,
and archival publications.