* 0932024
* Micro-Mechanical Characterization of Damage in Ligaments
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Joseph Freeman, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Ted A. Conway
* 07/31/2013
* USD 300,150.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0932024&lt;br/&gt;De
Vita&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sprains of the knee ligaments are among the most
common orthopedic injuries. They usually occur when the knee is forced beyond
its normal range of motion, such as in a fall. They also happen when the knee
experiences an impact, such as in a car accident or during a football tackle.
These injuries can consist of a slight over-stretch, a partial tear, or a
complete disruption of the ligaments. While many investigators in biomechanics
have focused on quantifying the material properties of ligaments, such as
tangent modulus, tensile strength, and ultimate strain, little is know of their
response to mechanical stimuli that lead to partial and complete failure. In
particular, studies are needed to clarify the micro-structural changes
associated with partial and complete tears. For the first time, constitutive
relationships that explain the role of microstructure in the damage evolution
process of ligaments will be developed. These models will be derived by
integrating molecular models that provide information about collagen cross-
linking and collagen molecular damage with structural continuum models. The
structural models will be formulated by taking into account the components of
the ligamentous tissues, their geometrical arrangement, and their interactions.
They will describe the typical anisotropy, nonlinearity, and inelasticity
exhibited by ligamentous tissue. Together with the theoretical study, mechanical
and microscopic experiments will be performed to quantify the effect of collagen
intermolecular cross-linking on the failure of ligaments. Toward this end, knee
ligaments harvested from two groups of animals, one fed with a normal diet and
another fed with a lathyritic diet, will be subjected to different sub-failure
stretches along their physiological direction. Ligaments will be examined for
microscopic structural damage, and molecular fragmentation of collagen _brils
will be assessed to determine how ligament failure occurs on a molecular level.
This information will, in turn, be correlated to the structural models developed
based upon the mechanical data. Together, these three approaches will culminate
in a more complete understanding of the structure/function relationship of the
components of ligament.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. The successful
completion of the proposed project requires a combined knowledge of theoretical
and experimental mechanics of biological systems as well as molecular biology.
The PIs will combine their expertise in continuum mechanics (R. De Vita),
molecular modeling (J. W. Freeman), experimental mechanics (J. G. Barrett, R. De
Vita and J. W. Freeman) and molecular biology (J. G. Barrett) to formulate novel
models that together with mechanical and microscopic experiments will elucidate
the relationship between damage development and material composition of
ligaments. This research program will have a signifcant impact in the area of
engineering materials for replacement grafts and biological scaffolds by
offering a knowledge of mechanical and structural properties to target in
developing replacements for ligaments. The results can also guide the design of
braces or stretching routines to limit ligament strain so as prevent damage
during stressful activities. Because ligaments possess a very well organized
structure and a relatively simple composition, the research findings will
contribute to understanding the failure mechanism of more complex biological
soft tissues such as, for example, skin and
arteries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. Undergraduate and graduate
students will be engaged in the theoretical, numerical, and experimental
components of the research project. The PIs will work with the Bioin-formatics
and Bioengineering Summer Institute program and the College Bound program to
attract and retain underrepresented groups to science and engineering. Research
findings will be incorporated into current courses that are offered in the
undergraduate, graduate and professional curricula. The results of the research
will be presented at national and international conferences and published in
peer-reviewed journals.