* 0932973
* Integrated Self & Directed Assembly of Multi-Component Colloidal Structures
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Michael Bevan, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 07/31/2013
* USD 300,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

0932973 Bevan

This proposal is concerned with developing integrated self and directed
assembly mechanisms to robustly assemble multi component colloidal systems into
more ordered and diverse structures. In prior research, we have demonstrated
quantitative connections between interactions, dynamics, and microstructure in
unassembled colloidal fluids and as part of independent self-assembly (i.e.
colloids assembling themselves) and directed assembly (i.e. external fields
assembling colloids). With this foundation, questions related to advancing
colloidal assembly include: (1) how can processes be designed to minimize
defects in ordered structures (2) how can greater structural diversity (and
material properties) be accessed using colloidal components To address these
questions, the proposed research aims to systematically extend our current
understanding of colloidal assembly by integrating self and directed assembly
mechanisms in single component colloidal systems, binary colloidal systems, and
in the folding of chains of single and binary colloidal particles. For
clarification, binary refers to species with different potentials, which
includes different sized colloids, but is intended to refer more generally to
any system where species A and B have different AA, BB, and AB interactions.

Specific objectives and associated tasks in the proposed research include: (1)
(objective1) achieve unprecedented, reliable production of ordered, defect free
single component colloidal structures, by (task1) constructively integrating 2D
and 3D self and directed assembly processes using kT-scale actuators based on
tunable depletion potentials and electric field mediated dipolar interactions,
(2) (objective) adapt these approaches to develop new capabilities to assemble
binary particle systems into atomic analogues, by (task) identifying tunable AA,
BB, AB potentials that allow for implementation of reversible self and directed
assembly mechanisms in binary systems, and (3) (objective) extend these findings
to colloidal chains that fold into 2D and 3D structures to produce a new class
of materials and a new micro scale assembly mechanism, by (task) fabricating
single component and binary colloidal chains that fold via condensation due to
tunable intra chain attraction and/or compression in inhomogeneous electric
fields.

The significance of the proposed research is based on its effort to understand
how to best control the thermodynamics and kinetics of colloidal assembly
processes by exploiting the best aspects of self and directed assembly
mechanisms. With a fundamental basis for manipulating colloidal assembly in
single component systems, the proposed research also aims to extend the current
state of the art for realizing more diverse microstructures and associated
material properties. Because colloidal components are amenable to direct real
space and real time measurements, the proposed research should also provide
broader fundamental insights into the chemical physics of self and directed
assembly processes that are not accessible to experiments at smaller length
scales. The intellectual merit of the proposed research lies in the fundamental
understanding that will be gained of multi component colloidal self and directed
assembly through the ability to directly measure, model, and manipulate such
systems using coupled microscopy measurements and rigorous models. Such
understanding should enable quantitative design, control, and optimization
(formal engineering) of colloidal assembly processes and provide new insights
beyond what is already known from trial and error discovery. The proposed
research can be characterized as transformative based on its anticipated
identification of new ways to control defects and to expand the diversity of
micro scale structures that can be used as periodic meta materials and
manipulated via tunable interactions and sequenced connectivity.

The broader impacts of the proposed research plan will result from employing
rich visual data from experiments (e.g. images, videos), simulations (e.g.
renderings, animations), and analyses (e.g. dynamic, multi-dimensional plots) in
various classroom, laboratory, outreach, and dissemination activities.