* 0932559
* Autoignition Chemistry of Gasoline Surrogates Relevant to HCCI Operating Conditions
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Chih-Jen Sung, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Ruey-Hung Chen
* 08/31/2013
* USD 299,999.00

0932559&lt;br/&gt;Sung&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Homogeneous charge compression
ignition (HCCI) combustion has received much attention during the past few years
as a cost-effective means of increasing the fuel economy of gasoline engines.
HCCI engines offer the potential for 10 to 15% improvement in fuel economy and
dramatic reductions in NOx emissions as compared to today's conventional SI
engines. While the potential benefits of HCCI combustion are great, this
combustion mode has several practical development issues that must be solved
before it can be implemented. One of the goals of this project is to develop
surrogate fuels made from a small number (less than 10) of pure hydrocarbon
components that closely mimics the global ignition characteristics of gasoline
at conditions representative of HCCI combustion. The use of surrogate fuels is a
viable approach to make the development of chemical kinetic mechanisms for
practical fuels tractable. This proposed research aims to conduct kinetic
investigation of surrogate fuels relevant to HCCI operating conditions and
provide benchmark experimental data of high fidelity that will be used to
validate the predictive capability of chemical kinetic
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main focus of this three-year program will be
to experimentally determine the ignition characteristics of neat and blended
components for gasoline surrogate fuels using a uniquely designed rapid
compression machine. Experimental conditions will cover the compressed pressures
of 10-50 bar and charge temperatures of 650-1100 K. Based on the measured
pressure traces, information about the delay times of the first and second stage
ignition, heat release associated with the first stage ignition, and the fuel
burning rate can be obtained. The neat fuel components of interest include
n-heptane, iso-octane, toluene, 1-pentene, and methylcyclohexane, while
experiments will be also conducted using research-grade gasoline. Experimental
efforts will first focus on the investigations of each of these five components
in neat form over a range of pressures, temperatures, air-to-fuel ratios, and
dilution levels. Subsequently, these neat hydrocarbons will be blended into test
fuels, including binary, ternary, and higher-order blends, which will be
evaluated to determine if the ignition characteristics match that of a fully
blended gasoline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the availability of benchmark
experimental data in a well-defined configuration, the fuel kinetics can be
systematically studied, which represents an important step towards the
development of robust detailed and reduced chemical mechanisms for gasoline
surrogate fuels. For comprehensive kinetic modeling, literature experimental
data from shock tubes, flow reactors, and flames will also be included and
considered. It is recognized that the kinetics of these neat fuels is rather
complex and not yet properly understood. Significant advances in terms of the
availability of critical experimental data and kinetic understandings are
expected from this proposed work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program
will provide an invaluable experimental database and chemical kinetic models for
gasoline surrogate fuels. These results are critical for the development of
successful HCCI engines. Enhanced understanding of gasoline surrogate fuels
through this research will help in overcoming R&amp;D barriers to the
development of HCCI engines by making reliable predictions and explorations
through numerical simulations. Estimates show that if HCCI technology can be
successfully implemented starting from year 2010, large savings in the US demand
for gasoline in the transportation sector are possible. Furthermore, the
research conducted will directly contribute to an improvement in the learning
experience of undergraduate and graduate students. With active participation in
cutting-edge combustion research, talented students can be attracted to retain
in science/engineering areas and be well prepared to meet challenges in the
field of clean and efficient energy utilization.