* 0932259
* Nanoparticles as Surfactants: Static and Dynamic Properties
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* L. Gary Leal, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Eddie Chang
* 09/30/2013
* USD 314,469.00

0932259 Leal

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

The interfacial activity of copolymers and polymer functionalized nanoparticles
in multiphase polymer systems holds deep scientific interest and enormous
industrial importance. In addition to the variety of basic science questions
they raise, these synthetic compatibilizers enable blends of immiscible
polymers. Moreover, the core material of functionalized nanoparticles may offer
additional chemical or physical functionality (magnetic, optical, thermal or
electronic). However, even a basic understanding of how they work remains
lacking. The research aims to measure, predict, and model the static and dynamic
properties of nano-particle and co-polymer surfactants. Without such capability
to make such measurements, and thus to develop a fundamental understanding of
their operation, the rational design of synthetic compatibilizers for advanced
polymer blends will remain impossible.

Intellectual merit. The central intellectual merit of the proposed project is to
develop and apply new techniques to measure and understand the static and
dynamic properties of synthetic co-polymer and nanoparticle "surfactants" at
polymer/polymer interfaces, essentially for the first time. This requires three
specific aims be achieved:

(1) To develop novel micro-scale techniques and tools. Two new and novel
techniques will be developed: a micro-tensiometer, and an active microrheology
technique to measure the surface viscoelasticity and nonlinear viscosity of the
compatibilizer laden interface; (2) To use these new tools to measure and
characterize the statics and dynamics of nanoparticle and copolymer surfactants.
Specifically, surface pressure vs. concentration isotherms, surfactant
diffusivity and interfacial viscoelasticity will be measured for nanoparticle
and copolymer surfactants, whose properties are varied in a systematic and
comprehensive manner; and (3) To develop theories that capture the measured
behavior and make testable predictions; so as to generalize our results, provide
an intuitive understanding of the mechanisms by which these synthetic
compatibilizers work, and guide design rules. The proposed work is potentially
highly transformative: not only does it propose to develop novel and
unprecedented measurement capabilities, but also to develop fundamental and
general understanding of the static and dynamic behavior of copolyer and
nanoparticle surfactants, as well as intuition for how to design them.

Broader impact. The broader impact of the proposed work is quite substantial.
First, the measurement tools to be developed require only minute quantities of
sample, yet would enable a control over interfacial composition and the
measurement of interfacial tension and rheology, that would be unprecedented.
This aspect of the proposed work would be truly transformative in terms of the
information it would make accessible. The specific measurements would be the
first of their kind, and would allow the first steps toward a fundamental
understanding of the static and dynamic properties of nano particle surfactants
at polymer/polymer interfaces. Such understanding would be potentially
transformative as well, in that it that would enable the rational design and
processing of advanced polymeric materials with desired properties. The groups
will continue to be active in recruiting and mentoring under represented
minority students and generally ambitious undergraduates in summer and academic
year research projects, by leveraging the nationally recognized outreach
infrastructure in UCSB's Materials Research Laboratory. A high school teacher
will be involved in summer research, to impact his/her own experience as well as
his/her students in future years. To reach out to the broader university
community, a freshman seminar course will be developed for non-science students
on the science and engineering of rheologically interesting products familiar
from everyday life including foods and personal care products. The idea is to
expose students to the interesting, ubiquitous and surprisingly understandable
world of materials that are neither solid nor liquid. As part of this course,
the investigators will post lecture notes and demonstration videos freely on the
internet; following its successful development, we will write a descriptive
article for Chemical Engineering Education, to encourage and facilitate related
course content for other undergraduate or high school programs.