* 0932263
* CPS: Large: Cybernetic Interfaces for the Restoration of Human Movement through Functional Electrical Stimulation
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2015
* Kevin Lynch, Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2015
* USD 3,440,008.00

CPS: Large: Cybernetic interfaces for the restoration of human movement through
functional electrical stimulation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
research is to develop an intuitive user interface for functional electrical
stimulation (FES), which uses surgically-implanted electrodes to stimulate
muscles in spinal cord-injured (SCI) patients. The challenge is to enable high-
level tetraplegic patients to regain the use of their own arm. The approach is
to develop a multi-modal Bayesian user-intent decoder; use natural muscle
synergies to generate appropriate low-dimensional muscle activation signals in a
feedforward controller; develop a feedback controller to enhance the performance
of the feedforward controller; and test the system with SCI patients on daily
living tasks, such as reaching, grasping, and eating.&lt;br/&gt;The challenge
problem of restoring arm use to SCI patients will lead to new design principles
for cyber-physical systems interfacing neural and biological systems with
engineered computation and electrical power systems. The tight integration of
the proposed user interface and controller with the users own control system
requires a deep understanding of biological design principles such as nested
feedback loops at different time and length scales, noisy signals, parallel
processing, and highly coupled neuromechanical systems.&lt;br/&gt;This work will
lead to new technology that dramatically improves the lives of spinal cord-
injured patients. These patients often have no cognitive impairment and have
long life spans after injury. The goal is to enable these patients to eat,
reach, and grasp nearby objects. These tasks are critical for independent living
and quality of life. This work will also help train a new generation of students
in human-machine interfaces at the undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral
levels.