* 0932421
* CREST Center for Energy and Sustainability
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2009,04/30/2016
* Frank Gomez, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Santiago
* 04/30/2016
* USD 5,299,994.00

The California State University, Los Angeles (Cal State L.A.) proposes to
establish a new CREST Center for Energy and Sustainability (CEaS). CEaS embodies
a new vision for a new CREST center that builds on existing strengths of Cal
State L.A.?s Colleges of Engineering, Computer Science, and Technology (ECST)
and Natural and Social Sciences (NSS). The Center?s mission is threefold: 1) to
increase the number of underrepresented students in STEM fields and, especially,
to put them on a path towards the professoriate; 2) to conduct innovative,
multidisciplinary, research in energy and sustainability; and 3) to increase
public awareness and engage policymakers in this nascent movement. CSLA will be
have a consortium of partners that includes representatives from institutions
(i.e., middle and high schools, and a community college) with highly diverse
student populations, public and private Ph.D.-granting institutions, the largest
energy providers and utilities in the U.S., private industry, the Los Angeles
Mayor?s office, and national laboratories. Collaborating with these institutions
helps us pursue a vision of conducting cutting edge research and transforming
sustainable energy from environmental chic to accessible technologies that
excite 6th-graders and benefit society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under the unifying
theme of Energy and Sustainability, the four center subprojects will engage in
research to address the three cornerstones of energy sustainability: diversity
in energy sources, efficiency in energy use, and long-term sustainability. The
?biofuels combustion? subproject will immediately tackle research projects to
make current combustion more efficient and less polluting. The ?photovoltaics?
subproject will work on developing highly efficient and inexpensive photovoltaic
cells. The ?fuel cells? subproject is interested in creating micro-fuel cells
for applications in portable electronics. Finally, the ?carbon sequestration?
component is interested in understanding the impacts of carbon capture and
storage on the environment. Together, these four subprojects have a good mix of
scientists and engineers with both short- and long-term research agendas.
&lt;br/&gt;