* 0932510
* Microfluidic separation of particles based upon stiffness
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Alexander Alexeev, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* William Olbricht
* 07/31/2013
* USD 317,635.00

0932510 Sulchek

The mechanical stiffness of human cells can be a key parameter that reveals the
disease state of the cell, for example, in various cancers and in malaria.
However, for stiffness to be utilized in diagnostic settings, we will require
methods for continuous monitoring of the stiffness of cells in high throughput.
Although separation by other parameters, such as size or density, is commonly
employed, methods are not currently available for separation by stiffness. The
main goal of the proposed studies is to develop a microfluidic device capable of
continuous separation and sorting of microscale elastic particles, synthetic
microcapsules, and biological cells by their mechanical compliance. We will
combine computational modeling and experimental studies to probe the movement of
microscale compliant objects in microchannels with periodical constrictions and
examine how the dynamical interplay between elastic deformation due to viscous
flow and the channel geometry can be harnessed to provoke cell segregation. Our
preliminary three dimensional computer simulations reveal that cells with
dissimilar stiffness initially having identical lateral positions disperse to
distinct lateral locations in a microchannel with diagonal constrictions and, in
this way, can be effectively separated by their compliance. In the proposed
studies, we will first develop a comprehensive computational model of elastic
capsules and cells in a microfluidic environment. Our fluid structure
interaction computational approach will capture the dynamic interactions among
an elastic shell representing compliant capsules, complex geometry of
microchannel, encapsulated fluid, and host solution. We will employ our
numerical model to gain insight into the physics of compliant colloidal
particles propelled through well defined solid constrictions and establish
guidelines for designing robust and efficient microfluidic sorters with diagonal
constrictions. We will formulate the optimal range of system parameters leading
to the most efficient separation. These results will then guide our experimental
studies. We will begin our experimental efforts by synthesizing well-defined
capsules made from layer by layer deposition. The mechanical compliance can be
reliably controlled by including additional layers to the wall of the capsule,
with a negligible increase in particle diameter. We will assess particle
stiffness with mechanics measurements based upon atomic force microscopy. We
will implement the proposed microchannel design into an experimental
microfluidic system composed of a rectangular poly (dimethylsiloxane) channel
containing a pressure driven liquid flow. The top and bottom surface of the
channel display skewed ridges with a defined vertical gap. We will employ the
experimental setup to verify the predictions of our theoretical model and
further examine the dynamics of microscopic particles in confined fluidic
channels by tracking their trajectories. In our experiments, we will collect
data on the effect of particle stiffness and channel geometry upon the particle
movement, which is critical for designing robust sorters and establishing the
accuracy of the proposed method.

Intellectual Merit: The proposed synergetic approach will enhance our basic
knowledge on the dynamic interactions between compliant particles and
microfluidic flows in constrained geometries and the role that elasticity plays
in the complex particulate flows. The results of proposed studies could
potentially transform our knowledge on the effect of elasticity in biological
systems, including flows in blood vessels and the contribution of cell
elasticity to development of various diseases. It will also yield useful
computational and experimental tools for examining dynamic processes involving
compliant particles and viscous flows.

Broader Impact: The results of our studies will establish the much needed
guidelines for designing novel microfluidic devices for continuously analyzing
and sorting of biological cells and synthetic microcapsules. Such microfluidic
sorters could prove extremely valuable for rapid and inexpensive diagnostics of
a large number of pathologies affecting the biomechanical properties of
biological cells that could potentially save numerous human lives. In terms of
educational outreach, the PI's will participate in CEISMC program to host a
science teacher from the Atlanta Public School system. The teacher will recruit
2-3 high school students from underrepresented groups to work on site on a
project in the framework of the proposed studies. The high-school students will
then present their research results at the state science fair and the national
Siemens science competition.