* 0932404
* Collaborative Research: Effects and transport of exopolymeric substances (EPS) on engineered nanoparticle (EN) into marine phytoplankton cells
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Wei-Chun Chin, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2014
* USD 199,722.00

0933137/0932404 &lt;br/&gt;Santschi/ Chin &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Engineered
Nanoparticles (ENs), which range in size from 1 to 100 nm and have properties
that are different from those of bulk materials of the same chemical
composition, are used in the fabrication of numerous consumer goods, including
printing paints, detergents, bactericides, coatings, cosmetics, sunscreens,
tires, computer electronics, and drug delivery. In spite of their growing and
widespread use, the impacts of these materials on human health and the health of
ocean ecosystems are largely unknown. ENs include carbon nanotubes, metal
containing particles, zero-valent metal products, dendrimers, and quantum dots
(QDs). The proposed research will utilize QDs, as they not only have many
applications in biological imaging, disease diagnostics, and therapeutics, but
their broad excitation spectrum, tunable emission wavelength and quite stable
fluorescence also make them suitable for mechanistic studies. While the major
concern with ENs is in terms of their potential toxicity (e.g., the potential
for producing reactive oxygen species), the proposed research will mainly focus
on the transport steps and mechanisms into marine phytoplankton cells, which can
be affected by both electrostatic and hydrophobic interactions. For example, the
relative hydrophilicity of ENs is one of the key factors controlling their
ability to reach coastal waters, as well as their bioavailability and biological
uptake. Because of the emulsification and surfactant qualities of terrestrial
and aquatic natural organic substances such as fulvic acids and exopolymeric
substances (EPS), it can be expected that ENs that reach surface waters are more
hydrophilic. EPS, secreted from phytoplankton and bacteria in the ocean are
polysaccharide-rich anionic colloidal polymers that are important in the
formation of marine gels, marine snow and biofilms, as well as in colloid and
trace element scavenging and in providing protection against virus infection.
The same EPS characteristics will also affect EN uptake and accumulation in
organisms. Based on the limited research on animal cells, ENs can enter cells
either by endocytosis (material to be ingested is progressively enclosed by the
plasma membrane, which eventually detaches to form an endocytic vesicle) or by
other non-vehicle related processes such as surface adhesion and passive
diffusion. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research, the effects of EPS on EN
stability in aquatic systems and the mechanisms of EN transport across the
marine phytoplankton membranes will be examined. The following hypothesis will
be tested in the proposed research: H1: QD stability in the aquatic environment
can be significantly influenced by EPS, which can alter the attachment and/or
entry pathways of QDs into cells, with the relative the hydrophobicity of EPS
playing a major role. H2: QDs may not only be adsorbed onto the cell surface but
may also be internalized and concentrated in certain algal organelles; this in
turn will determine their final effects (either elimination or amelioration of
potential damages) on phytoplankton. H3: QDs may enter phytoplankton without an
obvious cell wall through endocytosis while non-vesicle related processes may be
the main mechanisms of entry in phytoplankton with cell walls. Or QDs may not
necessarily enter cells, but stimulate nonspecifically membrane receptors. H4:
Intracellular Ca2+ signaling plays a universal critical role in stimulus
coupling of activation in a broad variety of cell responses. The potential
interactions of QDs with phytoplankton cells could trigger intracellular Ca2+
elevation leading to exocytosis and/or endocytosis. In order to test these four
hypotheses, five different phytoplankton species will be screened first for
their ability to produce EPS and to uptake ENs intracellularly. After an initial
screening, two of the five species will be chosen for further mechanistic
research on their interactions with QDs, which will be the EN of choice. EN
subcellular distribution as well as the excretion of ENs and EPS out of the
phytoplankton cells via a Ca2+-mediated secretion process will also be examined.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Besides contributing to our knowledge of ENs' behavior and
toxicity in aquatic systems, toxicity responses of phytoplankton, and importance
of relative hydrophobicity/hydrophilicity of EPS in changing stability and fate
of ENs, the outcome of this research will also contribute to the knowledge base
for policy-making of ENs regulations, and will enhance training programs at
TAMUG and UC Merced for postdoctoral fellows, graduate and undergraduate
students. It will also contribute to increased awareness in the scientific,
academic and local communities of the environmental risks associated with this
developing technology.