* 0932114
* CPS: Medium: Collaborative Research: The Foundations of Implicit and Explicit Communication in Cyberphysical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Venkatesh Saligrama, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2014
* USD 433,430.00

Proposal Title: CPS:Medium:Collaborative Research: The Foundations of
Implicit&lt;br/&gt;and Explicit Communication in Cyberphysical
Systems&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of California-
Berkeley&lt;br/&gt;Abstract Date: 07/30/09&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
research is to develop the theoretical&lt;br/&gt;foundations for understanding
implicit and explicit&lt;br/&gt;communication within cyber-physical systems. The
approach is&lt;br/&gt;two-fold: (a) developing new information-theoretic tools
to&lt;br/&gt;reveal the essential nature of implicit communication in
a&lt;br/&gt;manner analogous to (and compatible with) classical
network&lt;br/&gt;information theory; (b) viewing the wireless ecosystem
itself&lt;br/&gt;as a cyber-physical system in which spectrum is the
physical&lt;br/&gt;substrate that is manipulated by heterogeneous
interacting&lt;br/&gt;cyber-systems that must be certified to meet safety
and&lt;br/&gt;performance objectives.&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this
project comes from the&lt;br/&gt;transformative technical approaches being
developed. The key to&lt;br/&gt;understanding implicit communication is a
conceptual&lt;br/&gt;breakthrough in attacking the unsolved 40-year-old
Witsenhausen&lt;br/&gt;counterexample by using an approximate-optimality
paradigm&lt;br/&gt;combined with new ideas from sphere-packing and cognitive
radio&lt;br/&gt;channels. These techniques open up radically new
mathematical&lt;br/&gt;avenues to attack distributed-control problems that have
long&lt;br/&gt;been considered fundamentally intractable. They guide
the&lt;br/&gt;development of nonlinear control strategies that are
provably&lt;br/&gt;orders-of-magnitude better than the best linear strategies.
The&lt;br/&gt;keys to understanding explicit communication in cyber-
physical&lt;br/&gt;systems are new approaches to active learning, detection,
and&lt;br/&gt;estimation in distributed environments that combine worst-
case&lt;br/&gt;and probabilistic elements.&lt;br/&gt;Beyond the many diverse
applications (the Internet, the smart&lt;br/&gt;grid, intelligent
transportation, etc.) of heterogeneous&lt;br/&gt;cyber-physical systems
themselves, this research reaches out to&lt;br/&gt;wireless policy: allowing the
principled formulation of&lt;br/&gt;government regulations for next-generation
networks. Graduate&lt;br/&gt;students (including female ones) and postdoctoral
scholars will&lt;br/&gt;be trained and research results incorporated into both
the&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate and graduate curricula.&lt;br/&gt;NATIONAL SCIENCE
FOUNDATION&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Proposal:0932410 PI Name:Sahai,
Anant&lt;br/&gt;Printed from