* 0932905
* Implementation of Intermediate-Band Solar Cells using Multi-Band Semiconductors
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Oscar Dubon, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Ram Gupta
* 08/31/2012
* USD 350,000.00

0932905&lt;br/&gt;Wu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Summary&lt;br/&gt;The project is aimed at the full
demonstration of an intermediate-band solar cell based on the recently
discovered multi-band semiconductor alloy AlyGa1-yAs1-xNx. The research to be
undertaken targets fundamental questions in photovoltaics science and
technology. Can the Shockley-Queisser limit of photovoltaic efficiency in a
single p-n junction be overcome? What new paradigms in solar-cell operation can
be realized in a single-phase material through electronic structure engineering?
The broader objectives of this program are to train undergraduate and graduate
students as well as postdoctoral researchers in a collaborative environment, to
transfer research innovations and concepts in energy science and policy to the
classroom, and to engage the surrounding community, specifically elementary
school children, in discussions and learning around energy sustainability and
the role of technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. If successful,
this research program will lead to the highest ever photovoltaic efficiency,
exceeding 35%, in single-junction, single-phase solar cells. Such an achievement
would produce significant advancements in the understanding of solar cells based
on intermediate bands - a promising device architecture that has been predicted
but not yet demonstrated to yield high energy conversion efficiency, hence,
potentially at much lower cost than highly efficient multi-junction solar cells.
Demonstration of an intermediate-band solar cell using the multi-band
semiconductor AlyGa1-yAs1-xNx epitaxially integrated into a conventional p-n
junction will promote innovations in semiconductor thin-film growth and device
processing. New knowledge concerning the materials physics of the multi-band
semiconductors will be gained. The interaction of such a multi-band system with
broad-spectrum photons has not been fully characterized and understood.
Therefore, a significant portion of the proposed activities will be devoted to
elucidating the photo-physics and thermodynamics of charge carriers in this
novel materials system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The transformation
of sunlight into electrical energy using photovoltaics has captured the
imagination of not only scientists, engineers and technologists but also the
public at large. Solar cell research provides exciting opportunities to engage
future innovators in energy science and technology at all levels. The proposed
research and education program at U.C. Berkeley will provide invaluable training
and opportunities for learning to students at all stages, from elementary school
to the postdoctoral level, in the San Francisco Bay Area. As an emerging
industry, energy technology will experience tremendous growth, making the
infusion of diversity now a critical action. The proposed outreach activities
will be targeted to promoting diversity in the energy sector by the training and
mentoring of scholars from diverse backgrounds.