* 0932511
* Liquid Membranes in Nanopores with Strip Dispersion for Antibiotic Recovery
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Winston Ho, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Rosemarie D. Wesson
* 08/31/2011
* USD 205,558.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0932511&lt;br/&gt;Ho&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/
&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent advances in enzymatic synthetic methods using biocatalysts
have lead to environmentally friendly production methods of beta-lactam
antibiotics. These methods have been limited in their industrial use due to the
difficult separation of the desired antibiotic from other components of the
reaction mixture. The development of a simple and easy to operate separation
process for antibiotic recovery from aqueous solutions and fermentation broths
would eliminate a major drawback of enzymatic antibiotic production. The
research proposed will focus on the recovery of antibiotics from fermentation
broths using supported liquid membranes with strip dispersion. The proposed
process will recover and concentrate antibiotics in a simple manner, while
providing long-term stability, which is a requirement for industrial use. This
process combines extraction and back-extraction, carried out in 2 separate steps
in conventional extraction processes, into a one-step membrane process. This one
step process not only simplifies the separation process, but also eliminates the
needs for the extractor and the back extractor. This process also overcomes the
thermodynamic solubility limitation of solvent. Thus, this process will have
both significant capital and energy savings. The recovery of Cephalexin will be
studied extensively on a laboratory scale to determine important factors in the
separation process. The understanding of the mass transfer mechanism involving
interfacial complexation reactions and complex diffusion and the development of
mathematical models that describe the mass transfer suitable for scale-up are
also goals of this work. Once the recovery of Cephalexin is fully understood,
similar processes for other antibiotics will be developed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Supported liquid membranes with strip dispersion have
never been used in comprehensive studies involving the recovery of antibiotics
or biochemicals. The proposed separation scheme provides an efficient and stable
separation process. Long-term stability is the key obstacle in commercialization
of liquid membrane processes. This research not only is of a great scientific
interest in the fundamental understanding of the transport mechanism but also
may provide an improved separation scheme of significant technological
importance. We believe that it represents a significant contribution to
expanding the scientific knowledge and understanding in the science and
technology of antibiotic separation/recovery. This work also provides the
education of the students involved with such kind of research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The resulting work will have immediate impacts on the
industrial production of antibiotics. The proposed one-step process will save
energy, reduce costs, eliminate toxic solvents, and operate at higher
efficiencies compared to current industrial processes used for antibiotic
separation. These improvements will foster the industrial use of enzymatic
synthetic methods for antibiotic production. This process also has potential for
the effective separation of other organic acids from fermentation broths such as
lactic acid, citric acid, and propionic acid and for the recovery of other
organic compounds including bio ethanol and butanol.