* 0932423
* CPS:  Small:   Real-time, Simulation-based Planning and Asynchronous Coordination for Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Kostas Bekris, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 08/31/2013
* USD 599,970.00

CPS:Small: Real-time, Simulation-based Planning and Asynchronous Coordination
for Cyber-Physical Systems

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The objective of this research is to investigate how to replace human decision-
making with computational intelligence at a scale not possible before and in
applications such as manufacturing, transportation, power-systems and bio-
sensors. The approach is to build upon recent contributions in algorithmic
motion planning, sensor networks and other fields so as to identify general
solutions for planning and coordination in networks of cyber-physical systems.

The intellectual merit of the project lies in defining a planning framework,
which integrates simulation to utilize its predictive capabilities, and focuses
on safety issues in real-time planning problems. The framework is extended to
asynchronous coordination by utilizing distributed constraint optimization
protocols and dealing with inconsistent state estimates among networked agents.
Thus, the project addresses the frequent lack of well-behaved mathematical
models for complex systems, the challenges of dynamic and partially-observable
environments, and the difficulties in synchronizing and maintaining a unified,
global world state estimate for multiple devices over a large-scale network.

The broader impact involves the development and dissemination of new algorithms
and open-source software. Research outcomes will be integrated to teaching
efforts and undergraduate students will be involved in research.
Underrepresented groups will be encouraged to participate, along with students
from the Davidson Academy of Nevada, a free public high school for gifted
students. At a societal level, this project will contribute towards achieving
flexible manufacturing floors, automating the transportation infrastructure,
autonomously delivering drugs to patients and mitigating cascading failures of
the power network. Collaboration with domain experts will assist in realizing
this impact.