* 0932735
* Rheology of dense sheared granular mixtures: computational and experimental studies on the effects of particle size distributions
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2014
* Kimberly Hill, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* William Olbricht
* 06/30/2014
* USD 299,202.00

Proposal Number: 0932735&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Hill,
Kimberly&lt;br/&gt;Affiliation: University of Minnesota&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
central research goal is to determine the governing features of the rheology of
dense granular mixtures. Recent advances in rheological models for monodisperse
dense granular materials do not have a mechanism to incorporate the effect of
local particle size distributions on the rheology of mixtures. The rheological
properties are dependent on species concentration, further complicated by the
fact that particulate mixtures tend to unmix. Typically, expressions for the
rheology of dense granular flows have an explicit dependence on particle size,
though the representative particle size for a mixture is not obvious. In many
cases average particle size is not sufficient for predicting general rheological
trends. This research will address the question of the dependence of rheology of
granular mixtures on particle size distribution. Computational simulations will
be performed using the Distinct Element Method (DEM) for soft spheres. Boundary
conditions will include free surface gravity-driven flows and constant pressure
and constant volume boundary-driven shear cells to investigate the importance of
associated boundary effects. Experiments will include Couette shear flow and
free-surface gravity-driven flows in small and large rotating drums. Boundary
force and digital image analysis will validate many computations. Particle size
distributions will include binary mixtures of distinct sizes and concentrations,
tertiary mixtures, and, ultimately, multiple sizes. Particle size distribution
will be investigated, including the effect of mean, median and standard
deviations of the particle sizes. Other considerations are the average Veronoi
volume fractions and probability distribution functions of interparticle forces
as they depend on particle size distributions and flow conditions. Better
understanding of dense particulate mixtures is applicable to powder processing
and mixing, prediction and mitigation of debris flows, and environmental
restoration of rivers and streams. Including undergraduates from
underrepresented groups in research will better train future civil engineers for
developing longer-term successful solutions to relevant engineering problems.
Related teaching materials will be developed for K-12 teachers and their
students at the National Center for Earth-surface Dynamics' (NCED)
gidakiimanaaniwigamig (Our Earth Lodge) summer camps and after-school
programming at the Fond du Lac Tribal and Community College near Duluth,
Minnesota.