* 0932611
* Ultra-Broadband Plasmon-Polariton Crystals for Label-Free Single Molecule Detection
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Hooman Mohseni, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Revzin
* 08/31/2012
* USD 196,645.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0932611&lt;br/&gt;Mohseni
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF award by the Biosensing /CBET program supports
work by Professor Hooman Mohseni at Northwestern University to study a novel
nano-structure called "Plasmon-Polariton Crystal" and to explore the possibility
of detecting single molecules without attaching chemical labels to them. The
main goal of this research is to explore the unique properties of the Plasmon-
Polariton Crystal and achieve a very large optical bandwidth, exceeding several
Tera Hertz, as well as a very large Purcel's constant. Unlike the existing
photonic resonators and cavities that rely on a very large quality factor to
achieve a high sensitivity, the proposed Plasmon Polariton Crystal has a small
quality factor that leads to a very large bandwidth and the possibility of
spectral fingerprint sensing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, PI plans to use
detailed three-dimensional electromagnetic simulations to optimize the proposed
structure for a practical realization using conventional dielectric and metal
layers. PI also plans to fabricate such structures using advanced micro and
nano-processing tools. Finally, the most important optical properties leading to
an understanding of the device bandwidth and Purcell constant will be
measured.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposed research advances the physics of rapidly
growing plasmonic devices. With a sensing volume in the Zepto-litter range, and
a very large cavity coupling over large bandwidth, the proposed nano-structure
could impact a wide range of fields such as single-molecule detection, cavity
quantum electrodynamics, and quantum dot single-photon sources. &lt;br/&gt;