* 0932592
* Collaborative Research:  Assistive Object Manipulation via RFID Guided Robots
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Charles Kemp, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ted A. Conway
* 08/31/2012
* USD 204,532.00

PI: Kemp, Charles C. in collaboration with Reynolds, Matthew S. Proposal Number:
0932592 in collaboration with 0931924

For millions of people, motor impairments diminish quality of life, reduce
independence, and increase healthcare costs. Assistive mobile robots that
manipulate objects within everyday settings have the potential to improve
quality of life by augmenting people's abilities with a cooperative robot. In
spite of this promising opportunity, autonomous mobile robots are not yet robust
enough for daily operation in real homes. The proposed research directly
addresses the challenges of achieving this competence through novel, innovative
research that combines RFID-based sensing with autonomous mobile manipulation.
Key insights of the proposed work are that the current range of ultra-high
frequency passive RFID 'smart labels' makes it feasible for robots to read them
from across a room and that their low cost (sub-$0.25) means they can be
ubiquitously attached to important objects throughout the home. The unambiguous
digital signals available from tagged objects could be profoundly enabling for
an assistive robot in three ways which this research will investigate and
exploit: (1) scanning a room to provide reliable unique identification of
important tagged objects so the robot can provide the user with a menu of
available objects and be informed about the objects (e.g., their appearance and
appropriate manipulative actions) (2) long-range localization of a tagged object
based on its signal characteristics so the robot can approach the object and (3)
short-range localization and identification through novel finger-mounted
antennas to help the robot manipulate the object, including grasping it and
confirming that it has been grasped. We will research these transformative
capabilities for assistive robots in the context of object retrieval. Our
studies with physically-impaired patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
(ALS) from the Emory ALS Center clearly demonstrate that object retrieval via an
autonomous mobile robot would be a valued assistive technology, and these
capabilities could serve as a foundation upon which other assistive services
could be built. We will evaluate the RFID guided robot that results from this
research with ALS patients. The robot will include a novel menu-driven user
interface that will enable a physically-impaired user to easily select an object
and an appropriate delivery method. After this selection, the robot will find,
approach, grasp, and deliver the requested object.

Intellectual Merit The proposed research will yield novel RFID signal processing
strategies and antenna designs, and novel robot localization and manipulation
behaviors that significantly advance the state of the art. This will result in a
transformative understanding of RFID as a new modality for robot perception.
Through our collaboration with patients at the Emory ALS Center we will continue
to obtain feedback to guide the research and maximize its real-world value,
which will in turn lead to new insights into how robots can best assist this
target population.

Broader Impacts This research will strengthen the collaboration between
researchers at Georgia Tech, researchers at Duke, and patients from the Emory
ALS Center. This unique collaboration will accelerate progress in this highly
promising area of assistive technology. The proposed research will also promote
a new collaboration with the Quality of Life Technology Center at CMU, with whom
we will work closely to transfer all developed technologies (hardware and
software) via opensource models. We will continue our commitment to the
education of under-represented minorities through our participation in Georgia
Tech's SURE and Duke's REU programs. By involving all students in the patient
studies, this research will enhance their education and increase the pool of
talent trained to innovate in this area.