* 0932762
* Molecular basis of enzyme-catalyzed pehydrolysis of acetate esters for pretreatment of lignocellulosic biomass
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Jonathan Schilling, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Ram Gupta
* 08/31/2013
* USD 300,005.00

0932762&lt;br/&gt;Kazlauskas&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Summary&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Replacing the current biofuels feedstock - corn - with
lignocellulosic biomass such as wood, switchgrass or agricultural wastes is a
key current goal of bioenergy research. Recalcitrance - inefficient release of
sugars from lignocellulosic biomass - is the key problem that must be solved to
make this replacement. The proposed solution is an unnatural enzyme-catalyzed
reaction to make a strong oxidant peracetic acid. The objective for this
application is a molecular-level understanding of an unnatural enzyme-catalyzed
reaction - perhydrolysis of esters to form peracetic acid. The central
hypothesis is that precise positioning of hydrogen bond donors or acceptors
within the active site selectively deactivates water, thus favoring hydrogen
peroxide. The PIs have formulated this hypothesis based on the comparison of
x-ray crystal structures of enzymes with different abilities to make peracetic
acid. The test for this hypothesis will be to correlate the structure and
kinetics of perhydrolysis and to design new enzyme variants that make high
concentrations of peracetic acid for pretreatment of lignocellulosic biomass.
Intellectual Merit: The intellectual merit includes first the molecular-level
understanding of how to design enzyme catalyzed non-natural reactions. It will
contribute to the research frontier catalytic promiscuity where enzymes catalyze
several distinct chemical reactions. Learning how to favor one or another
reaction gives insight into the natural process of divergent enzyme evolution
and will deepen our understanding of the subtleties of enzymatic
catalysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The proposed research will
generate new fundamental knowledge on the molecular basis of how catalytic
activity of enzymes can evolve to new catalytic activities and contribute to the
understanding of the mechanisms of oxidation of proteins. The proposed research
will contribute to the discovery of efficient routes to peracetic acid to remove
lignin to convert lignocellulosic biomass to fuels. The proposed research will
educate and train undergraduate students, graduate students and postdoctoral
fellows, including students from underrepresented groups in chemical sciences.
For the last three years, the PI participates in the Common X-Change program in
Saint Paul public schools, which teaches experimental science at the elementary
school level. The science teacher partner in this project over the last four
years, Ms. Henriette Ngo-Bissoy, an African-American woman, and many of the
students in the classes are from underrepresented groups in science. The co-PI,
Tschirner, teaches a two week all day summer workshop titled "Topics in Natural
Resources: Renewable energy and Bioproducts" for twenty high school teachers.
About half of the class is hands-on experiments, inquiry based teaching that is
suitable for classroom teaching. The proposed research will also support
international cooperation of visitors from Europe and Asia to the PI's
laboratories.