* 0932656
* GOALI: Molecular Modeling of Confined Nano-Phases and Novel Nano-Porous Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Keith Gubbins, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Eddie Chang
* 09/30/2013
* USD 399,000.00

0932656 Gubbins

This is a GOALI project involving university-industry collaboration between
researchers at North Carolina State University (NCSU) and at Quantachrome
Instruments, a leading maker of instruments for characterizing nano-structured
materials. The aim of this project is to develop and apply atomistic simulation
methods to obtain realistic atomic models for several new classes of synthetic
nanoporous materials, and to use these to investigate confined phases within
these materials and to assist in optimization of the materials for specific
applications. The materials to be studied are carbide-derived carbons,
mesoporous carbons and silicas, and hierarchical carbons and silicas. These
materials hold promise for energy-related applications in hydrogen storage,
catalysis, microelectronics (mesoporous silicas), and as electrodes in fuel
cells, batteries and supercapacitors (carbide-derived carbons, mesoporous and
hierarchical carbons). Accurate and realistic atomic models of these materials
are essential to the development of optimal material designs for these
applications.

Preparation of these materials and experimental studies of structure and
adsorption on them will be performed by researchers at Quantachrome Instruments,
and this data will be provided to the NCSU researchers. Quantachrome scientists
will also offer advice on directions for the modeling work carried out at NCSU.
The NCSU researchers will develop and test a new simulation methodology, Hybrid
Reverse Molecular Dynamics, for building realistic atomistic models of these
materials. Monte Carlo and molecular dynamics simulations will be carried out to
study adsorption in these materials, and of diffusion in the carbide-derived
carbons and hierarchical carbons and silicas. In the case of the carbon
materials, molecular simulations will be carried out to determine their
performance as supercapacitors, including studies of capacitance, power density
and diffusion in the pore structures, with the aim of understanding the
influence of pore design on performance.

Intellectual Merit. Because these novel materials are not crystalline, a
combination of atomistic simulation and experiment provides the best route to
developing realistic atomic models of them. Existing models of such materials
assume over-simplified pore geometries (slit or cylinder shaped) and are
inadequate for predicting the behavior of adsorbed phases. The realistic models
that are being developed will make possible fundamental investigations of the
influence of confinement and nature of the material on adsorption, phase
changes, diffusion, reactions and electrode performance.

Broader Impact. Improved understanding of the behavior of nano-phases confined
within these novel nano-porous materials will impact a broad range of
technologies, and is essential to the design of new biological and chemical
sensors, nano-reactors, hydrogen storage media, electrodes for fuel cells and
batteries, and nano-structured catalysts. Graduate and undergraduate students
working on this project will learn modern multi-scale modeling methods, and will
gain experience of international cooperative research through our active
collaborations in this area with researchers in Japan, Poland, China and Hong
Kong. Graduate students from under-represented groups will be recruited through
a bridging program and an existing AGEP program with nearby HBCUs.