* 0932415
* Combustion of Fuel Hydrates
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Peter Taborek, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Ruey-Hung Chen
* 08/31/2012
* USD 332,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;AWARD&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title:
Combustion of Fuel Hydrates&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Dunn-Rankin, Derek
. &lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of California-Irvine &lt;br/&gt;Proposal
No: CBET-0932415 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on the combustion
science involved in burning gas hydrates, a major potential energy resource. Gas
hydrates are ice-like crystalline solids that encapsulate guest gas molecules
like methane. A significant storehouse of methane is in the form of methane
hydrates on the sea floor and in the arctic permafrost. These fuel hydrates
represent an important intersection of energy and environmental concerns.
Methane has a beneficial potential impact on climate change as a fuel because it
makes less CO2 than any other hydrocarbon, but if released, its negative impact
is significant because unreacted methane is a powerful greenhouse gas.
Combustion of hydrate deposits is being considered both to release the natural
gas and for direct energy conversion. In addition, hydrates are being examined
as efficient forms for storage and transport of natural gas. The potential fire
hazards of such uses can be significant. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
measure the combustion properties of methane, propane, and mixed gas hydrates.
Although there is a broad scientific literature and understanding of the
physical properties of hydrates and their formation kinetics, there is very
little research on their combustion properties. Sample photographs of burning
fuel hydrates demonstrate flammability, but these photographs contain none of
the important standard combustion-behavior information. Fuel gas hydrates will
be molded into pellets mounted on thin supports or dispersed as a snow. The
hydrates will then be ignited for measuring key combustion properties such as
surface regression rate, water melted versus evaporated, flame standoff
distance, combustion temperatures and the formation of soot. The results will be
contrasted with the classical results for the combustion of single-component
droplets and porous-sphere diffusion flames. One of the key differences between
conventional fuels and a hydrate form is that for hydrates the internal kinetics
controlling gas release and diffusion to the surface are likely to be important.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond the focused contribution to graduate education and
research, the project will reach and encourage younger students through three
programs at the University of California Irvine: LSAMP (Alliance for Minority
Participation), UROP (Undergraduate Research Opportunities), and COSMOS (Summer
Science Camp). At least one LSAMP student will participate on the project each
year, and undergraduate research is an integral part of the work. The burning
ice experiments developed in this project will be used in the precollege UCI
COSMOS program, a summer residential activity for talented high school students
interested in science and technology.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;