* 0932542
* Student Design Projects to Aid Hearing Impaired at The University of Texas at Dallas
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Nasser Kehtarnavaz, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Ted A. Conway
* 09/30/2013
* USD 128,445.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-
5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0932542&lt;br/&gt;Torlak&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&g
t;The aim of this proposal is to implement a highly focused program at The
University of Texas at Dallas that enables seniors enrolled in senior design
projects in the Department of Electrical Engineering (EE) to partner with
clinical collaborators from The Callier Center for Communication Disorders and
explore new ideas for improving access, integration and quality of life for
persons with hearing disabilities. The Callier Center for Communication
Disorders at the University of Texas at Dallas is a multifaceted, university
based institution containing a large number of interdisciplinary programs. This
effort will combine a unique blend of resources, personnel, and NIH-sponsored
projects in The Department of Electrical Engineering and Callier Center for
engineering seniors to understand the bases, treatments, and technology for
persons with hearing impairments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the proposed design program is to encourage
collaboration for senior engineering students with Audiology students, persons
with impaired hearing, and research faculty to identify assistive technology
needs and to collectively design new or improve upon existing assistive devices
and technology. Most design projects will be identified based on the interaction
between the engineering students and persons with impaired hearing under the
supervision of Callier faculty and engineering faculty. Some design projects
will be dedicated to improve ongoing clinical efforts and to support the
training of audiologists. At the conclusion of the design sequence the
engineering students will have experienced the most sophisticated techniques for
evaluating hearing and auditory processing disorders and gained experience with
advanced technology for reducing speech recognition deficits caused by hearing
loss through completing an assistive hearing technology or equipment
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Every year five senior
design projects will be offered to Electrical Engineering students. We will
include faculty and doctoral students from The Callier Center for Communication
Disorders as clinical advisors on project teams. The students in this program
will be asked to attend monthly seminars about ethics in medical research and
regulatory process of medical devices. Potential projects include Bluetooth/Wi-
Fi based assistive listening systems, hands-free Bluetooth interface for
cochlear implants, portable software-defined cochlear implant processors, self-
test system for hearing aid users, auditory training software on portable
digital players, cortical auditory evoke potential (CAEP) recorder to auditory
stimuli, and real-time signal processing system deployed in cochlear implants.
Innovative student designs will be presented at engineering education
conferences and published in engineering education or rehabilitation engineering
journals. Upon completion of the project, students will have gained valuable
experience in conducting research/development that will prepare them to continue
on to more in-depth research opportunities in fields related to hearing
impairments, or any other disability. The proposed program aims at producing
engineers who will be able to pursue the next generation of research challenges
in assistive technologies that will improve the quality of life of not only
hearing impaired listeners, but of those with other disabilities in ways never
before imagined.