* 0932941
* Elucidating the Flow Structure and Addressing Modeling Issues in Turbulent Boundary Layers Based on Multiscale, 3D Velocity Measurements
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Joseph Katz, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Dimitrios Papavassiliou
* 08/31/2013
* USD 460,000.00

Katz&lt;br/&gt;0932941&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High Reynolds number turbulent
boundary layers continue to pose major scientific and technological challenges
due to their inherently complex couplings of dynamics across many length and
time scales. Integration of recently introduced techniques enables 3D high-
resolution volumetric velocity measurements across a range of scales, from very
near the wall to the outer part of the boundary layer. The objective of this
study is to experimentally investigate interactions among buffer layer vortices
and outer (inertial) layer, larger-scale structures above a smooth wall at
moderate to high Reynolds numbers. Data analysis will examine effects of mean
flow acceleration and local instantaneous pressure gradients on the
characteristics of buffer layer vortices and their effects on turbulence
statistics. The study will also address fundamental Large-Eddy Simulation (LES)
issues in wall-bounded flows, especially modeling of wall shear stresses in
terms of large-scale features that are resolved in LES, and impact of
unsteadiness, local pressure gradient, and instantaneous streamwise curvature on
the wall stress. Finally, the PIs will develop a systematic method for
determining the length-scale required for fully resolving the inner boundary
layer flow, both experimentally and numerically. The multi-scale velocity
measurements will be performed by simultaneously implementing two state-of-the-
art, 3D flow measurement techniques: Relatively "coarse" measurements will be
performed using tomographic particle image velocimetry (PIV) at a spatial
resolution of 0.5mm. High-resolution velocity measurements near the wall within
part of the coarse volume will be performed using digital holographic microscopy
(DHM), at a spatial resolution of 20 um. Also, using recently introduced
procedures, four-exposure DHM will measure the instantaneous distribution of
material acceleration, and provide the local pressure gradients. Experiments
will be performed in the optically index-matched facility at JHU that enables
unobstructed near-wall measurements, even near rough walls and curved boundaries
used for generating mean pressure gradients. In-line DHM, a high-resolution flow
measurement technique recently developed in the PIs' laboratory, involves
acquisition of in-line holograms of a seeded flow by a digital camera. Numerical
reconstruction and particle tracking provide the 3D velocity distribution. The
present optical setup and data analysis procedures will be further developed for
simultaneous application with tomographic PIV. DHM extends the depth of field of
a conventional microscope by 3 orders of magnitude, and may revolutionize
microscopy in many other fields that require measurements of 3D dynamic
processes as in swimming of bacterial suspensions. The PIs have been active in
disseminating holographic microscopy by providing software, training and follow-
up assistance to personnel in several academic laboratories, including Rutgers,
LSU and VA Tech. The PIs will continue their long-term commitment to and record
of success at involving undergraduate students in laboratory and field research,
as part of the PIs' effort to motivate them to pursue graduate education. The
PIs will also continue engaging high school students from Baltimore Polytechnic
in an extensive, yearlong research experience as part of their Research
Practicum.