* 0932116
* Evaluation of Continuous Flow Ultraviolet Light Emitting Diode
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Joel Ducoste, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 08/31/2014
* USD 356,795.00

0932116&lt;br/&gt;Ducoste&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
plan seeks to integrate bench-scale and pilot-scale experimental and numerical
techniques for comprehensive characterization of an ultraviolet light emitting
diode (UV LED) continuous flow reactor. Data from these experiments will provide
the necessary information to develop and validate a computational fluid dynamics
(CFD) model of a UV LED disinfection system. The validated CFD model will be
combined with a heuristic optimization routine to construct an efficient
continuous flow UV LED system based on desired optimality criteria (i.e.,
minimize the total power input while achieving the required effluent log
inactivation or maximize the effluent log inactivation given a target total
power input). Overall, this research will allow engineers to determine whether
UV LED based continuous flow UV reactor systems can achieve high disinfection
system efficiencies and offer an alternative technology that replaces mercury
vapor UV lamps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acceptance of UV as an effective
disinfection process for treating drinking water sources and its potential use
in water reuse applications have led to considerable growth over the last 10
years. Such growth has ignited researchers to improve the effectiveness of UV
reactor designs and perform research to discover novel ways to increase the
power output of low pressure lamps, improve the efficiency of low and medium
pressure lamps, increase the lamp operating life, and develop new UV emission
sources. However, a majority of the UV lamp technologies contain mercury, which
is considered hazardous waste and poses environmental and public health threats
if not properly disposed or if lamps are broken. Lamp breakage may occur during
the transportation or installation of the lamps within the treatment process as
well as by a foreign object strike while the UV system is in operation. Other UV
light technologies that have emerged (i.e., pulsed and excimer lamps and UV
LEDs) do not contain mercury. However, little research has been performed with
UV LEDs to assess their capabilities as an effective UV emission light source
within continuous flow UV systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program
proposes to examine the UV disinfection efficiency of UV LED continuous flow
reactors by 1) performing collimated beam experimental tests that determine the
UV response of target non-pathogenic microorganisms and UV sensitive
fluorescence microspheres at multiple UV LED wavelengths, 2) developing a
numerical model that describes the UV LED light distribution, UV dose
distribution, and microbial log inactivation of continuous flow UV LED reactors,
3) performing pilot-scale experiments on a UV LED reactor over a range of flows
and UV transmittance to validate numerical models, and 4) developing an optimal
UV LED reactor based on the output from a combined optimization routine and CFD
model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research represents one of the first
comprehensive and direct efforts to quantify the disinfection performance of a
distributed point light source within a continuous flow UV reactor that may lead
to improved disinfection efficiencies without geometric constraints due to
incorporation of a cylindrical light source. Previous studies have only
investigated UV LEDs with bench scale tests to assess either log inactivation of
E-coli or the degradation of phenol under advance oxidation conditions with
peroxide. The proposed study is a necessary first step to evaluating this
alternative UV light source as a benign replacement to current mercury vapor UV
lamps in continuous flow systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
contribute to the education of one PhD and one MS student in Environmental
Engineering. These students will be selected from the pool of applicants to the
Civil, Construction, and Environmental Engineering (CCEE) Department, with
special consideration for applicants from under-represented groups. The graduate
students will be extensively involved in all areas of research: 1) experimental
design, setup, and execution, 2) development and execution of numerical
simulations, 3) presentation of research results at national and international
conferences and peer reviewed publications. The graduate students will be
trained in many disciplines (chemical engineering, microbiology, and
computational modeling) due to the proposed research approach. It is essential
that future engineers receive interdisciplinary training given the complex
nature of environmental problems. This project clearly requires knowledge in
microbiology, reaction engineering, parameter estimation, and numerical
programming. A partnership involving Sensor Electronic Technologies, a UV LED
manufacturer, will help ensure the success of the various phases involved in
this research.