* 0932026
* Collaborative Research: Experimental Studies to Reveal the Boundary Layer Control Mechanisms of Shark Skin
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Philip Motta, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Dimitrios Papavassiliou
* 08/31/2012
* USD 113,518.00

Motta &lt;br/&gt;0932026 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This experimental work will study
a new and unique passive boundary-layer separation control methodology derived
from shark skin, functioning at the micro-scale level. The skin and denticles
(scales) of sharks represent over 400 million years of natural selection for
swimming efficiency. Evolutionary adaptations in the morphological structure of
the shark skin, to develop unique boundary layer control (BLC) mechanisms, stem
from the ensuing decrease in drag, probable increase in fin performance (e.g.
thrust production) and enhanced turning agility for fast-swimming sharks.
Previous work, confirmed by the PIs, has shown the capability for shark
denticles to bristle. The PI discovered that a bristled microgeometry results in
the formation of a system of interlocking embedded cavity vortices. Three
mechanisms are hypothesized which lead to boundary layer control via deterrence
of separation over the shark skin. The first mechanism is the formation of
embedded micro-vortices that increase momentum in the very near-wall region due
to the partial slip condition resulting on the outer boundary layer flow. The
second mechanism is that the preferential flow direction inherent in the surface
geometry inhibits global flow reversal. The third mechanism, occurring during
transitioning and turbulent boundary layer conditions, involves an exchange of
flow with the cavities resulting in turbulence augmentation, or an additional
energizing of flow in the near-wall region and cavities. The study involves
engineers, working together with biologists, to fully comprehend the
morphological bristling mechanism of shark denticles. This study will provide
the first comprehensive characterization of the morphological mechanism
resulting in denticle bristling and will classify the scope and degree (or
angle) of bristling, yielding data for the building of shark skin models for
hydrodynamic testing. The three passive BLC mechanisms will be evaluated through
flow visualization and measurement using Time-Resolved Digital Particle Image
Velocimetry (TR-DPIV). Innovations in the field of BLC are needed to provide
efficient methodologies to decrease drag (resulting in increased payload, range
or fuel savings), improve performance of control surfaces and enhance turning
agility of modern technologies (e.g., submarines, aircraft). Dissemination of
results will occur in journals/conference proceedings and the public media (e.g.
Discovery Channel Canada). Undergraduate student involvement will take place
through participation with two NSF REU programs (University of Alabama and Mote
Marine Laboratory) with a focus on involving underrepresented groups; an REU
supplement will also be sought to involve additional underrepresented
undergraduates. Finally, the results from this research will be incorporated
into educational outreach programs/exhibits at the Mote Marine Laboratory on
sharks by the co-PIs and at the McWane Science Center in Birmingham, AL by the
PI. Outreach through these two outlets alone should educate over 700,000 people
each year about the drag-reducing properties of shark skin.