* 0932992
* Acquisition of SEM-EDX and upgrade of petrographic microscopy to enhance rapid sediment characterization at LacCore, the National Lacustrine Core Facility
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2011
* Amy Myrbo, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2011
* USD 142,897.00

0932992&lt;br/&gt;Ito&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5)." This
proposal will fund a petrographic microscopy system and an SEM-EDX upgrade for
rapid sediment core characterization at the Lacustrine Core Facility. The SEM
with EDX/EDS elemental analysis will be user friendly and table top to
facilitate core analysis. The LacCore facility will be able to offer new
capabilities for characterizing new and stored cores. The main advantage of the
currently requested instrument is that the PIs will be able to better
characterize sediment cores in a non-invasive manner. This will facilitate
prioritizing core ranges for sub-sampling and expensive detailed analysis. The
proposed petrographic microscope will be used to gain better phase and mineral
orientation information. The instrumentation will be incorporated into a
generalized analysis scheme which will aid in sample prioritization and
efficient analysis. The instrumentation will offer enhanced visualization and
stimulate public outreach and student recruitment. The instruments will be
incorporated into a summer microscopy camp for middle and high school students.
High school students will be trained and allowed to run the instruments. The SEM
will be incorporated into an undergraduate laboratory class at UM.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;