* 0932573
* Understanding the thermal response at short time scales in near-apex regions of a nanoprobe during ultrafast laser irradiation
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Xinwei Wang, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 07/31/2013
* USD 325,002.00

0932573&lt;br/&gt;Sundararajan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the
research is to determine the thermal response of the near-apex region of a
nanoprobe in response to ultrafast laser irradiation. This is an important
aspect of atom probe microscopy measurements and photo-assisted scanning probe
matter manipulation (nanomanufacturing). Current models do not predict
temperatures accurately. Furthermore, identifying exact temperatures in the
near-tip region of the probe is limited by the ability to experimentally verify
the model predictions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The modeling
approach will employ solutions of the Maxwell equation to obtain the optical
field distribution in the vicinity of the probe tip. The energy transport within
the nanoscale probe will be determined using a combined Lattice Boltzmann
methodology and finite element technique. The resulting model will provide
fundamental knowledge regarding the optical intensity distribution inside the
nanoprobe as well as how, and to what extent the near-field laser heating
affects probe temperatures. Experimental validation of the model will be
achieved via laser assisted atom probe microscopy
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This research is relevant to
atom-scale characterization of materials using atom probe microscopy as well as
a range of applications involving photo-assisted probe microscopy including but
not limited to nanoscale biological, chemical sensing, and nanomanufacturing.
Undergraduate and graduate education will be enhanced by (1) incorporating the
research results into specific engineering courses (Scanning Probe Microscopy
and Nanoscale Thermal Transport) taught at Iowa State; (2) partnering with
freshman honors and student work-study programs to involve undergraduate
students in the research; (3) mentoring and recruiting women students in
conjunction with the Society of Women Engineers and (4) dissemination of
research results through an on-campus NSF International Materials Institute.