* 0932879
* Research Starter Grant: Building Pacific Islander Homes, Households, and Communities
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Lola Bautista, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 08/31/2012
* USD 49,908.00

This NSF Starter Grant will allow the continuation of a research project called
?Understanding Domestic Space in an Urban Setting: Views from Migrant Women from
the Federated States of Micronesia? undertaken as part of a Postdoctoral
Research Minority Fellowship (NSF 00-139). The postdoctoral project examined
gendered and indigenous understandings of mobility and the household among
migrant women who reside in the Territory of Guam, but come from Chuuk, an
island state in the Federated States of Micronesia (FSM). The focus of this
Starter Grant project stems from experiences and engagements that took place
during the postdoctoral research involving a grassroots movement of Pacific
Islanders acting collectively to establish a desirable built environment and
community. The intellectual merit of the proposed activity is an increased
understanding of Pacific Islander ways of knowing and experiencing urban and
diasporic communities. The newest wave of Pacific Islanders to the United States
and its territories comes from the FSM. They can be found in urbanized places in
the Pacific region, especially in locales such as Hawai`i and the Territory of
Guam, often living in less-than-desirable conditions. Yet little is known about
them. Among other things, this research will produce a story-based documentary
film, a new vehicle for Pacific peoples in urban spaces to express emerging
identities found in community activism as well as a fresh and engaging way for
viewers to better understand Pacific Islander ways of knowing and communicating.
As a model of observation employed here, film will be used both as a cultural
product that explores social issues relating to Pacific Islanders and a social
process that encourages community strengthening and social change. Finally, as a
Pacific Islander scholar studying other Pacific peoples, this research will
yield more nuanced scholarship involving boundaries amongst and between Pacific
Islanders as both indigenous people and ethnic minorities in different island
settings and on different levels of the national and regional context. The
broader impacts of the proposed activity will deepen an understanding of social
issues contemporary Pacific Islanders face, and underscore their resonance
within an increasingly diverse global society. The proposed project incorporates
the focus on migrant women and households featured in my postdoctoral work, and
extends it to include research on Pacific Islander migrants taking civil action
to stay on their land, as well as the social movements and transformations
involved. This combination promises many benefits. A social-issue documentary
offers opportunities to set the public agenda and influence public policy.
First, it increases the visibility and importance of the Pacific and its
peoples. Second, it brings regional and national awareness to diasporic and
migrant groups who are often ignored. Third, it will allow an underrepresented
group to express ways of knowing and manners of thinking through digital and
broadband (internet) media. To help achieve this last objective, the project
will provide internship, training, and employment for two nationals from Chuuk
(FSM), one pursing a PhD in educational technology and another who worked as my
assistant for the postdoctoral project and is currently pursuing a master?s in
social work. Many other Pacific peoples who are represented in the film will be
given opportunities to both critique and participate in post-screening
discussions. Several government organizations headquartered in Hawai`i have a
direct interest in this project and its postdoctoral predecessor. The Department
of Housing and Urban Development would benefit from my research on housing
discrimination, displacement, and homelessness. Findings on infrastructure and
natural disasters preparedness would be of interest to the Environmental Health
Administration, as would public health information on water, sanitation, and
wastewater treatment in urban areas. By better understanding housing
affordability for large, extended family units, the United States Department of
Agriculture could build more effective coalitions with rural communities.
Finally, Hawai`i is an EPSCoR state and falls within the educational directive
of the NSF. If awarded, this project will build on the first postdoctoral
research minority fellowship given to a Pacific Islander and will be the first
Starter Grant made to the University of Hawai`i at Manoa where the PI recently
has been hired as an assistant professor in the Center for Pacific Islands
Studies, School of Pacific and Asian Studies.