* 0932590
* Supply and Demand of Proteins During Neuronal Growth and Extension
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2009,05/31/2012
* Sameer Shah, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Semahat S. Demir
* 05/31/2012
* USD 297,757.00

0932590&lt;br/&gt;Shah&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL
MERIT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the fundamental relationship
between the production, delivery, and demand of neuronal proteins during axonal
growth. The global hypothesis to be tested is that axonal transport and local
protein production are primary suppliers for the resources needed for neuronal
growth, and are regulated in part by the local mechanical environment of the
neuron. This hypothesis will be addressed by using a multidisciplinary approach
involving molecular and cellular biology, high-resolution imaging and image
processing, and cell biomechanics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Any number of candidate
proteins may be selected to study neuronal supply and demand. However, the
specific cargoes to be considered in this project are those essential for
growth, transport, and protein synthesis: mitochondria, responsible for
fulfilling ATP-dependent energetic requirements for the neuron, vacuoles,
responsible for supplying plasma membrane required for expansion of neuronal
surface area; ribosomes, responsible for protein synthesis; and mRNA, which
provides the template transcript for protein
synthesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several aspects of the proposed research are
transformative, including the development of novel engineering approaches to
examine and quantify neurobiological processes, and the use of a systems
approach to understand the subcellular function of neurons. In the long term,
this basic science project has implications for providing a basis for the
progression of neurodegenerative diseases linked to defects in axonal transport,
such as Alzheimer's and Lou Gehrig's Disease (ALS). Additionally, this
bioengineering approach to understanding physiological processes within the
neuron will facilitate a valuable data-driven approach to modeling and
manipulating the dynamics of neuronal cargo supply and demand, and the
allocation of cellular resources. Finally, given the ubiquity of transport
processes in cellular systems, it is expected that general principles identified
from this project will be relevant to the function and dysfunction of non-
neuronal cells. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
addition to the biomedical and basic scientific impacts highlighted above, the
proposed plan also impacts education, research training, and community outreach.
In the classroom, research results will be integrated into two bioengineering
courses based on cell physiology, both of which draw heavily on current research
approaches for their course material. Given the multi-disciplinary nature of the
proposed research, training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate
students from backgrounds in both engineering and biological sciences will be
provided. Thus far, students from multiple backgrounds have successfully been
recruited to the laboratory of the PI, and the continuation of this success is
anticipated based on the emphasis on an open, collaborative work environment.
This cross-disciplinary, team-based approach is critical for training a new
generation of biomedical scientists and bioengineers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Additionally, participation in a variety of outreach
programs will be initiated or continued. A new Neuro-Bioengineering Research
Program (NBRP) will be created, in conjunction with the QUEST program at Eleanor
Roosevelt High School, whose enrollment consists of student populations under-
represented in science and engineering. Implementation has already been started
for portions of this program, which exposes middle and high school students to
career options in bioengineering, introduces them to research methodology and
scientific writing, and provides them with access to state-of-the-art laboratory
facilities. Active participation in the Molecular and Cellular Bioengineering
Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Program will also be continued. It
is a priority to admit students to this program who have limited access to
research opportunities at their home institutions. The vision of the PI is
consistent with that of the Fischell Department of Bioengineering, the Clark
School of Engineering, and the University of Maryland; ultimately, the aim is to
encourage and facilitate the participation of K-12, undergraduate, and graduate
students in multidisciplinary biomedical research, in an effort to attract the
finest students to this exciting field.