* 0932011
* CPS: Small: Programming Environment and Architecture for Situational Awareness and Response
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Robert Fowler, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 06/30/2014
* USD 524,570.00

CPS: Small: Programming Environment and Architecture for Situational Awareness
and Response&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to
investigate and implement a software architecture to improve productivity in the
development of rapidly deployable, robust, real-time situational awareness and
response applications. The approach is based on a modular cross-layered
architecture that combines a data-centric descriptive programming model with an
overlay-based communication model. The cross-layer architecture will promote an
efficient implementation. Simultaneously, the data-centric programming model and
overlay-based communication model will promote a robust implementation that can
take advantage of heterogeneous resources and respond to different
failures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is currently no high-level software
architecture that meets the stringent requirements of many situational awareness
and response applications. The proposed project will fill this void by
developing a novel data-centric programming model that spans devices with
varying computational and communication capabilities. Similarly, the overlay
communication model will extend existing work by integrating network resources
with the programming model. This cross-layer design will promote the
implementation of efficient and robust applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will benefit society by providing emergency responders with software
tools that present key information in a timely fashion. This, in turn, will
increase safety and reduce economic and human loss during emergencies. The
productivity gains in deploying sensors and mobile devices will benefit other
domains, such as field research using sensor networks. Software will be released
under an open-source license to promote the use by government agencies, research
institutions, and individuals. Products of this research, including the
software, will be used in courses at the University&lt;br/&gt;of North Carolina.