* 0932795
* Ethics Education for Professional Science Master's Programs
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Camille Nebeker, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Richard Tankersley
* 08/31/2013
* USD 300,000.00

This project is creating ethics education materials in the growing area of
Professional Science Masters (PSM) education programs. Its goal is to enhance
student awareness of important ethical issues and develop critical thinking
skills of future science professionals working in three PSM fields:
computational, biological, and environmental sciences. The model for developing
materials is designed to be adaptable by any of the PSM programs within the
23-campus California State University (CSU) system and can also be used by PSM
programs nationally. After evaluation, these materials will be integrated into
course materials. Project teams are preparing learning materials that reflect
the ethical dilemmas and challenges often faced by PSM professionals in the
workplace, using a problem-based learning approach and case exploration.
Mentoring in an internship setting is providing guidance for curricular
integration. The project also has a comprehensive evaluation component.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts derive from the fact that the California
State University (CSU) System has launched fifteen PSM programs throughout
California and is in the process of creating 15 more. Nationally, there are more
than 120 Professional Science Masters (PSM) programs in 60 universities as of
January, 2009. PSM programs combine science with employer-relevant graduate
education in business, management, communications, and law. This project extends
ethics education models beyond graduate academic education to graduate
professional education. As PSM graduates take professional positions,
understanding of ethics and integrity in scientific research outside of the
academy will grow. Ethics education materials developed here will be placed in
established on-line educational repositories: the National STEM Digital Library
(NSDL) and the international MERLOT higher education repository.