* 0932481
* Water Spray in Atmospheric Pressure Electrical Discharge Plasma
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Bruce Locke, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruey-Hung Chen
* 08/31/2013
* USD 384,325.00

0932481&lt;br/&gt;Locke&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interaction of liquid (e.g., water) with plasma
(typically an ionized gas) occurs in a wide range of technological applications
and natural phenomena including liquid-phase electrical discharge for
arthroscopic surgery, lithotripsy for kidney stone treatment, wound healing and
disinfection, synthesis of nanoparticles, plasma-assisted combustion,
microsensors for chemical analysis, lightning discharges, corrosion in high-
voltage electrical transmission and air flow control using plasma actuators. The
relatively unexplored field of plasma-chemical reactions in gas-liquid plasma
may also have a broad impact in industrially important applications where gas-
liquid chemical reactions are important (e.g., air pollution study and control
and the production of useful chemicals such as methanol or hydrogen and other
fuels). This work will focus on studying a gas-phase electrical discharge with a
spray of small micron-size water droplets into the plasma because this approach
has been shown to be potentially very energy efficient for initiating a variety
of chemical reactions, including the formation of hydrogen peroxide. Analysis of
plasma interactions, particularly the chemical reactions initiated in such
systems with small droplets of water, is vital to developing our understanding
of plasma with condensed liquids in general. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work
will focus on two general cases of 1) reaction products, including hydrogen
peroxide, oxygen, and hydrogen, from pure water with Ar and O2 carrier gases and
2) formation of methanol from methane and water droplets with Ar carrier. The
first case is of fundamental importance for all hydroxyl radical reactions
initiated in the plasma and the second, while of significant importance in the
energy field for production of liquid fuels, provides an example of gas-liquid
reactions with reasonably well characterized reaction pathways and mechanisms.
The proposed work will use a range of experimental techniques including aerosol
particle size measurements, flow visualization, emissions spectroscopy, and
chemical analysis to develop our understanding of how reactive chemical species
like hydroxyl radicals are formed by water droplets flowing into a plasma
reactor. Mathematical modeling of the transport coupled to the plasma chemical
reactions will be conducted. Fundamental analysis using molecular dynamics will
also be conducted to study the basic interactions of electrons with condensed
water surfaces and to assist in interpretation of the experimental studies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is expected to lead to the development of
fundamental knowledge on how plasma in gas-liquid environments leads to the
formation of reactive species and how it affects some of the applications
mentioned above. Advanced education and training of undergraduate students, PhD
students, and a postdoctoral researcher in chemical, mechanical, and electrical
engineering in an interdisciplinary and international environment will be
conducted, and the mentoring of a young faculty member in chemical engineering
will be accomplished.