* 0932268
* Individual and Situational Determinants of Psychophysiological Responses to Race-Based Discrimination
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2011
* Enrique Neblett, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 07/31/2011
* USD 45,648.00

The proposed research examines individual and situational determinants of
psychophysiological responses to race-based discrimination. The project consists
of two components. The primary aim of the first component is to evaluate
individual and situational determinants of cardiovascular and electromyographic
responses to race-based discrimination analogues in a laboratory setting. The
primary aim of the second component is to use ambulatory physiological
monitoring to examine individual differences in psychophysiological responses to
race-based discrimination in the field. Psychophysiological methods are used to
attain these objectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To date, the majority of studies examining responses
to race-based discrimination have focused primarily on individual determinants
of responses to race-based discrimination and subjective data collected in a
laboratory setting. The failure to consider how situational characteristics of
race-based discrimination experiences also influence responses to these
experiences lends itself to an incomplete and inaccurate picture of the
underlying mechanisms that account for individual differences in responses to
race-based discrimination. Reporter biases in subjective data are also
problematic in studies of responses to race-based discrimination as participants
can underestimate or exaggerate responses due to lack of awareness or social
desirability. A final consideration is the fact that the majority of these
studies have been conducted in laboratory settings, making it difficult to
ascertain whether the findings in these studies generalize to real-world
experiences of race-based discrimination. The proposed project uniquely
addresses these shortcomings through the use of psychophysiological methods in
laboratory and naturalistic settings and the consideration of situational
correlates of race-based discrimination experiences. As such, the proposal seeks
to increase basic knowledge about both the broader psychological and
physiological impacts of race-based discrimination across
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding of
the proposed Starter Research Grant would result in the increased participation
of underrepresented minorities in U.S. science. Underrepresented ethnic minority
undergraduate and graduate students would receive state-of-the-art training in
psychophysiological methods in preparation for industry and academic positions.
Execution of the proposed research would also help to lay the foundation for a
fledgling research program whose success will directly lead to the increased
presence of underrepresented minorities at the undergraduate, graduate, and
faculty levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A second impact of the proposed research
concerns African American health and well-being. Although the proposed research
does not focus explicitly on health outcomes, it stands to enhance the agenda of
the health disparities research literature which seeks to examine the role of
race-based discrimination and other factors in African American and other racial
and ethnic health disparities. The proposed research activities are consistent
with ongoing efforts to: (1) identify psychosocial variables that have the
potential to influence and reduce health disparities; (2) promote minority
health; and (3) reduce and ultimately eliminate health disparities involving
cardiovascular illnesses and other diseases.