* 0932060
* Targeted Design of Biomaterials for Water Treatment: Arsenic Removal and Recovery
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2009,10/31/2013
* Julie Zimmerman, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 10/31/2013
* USD 324,460.00

0932060&lt;br/&gt;Zimmerman&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of
this study is to design and develop bio-based hydrogels aligned with the goals
of green engineering for arsenic removal from aqueous solutions. A sub-objective
is to evaluate the potential for regeneration of these materials and any
subsequent impact on performance to estimate functional lifetime. Additionally,
end of life strategies will be evaluated, including biodegradation. To close the
loop, a feasibility analysis will be conducted to evaluate the recovery of
arsenic from the waste stream for use as a feedstock to industrial processes. By
considering the entire life cycle of the system including the material itself
and the waste streams from the process, the design of an arsenic removal system
for water purification has an increased likelihood of optimizing performance of
the entire system while aligning environmental and economic objectives. The
study involves the functionalization of chitosan, a biopolymer, and its use in
arsenic removal. This research presents potential benefits for improved health
and quality of life for those whose groundwater source contains toxic arsenic
levels. The team will work with the Yale Peabody Museum staff to develop an
exhibit communicating global water issues, particularly as they relate to water
quality and scarcity in developing communities. Also, the team will work with
high school students in the Evolutions Program at Peabody to develop exhibits
about global water issues, and additionally high school students will work in
the team?s laboratories over summers. Undergraduate and graduate students will
be actively engaged in the research throughout the year.