* 0932665
* Collaborative Research: Impact of Wastewater Derived Organic Nitrogen on Eutrophication
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2014
* Paul Vouros, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 07/31/2014
* USD 297,030.00

0932665/0932632&lt;br/&gt;Gu/Paerl&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many
municipal wastewater treatment facilities are facing increasingly stringent
effluent N limits that are near or beyond the current limits of technology.
Removal of dissolved organic nitrogen (DON) becomes necessary if the permitted N
level is below the limit of conventional N removal technology. The capital cost
required to research and install advanced treatment technologies for further
removal of the residual DON is substantial. Current regulations use total
nitrogen for setting limits without consideration of the possibility that DON
and inorganic N may differ in their bioavailability to phytoplankton and
therefore their potential harmful impact on receiving aquatic systems. The
question arises on whether further reduction of DON will bring substantial
environmental benefits relative to the significant cost incurred, given the
uncertainty over the bioavailability of wastewater derived DON (wwDON).
Currently, there is little information on the wwDON bioavailability to
phytoplankton in receiving waters and there is no accepted method for
quantitatively assessing the wwDON bioavailability. This study proposes to
addresses this issue and fill in the knowledge gap for understanding the impact
of wastewater derived organic nitrogen on receiving aquatic
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research aims at investigating the
characteristics of wwDON from municipal treatment facilities and assessing the
bioavailability of wwDON to phytoplankton and its impact on eutrophication.
Although N is usually limiting for saline waters, both saline waters and
freshwaters are of concern here because most municipalities discharge to
freshwaters, and recent studies indicated that the fate and lability (labile) of
N in upstream freshwater systems will eventually affect the transport of N and
nutrient condition in down-stream N-sensitive estuary and coastal systems. The
specific objectives are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Assess the bioavailability of
wwDON to two phytoplankton species known to play roles in
eutrophication.&lt;br/&gt;2. Investigate the bioavailability of wwDON to both
saline and freshwater phytoplankton and the role of bacteria in labilization of
wwDON to algae.&lt;br/&gt;3. Examine the relationship between the composition of
wwDON and its bioavailability, and identify the fractions of wwDON that are
bioavailable versus recalcitrant.&lt;br/&gt;4. Further evaluate the fate and
bioavailability of wwDON to natural biota (including both algae and bacteria)
using 15N-labeled wwDON produced in situ.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
demonstrate the benefits of interdisciplinary and integrated approach for
solving environmental challenges. The multidisciplinary research covers
expertise in at least three disciplines that will apply unique, comprehensive,
and state-of-the-art assessment of the bioavailability of wwDON to freshwater
aquatic systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research addresses a pressing
issue with significant social and economical impacts that have not previously
been investigated. The results will provide essential information and framework
for developing a standard wwDON bioavailability assessment method that are
urgently needed by utilities and regulators in order to target their treatment
design and investments at eliminating the N components that are truly harmful to
receiving aquatic ecosystems and therefore maximizing the environmental
benefits. The project will enhance both existing and new education outreach
programs at the two institutions. At NU, there is BEST (Biotechnology for the
Environment, Showcase and Training), a center recently initiated by Gu;
CONNECTIONS and RET, two NSF funded education programs; and CO-OP, a
distinguished experiential learning program for NU. At UNC, there are NSF-
supported (Ecosystems, EID and Ocean Sciences Programs) summer internships at
UNC-IMS and NSF-supported Summer Pre-graduate Research Experience Program
(SPGRE). All these programs intend to attract and involve students from diverse
backgrounds. The PI started ITRI (Industrial Translational Research Initiative)
and will work with WEF/WERF (Water Environment Federation) for information
dissemination to professionals and practitioners via web-based tools and
databases.