* 0932403
* CPS:Medium: CitiSense - Adaptive Services for Community-Driven Behavioral and Environmental Monitoring to Induce Change
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* William Griswold, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,499,098.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research project
is to achieve fundamental advances in software technology that will enable
building cyber-physical systems to allow citizens to see the environmental and
health impacts of their daily activities through a citizen-driven body-worn
mobile-phone-based commodity sensing platform. The approach is to create aspect-
oriented extensions to a publish-subscribe architecture, called Open Rich
Services (ORS), to provide a highly extensible and adaptive infrastructure. As
one example, ORS will enable highly adaptive power management that not only
adapts to current device conditions, but also the nature of the data, the data?s
application, and the presence and status of other sensors in the area. In this
way, ORS will enable additional research advances in power management,
algorithms, security and privacy during the project. A test-bed called CitiSense
will be built, enabling in-the-world user and system studies for evaluating the
approach and providing a glimpse of a future enhanced by cyber-physical
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research in this proposal will lead to
fundamental advances in modularity techniques for composable adaptive systems,
adaptive power management, cryptographic methods for open systems, interaction
design for the mobile context, and statistical inference under multiple sources
of noise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific and engineering advances achieved
through this proposal will advance our national capability to develop cyber-
physical systems operating under decentralized control and severe resource
constraints. The students trained under this project will become part of a new
generation of researchers and practitioners prepared to advance the state of
cyber-physical systems for the coming decades.