* 0932978
* Nanoprecipitation in Turbulent Liquid-Phase Vortex Reactors:  A Fundamental Investigation of Scale Up Using Experimentally Validated CFD Models
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2015
* James Hill, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 07/31/2015
* USD 331,488.00

0932978 Olsen

The production of uniform-sized nanoparticles from hydrophobic organic compounds
by an economical, scalable process is very challenging. One of the most advanced
processes to produce functional nanoparticles of precisely controlled size is
Flash NanoPrecipitation, which requires very fast mixing of two or more streams
to create uniform supersaturation. Presently, Flash NanoPrecipitation has only
been demonstrated in microscale reactors with small production runs. This
limitation is only suitable for selected applications, such as the production of
high-value pharmaceutical agents. Other applications, such as the manufacturing
of nanoparticles used in pesticides and cosmetics, will require much larger
production runs, making microscale reactors economically unrealistic. For this
reason the fluid dynamics and scalar transport processes associated with scale
up Flash NanoPrecipitation to macroscale reactors capable of generating large
quantities of functional nanoparticles will be investigated using a combined
experimental and modeling approach in this research project.

A fundamental understanding of rapid precipitation requires a detailed knowledge
of the roles of macro, meso- and micromixing on the development of
supersaturation, and the scalability of the processing conditions needed for
Flash NanoPrecipitation (e.g. millisecond micromixing) is an open question that
will be addressed here. To answer this question, turbulent reactive mixing in a
macroscale multi-inlet vortex mixer (MIVM) reactor will be studied using non-
intrusive optically based measurement techniques, and the results from these
experiments will be used to develop and validate computational fluid dynamics
(CFD) models of the mixing and reaction processes. The experimental techniques
will include time-correlated (high-speed) stereo particle image velocimetry
(SPIV), passive scalar and reactive planar laser induced fluorescence (PLIF),
and simultaneous PIV/PLIF. The CFD models will be based on large eddy
simulations (LES) and transported probability density function (PDF) models
solved using the direct quadrature method of moments (DQMOM). Once developed and
validated, these CFD models can be used by the chemical process industry as
engineering tools for optimizing reactor design and operating parameters to
produce customized functional nanoparticles in plant-scale MIVM reactors.

Intellectual Merit: The development of computational models of turbulent
reacting flows, especially in complex swirling geometries such as in a vortex
reactor, is an important technical and intellectual challenge. For example, none
of the subgrid scale closures for the chemical source term in CFD models of
turbulent reacting flows have been fully validated for complex liquid-phase
reacting flows due to a lack of detailed experimental data for the local
velocity and concentration fields in well-defined reactor geometries.

Broader Impact: Flash NanoPrecipitation shows promise for producing uniform-
sized functional nanoparticles of organic compounds. However, this process has
only been demonstrated in microscale reactors capable of producing only very
small production runs. Scaling up the Flash NanoPrecipitation process to a
macroscale MIVM reactor could greatly increase the commercial viability of this
process for manufacturing a wider range of valuable end products. This project
will also train students in state-of-the art engineering tools for scale up and
design of chemical reactors.