* 0932251
* TeraGrid Extension: Bridging to XD
* CSE,OAC
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2013
* John Towns, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Barry I. Schneider
* 03/31/2013
* USD 36,380,865.00

The TeraGrid (TG) is an advanced, nationally distributed, open
cyberinfrastructure (CI) comprised of supercomputing, storage, analysis, and
visualization systems, data services, and science gateways, connected by high-
bandwidth networks, integrated by coordinated policies and operations, and
supported by computing and technology experts, that enables and supports
leading-edge scientific discovery and promotes science and technology education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The TG has enabled numerous scientific achievements in
almost all fields of science and engineering. The TG is driven by researchers
and educators requiring computational resources and services which would be
extremely difficult or impossible to obtain in their local/campus environments.
The largest fraction of TG resources are used in the support of peer-reviewed
scientific and engineering projects enabled by the advanced CI resources of the
TG. However, ?small? allocations are available to any individual willing to
apply. Through the coordinated capabilities of its staff, resources, and
services, TG enables cutting-edge, often transformative science and engineering,
by experts and expert teams of users making highly-skilled use of TG resources.
In addition, the TG also supports a wider community of much larger, domain-
focused groups of users that may not possess specific high-performance computing
skills but who are addressing important scientific research and education
problems. The broader impact of TG activities include outreach to communities
beyond the traditional set of HPC users, raising the awareness of future
scientists in schools and science fairs on the power of computation and data
mining, and spreading TG knowledge about how to build cyberinfrastructure, and
how to bring it to the user community. Advanced support joins researchers with
TG experts to increase efficiency and productivity, define best practices, and
create a vanguard of early adopters of new capabilities. Support for Science
Gateways provides community-designed interfaces to TG resources and extends
access to data collections, community collaboration tools, and visualization
capabilities to a much wider audience of users. Performing transformative
science and engineering on the TG depends on its resources working in concert,
which requires a coordinated user support system, centralized mechanisms for
user access and information, a common allocations process and allocations
management, and a coordinated user environment. Underlying this user support
environment, the TG maintains a robust, centrally managed infrastructure for
networking, security and authentication, and operational services. In this one
year extension, the TG will.&lt;br/&gt;* Continue to support several resources
into 2011. This includes the Track 2 systems, Pople (PSC), a shared memory
system particularly useful to a number of newer users, three IA32-64 clusters
and a new resource employing flash memory and virtual SMP nodes called DASH
(SDSC).&lt;br/&gt;* Allow high-throughput, Open Science Grid-style
jobs.&lt;br/&gt;* Enable exploration of interoperability and technology
sharing.&lt;br/&gt;* Provide a transition platform for users coming from
university- or departmental-level resources.&lt;br/&gt;* Support unique compute
platforms and massive storage systems.&lt;br/&gt;* Integrate new systems from
additional OCI awards.&lt;br/&gt;* Provide vigorous efforts in training,
education and outreach to retain larger and more diverse communities in
advancing scientific discovery.&lt;br/&gt;* Engage under-represented
communities, and continue to build strong partnerships in order to offer the
best possible HPC learning and workforce development programs and increase the
number of well-prepared STEM researchers and educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;