* 0932937
* Dynamic Properties of Confined Complex Fluids
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* John Walz, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 06/30/2013
* USD 299,999.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0932937&lt;br/&gt;Walz
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will be an experimental investigation focused
on advancing our understanding of the dynamic behavior of complex fluids (i.e.,
fluids containing dispersed nanocolloids) in confinement. While the oscillatory
equilibrium structure of these films, resulting from ordering of the
nanocolloids, has been well studied, the dynamic relationship between thinning
rate, structure formation, and viscous resistance of the film has received far
less attention and is poorly understood. Understanding these relationships is
important for predicting such basic properties as froth stability and product
storage life. The work will build upon significant preliminary measurements
obtained by the PI and will address the following issues:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. To what extent can the viscous resistance of the film
to drainage be predicted using lubrication equations developed for pure fluids?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. How does the rate of thinning affect the ability of the
nanocolloids to order? These particular studies will also be focused on
validating a a Peclet number analysis previously derived by the PI.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. How are the viscous resistance of the film and ability
of the nanoparticles to order affected by nanoparticles shape? This is an
unexplored issue and will be studied using model rod like nanoparticles.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The studies will be conducted using colloidal probe atomic
force microscopy, which has been found to be an ideal tool for measurements of
this type. &lt;br/&gt;A fourth task of the project will be to develop an
experimental test bed demonstrating the use of attractive depletion forces to
separate colloidal particles flowing through a packed bed of stationary
collector beads. This task will again build upon preliminary work by the PI
which demonstrated the feasibility of this application.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thin liquid films
containing a dispersed phase are found in many common products and industrial
processes. Examples include food products, soaps and detergents, and recovery of
minerals using froth flotation. Understanding the stability of these films is of
critical importance, and the knowledge gained from this project will clearly be
useful toward this goal. Drainage dynamics can also be important in predicting
the rate of particle aggregation, deposition, and transport. In addition to
being a useful application, the proposed use of depletion interactions as a
particle separation tool could spur additional research into new applications
that capitalize on the unique properties of this force. While the depletion
force has been extensively studied for more than 60 years, there are very few
actual applications utilizing its capabilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will support a full time Ph.D.
graduate student for three years, a post doctoral researcher for one year, and
provide research opportunities to undergraduate researchers. As Head of the
Department of Chemical Engineering at Virginia Tech, the PI is fully committed
to maintaining a diverse educational environment and continually strives to
provide opportunities to underrepresented groups. The project will also provide
support needed to develop a training module for summer programs at the
University aimed at encouraging high school and middle school students to
consider a career in science and engineering. Finally, the proposed particle
separation apparatus will be incorporated into a laboratory course in colloids
and interfaces that the PI is developing.