* 0932680
* GOALI Collaborative Research: Engineering magnetorheological fluids by controlling nonmagnetic particle interactions
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* John Ulicny, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 08/31/2013
* USD 199,432.00

0932680/0932715 Klingenberg/Zauscher

Magnetorheological (MR) fluids are suspensions of magnetizable particles, whose
rheological properties can be dramatically and reversibly altered by applied
magnetic fields. These materials can be exploited in a variety of applications,
with much of the current attention focused on automotive devices (e.g., active
damping systems and clutches). Applications can improve vehicle quality (e.g.,
ride and handling) as well as improve the gas mileage of vehicles. Past research
has illustrated that the field induced behavior of MR fluids can be explained
largely in terms of magnetostatic forces and their competition with hydrodynamic
forces. However, applications of MR fluids demand certain device dependent
characteristics of other properties, such as off-state viscosity, sedimentation,
redispersability, and durability. These properties are strongly influenced by
interparticle forces other than magnetic forces. It is thus apparent that
designing MR fluids for devices requires an understanding of the relationships
between various interparticle forces and macroscopic properties of the
suspensions. In the proposed work, we will use several complementary approaches
to probe the relationships between interparticle forces and macroscopic
behavior, and to investigate the mechanisms for observed behavior. Nonmagnetic
forces between iron surfaces will be altered by grafting various species to the
surfaces. The impact of the grafted layers on interparticle forces will be
determined directly using colloidal probe microscopy, in which both the normal
and lateral (i.e., friction) will be measured. The effects of the grafted layers
on the macroscopic rheological properties will also be determined
experimentally. Finally, we will use particle-level simulations to examine how
changes in interparticle forces affect macroscopic behavior. This will allow us
to determine if changes observed in the measured interparticle forces caused by
grafting species on the surfaces can account for the observed changes in
macroscopic properties.

Intellectual merit. The proposed research will provide new information about the
properties of MR fluids, and improve our ability to optimize fluids and
requisite particle coatings for various applications. This work will also more
generally improve our understanding of particulate gels, as we will be
investigating systems with deeper attractive well depths, systems with larger
particles, and probing larger deformation rheological properties than typically
studied.

Broader impact. Funding for this project will be used to support graduate
students, who will be trained in the emerging field of magnetorheology, as well
as colloidal probe microscopy and the more general fields of colloidal gels and
suspension rheology. The students will also be exposed to industrial
applications of their work through interactions with General Motors. Our groups
also involve undergraduate students in research every year, and thus we will
also be training a stream of undergraduates in aspects of MR, suspension
rheology, and colloid science throughout the course of this project. The PIs are
involved in other education projects that will benefit from the proposed work.
Klingenberg co teaches the freshman course "Introduction to Society" is
Engineering Grand Challenges, which examines how society is significant
challenges will require engineers to solve them. The goals of this course are to
recruit new students into engineering, and to recruit and retain a larger
fraction of women. One of societys main challenges is energy sustainability.
Numerous applications of MR technology are motivated by energy economy in
vehicles, and thus are incorporated into the Grand Challenges course to
illustrate how current research activities are addressing society?s challenges.
Zauscher has been involved over the last 6 years in an REU program that provides
laboratory experiences for hearing impaired students from Gallaudet University.
We propose to engage one such student each summer in the CPM measurements.