* 0933627
* CO2 Mineral Sequestration Integrated with Tailored Synthesis of Carbon-Neutral Filler Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Ah-Hyung Alissa Park, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/2012
* USD 300,033.00

0933627 Park

This research focuses on safe and permanent storage of CO2 via mineral
carbonation. Mineral carbonation is to be achieved through mimicry of natural
inorganic chemical transformation of CO2, such as weathering of rocks to form
calcium or magnesium carbonates and dissolution of CO2 in seawater/saline waters
to form bicarbonates. The fundamental reaction mechanisms and kinetics of CO2
with Mg-bearing minerals (i.e., serpentine) will be comprehensively
investigated, with an emphasis on validation of a proposed surface reaction
mechanism and the selection of optimized chelating agents to enhance the overall
conversion of the mineral carbonation process. The overarching concept is to
chemically fix gaseous CO2 into a mineral matrix via tailored synthesis of
magnesium carbonate. By engineering the morphological structure of synthesized
magnesium carbonate (PMC) to mimic commercially available filler materials, it
is anticipated that the proposed carbon mineral sequestration technology will
have the feasibility to store carbon at large scale economically. Since PMC is
to be produced by capturing CO2, the PMC-based filler materials produced via the
carbon mineralization can be considered carbon-neutral compared to the
conventional precipitated calcium carbonate filler material, which is made by
processing limestone. The PI participates in developing national-scale outreach
programs for K-12, undergraduate, and graduate students.

This award is co-funded by the CBET/ENG Environmental Sustainability program and
Chemical and Biological Separations program.