* 0933140
* Carbon Combustion Synthesis in Patterned Precursor Media
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Dmitri Litvinov, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Ruey-Hung Chen
* 08/31/2014
* USD 275,842.00

0933140&lt;br/&gt;Litvinov&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Carbon combustion synthesis of
micro and nanostructured complex oxides appears to offer a simple and efficient
method for making complex micro- and nanostructured oxides to be used in
biomedical imaging, drug delivery, data storage, biosensors, memory devices,
nanoelectronics, and energy storage. To respond to the demand for such new
materials, many synthesis approaches have been developed with varying
complexities, materials quality, production costs and efficiency. Often,
however, relative complexity, high reactant costs, and environmental issues of
by-product disposal limit large-scale applications. In carbon combustion
synthesis, nanoparticulates are formed from stoichiometric powder mixtures of
simple oxides with nano graphite in a self-propagating reaction wave sustained
by exothermic oxidation of carbon. Synthesis occurs on a time scale of several
seconds with the thermal front propagation velocities in the range of 0.1 to 3
mm/s; preliminary data on a thin-film version of the process show less than 1sec
conversion times. The technology carries a significant promise for simplicity,
low reactant costs, and no other byproducts than carbon
dioxide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this experimental and modeling project
is to gain insight into the mechanisms of phase nucleation and growth and to
apply the knowledge for control of the material properties. The work is
particularly innovative in that, for the first time, combustion synthesis in
patterned precursor media will be investigated. An efficient toolset for real-
time synthesis monitoring and post-synthesis characterization of reaction
products will be developed and used for the experiments. To interpret the data
and to predict the impacts of carbon dioxide release and the counterdiffusion of
oxygen on thermal energy transport during carbon combustion synthesis and on the
properties of the products, a computer model will be developed. The target use
is efficient synthesis of magnetic nanoparticles with precision-controlled
properties for applications in biosensors, data storage, and medical imaging,
using cobalt ferrite as a model system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the
potential technological impacts, findings of the program will be integrated into
the existing materials-related courses taught by the PI. A diverse set of
graduate and undergraduate students participating in the program will be at the
forefront of a fascinating scientific field with broad industrial potential.