* 0933163
* A Combined Photographic/Thermographic Study of  Subcooled Boiling in a Narrow Channel
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Larry Witte, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 09/30/2012
* USD 202,238.00

0933163&lt;br/&gt;HOLLINGSWORTH&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Minichannels (those with
channel spacing near 1 mm) offer an attractive scale range for technological
applications of two phase cooling. They are small enough to create large heat
fluxes, but large enough to remove significant quantities of heat. Furthermore,
they do not present the fouling and maintenance concerns as do microscale
channels. Heat transfer coefficients can be very high due to the latent heat
consumed during vapor production, and to enhanced near wall mixing caused by
bubbles which are constrained to remain near the channel surfaces.
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This research uses liquid crystal thermography in
concert with high speed video imaging to investigate highly subcooled bubbly
flow within a millimeter scale channel. In this flow regime, swarms of very
small contracting bubbles are swept along by the flow, presenting the
opportunity for greatly increased cooling caused by the capacity of the bubbles
to efficiently move subcooled liquid from the core of the channel toward the
walls. The insight gathered from this experimental investigation will provide
the basis for a better understanding of the physics of subcooled bubbly flow in
minichannels, and this understanding will lead to new models of this important
regime.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The technological broader impact of the
research is its contribution to the discovery and understanding of thermal
processes and performance limiting phenomena in two phase mm scale devices.
Students involved in the project will develop capabilities in demand in high
technology industries: experimentation involving small scale devices, high speed
digital imaging, liquid crystal thermography, and experience with two phase
cooling systems. Experience shows that the visual impact of high speed imaging
and liquid crystal thermography generates interest in students and often
motivates them to pursue graduate study. Using this research as the vehicle,
minority students, Hispanic students in particular, will be recruited into
graduate level study through direct involvement as undergraduate Honors thesis
students. The laboratory also participates in several College of Engineering
recruiting activities designed to attract students into engineering, namely the
Engineering Open House and the Engineering Leadership Day.