* 0933962
* Organizational Nomination for PAESMEM: Center for Innovation in Engineering and Science Education, Stevens Institute of Technology
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/2011,03/31/2013
* Elisabeth McGrath, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 03/31/2013
* USD 10,000.00

The Center for Innovation in Engineering and Science Education (CIESE) at
Stevens Institute of Technology was founded in 1988. Since that time the Center
has developed curricula, conducted teacher professional development and
mentoring programs, and implemented capacity-building efforts that have directly
impacted more than 19,000 K-12 teachers, more than 283 community college
faculty, and millions of students. Programs have been largely focused in
underserved and high minority school districts including Newark, Jersey City,
and Camden, NJ and Miami, Florida, Cleveland, Ohio and tribal communities in
rural and remote areas of Arizona. More than 19,000 teachers and students have
benefited from CIESE programs; of these approximately 68% or 13,416 teachers
represent high need, high minority districts. Over 20 years, upwards of six
million students in disadvantaged school districts have been impacted. The
Center's associated programs have directly benefited some 500 middle and high
school students from disadvantaged, high need, urban districts. CIESE has
deliberately and strategically focused on developing and implementing programs
that have a high probability of institutionalizing innovations that will be
sustained after the period of grant funding. For this reason, CIESE collaborates
primarily with classroom teachers and school and district administrators, to
enhance teacher content knowledge and change classroom practice, with a long-
term impact on many classes of students over time. All programs incorporate
intensive and supported hands-on teacher professional development, and
substantial in-class mentoring and follow-up. Collaborations with community
colleges, in which CIESE has closely mentored faculty to implement STEM
programs, have resulted in successful replications of CIESE programs in New
Jersey and in 21 other states. Evidence of CIESE's effectiveness as an exemplar
of STEM mentoring is demonstrated in a number of K-12 Science and Engineering
initiatives. Elementary students posted statistically significant higher gains
in their knowledge of science and engineering concepts than a comparison group
of students after their teachers implemented curriculum materials for which they
received professional development and monthly classroom visits. Middle and high
school students demonstrated increased knowledge of key science concepts after
designing and building robots to perform tasks in an underwater environment, a
curriculum module for which their teachers were trained and mentored by CIESE.
Student data also suggest that the curriculum has increased student awareness of
engineering, their interest in engineering careers, and their understanding of
the engineering design process and iterative design. Teachers' knowledge and
awareness of engineering, experience teaching engineering and the engineering
design process, and likelihood of sharing/recommending engineering materials and
resources with colleagues increased as a result of their professional
development and mentoring in a statewide engineering initiative led by CIESE.
CIESE's collaborations with other schools show the potential of expanding the
CIESE model of mentoring.