* 0933701
* Renilla Transfected Stem Cells as Light Source for In-Situ Photodynamic Therapy of Cancer
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Stefan Bossmann, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 09/30/2013
* USD 609,651.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-
5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0933701&lt;br/&gt;Bossmann&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Photod
ynamic Therapy causing apoptosis (programmed cell death) rather than necrosis,
is a very promising approach for the treatment of numerous cancers. Many PDT-
agents can be delivered to cancer cells with high selectivity due to the
overexpression of porphyrin-receptors by the cancer cells. However, due to the
biophysical features of the human body, poor light penetration remains the
biggest obstacle for the treatment of tumors, which are not located near a light
accessible surface. The PI proposes to use the bioluminescence from Renilla
luciferase in a mouse model to treat B16F10 subcutaneous melanomas with in-situ
PDT. These melanoma cells form deep pulmonary metastatic lesions when given by
I.V. injection, so this internal form of the tumor model will also be tested.
The results will help to develop better treatments for cancer, non-healing
wounds and bacterial infections. Although cancer is often referred to as a
single condition, it actually consists of more than 100 different diseases.
According to the American Cancer Society, These diseases are characterized by
uncontrolled growth and spread of abnormal cells. Cancer can arise in many sites
and behave differently depending on its organ of origin. This new approach will
combine treatment methods from stem cell biology, photochemical biotechnology
and physical inorganic chemistry.