* 0933169
* Improving the Understanding and Application of Multi-Modal Chromatography
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Steven Cramer, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Geoffrey Prentice
* 08/31/2012
* USD 300,000.00

0933169&lt;br/&gt;Cramer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF award by the
Chemical and Biological Separations program supports work by Professor Steven
Cramer and his colleagues Shekhar Garde and Curt Breneman at Rensselaer
Polytechnic Institute to establish a deeper understanding of the nature of
selectivity in multi-modal (MM) chromatographic systems. This project will
employ a state of the art library of novel multi-modal ligands and materials in
concert with protein libraries in a detailed study of MM ligand - protein
interactions. The binding of free solution MM ligands to a set of labeled model
proteins will be studied using NMR to determine binding kinetics and ligand
binding sites on the proteins. Chemical modifications of native proteins will be
carried out to generate a diverse set of protein ladders possessing various
combinations of surface properties. Chromatographic experiments will be carried
out with these proteins along with a set of commercially available proteins
under a range of operating conditions to study protein retention behavior and to
determine appropriate isotherm models for these MM systems. To complement the
experiments, large scale MD simulations of protein-ligand binding in solution,
and coarse-grained modeling approaches for protein - multi-modal resin
interactions will be carried out. These simulations will provide data on ligand
binding sites, modes of binding, and dynamics and thermodynamics of interactions
in solution. MD and coarse grained simulations will also provide important data
that will be used to generate novel molecular descriptors. Predictive
quantitative structure property relationship (QSPR) models of protein affinity
and isotherm parameters will be determined using the chromatographic data and
novel molecular descriptors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will
have a significant impact on the development and implementation of MM
chromatographic technology for protein purification. This work will facilitate
the design of next generation MM chromatographic systems and will provide
predictive tools for MM chromatography that will facilitate methods development
with these systems for the purification of biotherapeutics. The development of
improved MM chromatographic systems will potentially enable a reduction in the
number of downstream processing steps required for the purification of
therapeutic proteins, reducing the costs of producing biopharmaceuticals.
Further, multi-modal separation systems with unique selectivities will provide
new novel front end separations for the analysis of proteins by mass
spectrometry. Finally, a deeper understanding of the modes of interactions of
proteins with various classes of multi-modal ligands and surfaces will have
potential implications beyond separations to fields including biomaterials,
biosensors, and drug discovery. The proposed research will also have an
important impact on the education of both graduate and undergraduate chemical
engineering students. The proposed research will be carried out in the Center
for Biotechnology and Interdisciplinary Studies which provides excellent
multidisciplinary training opportunities for graduate and undergraduate
students. Students will gain exposure to cell culture, solution NMR
spectroscopy, chromatography, molecular simulations and chemometrics. The
research developed in this project will also be incorporated into a chemical
engineering senior laboratory chromatography experiment recently developed by
the PI as well as a course on Chromatographic Separation Processes. Finally,
simulations performed in this project, as well as conceptual parts of molecular
interactions will motivate new aspects of the Molecularium project, which uses
animation movies to teach and inspire students at all levels about the
fascinating world of molecules.