* 0933959
* Enhancing Computational Science Opportunities on NSF's Kraken
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Thomas Zacharia, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* robert pennington
* 06/30/2010
* USD 1,680,000.00

As part of the Office of Cyberinfrastructure program to provide advanced
computational science resources to the U.S. national computational science
community, the Kraken Cray XT5 system at the National Institute for
Computational Sciences (NICS) at the University of Tennessee-Knoxville will
become the largest memory computational system available for allocation to the
NSF computational science and engineering research community.

The Kraken computational system is the most powerful TeraGrid resource at 608
teraflops/s with 66,048 cores in 8,256 nodes. As part of the original
acquisition under solicitation 05-525, Kraken is being upgraded to over 99K
cores and over 1 petaflop/s of peak performance. With this memory upgrade, which
increases 3,840 nodes from 8 GB to 16 GB, all 8,256 nodes will have 16 GB of
memory for an aggregate of 132 TB of memory. This uniform configuration will
allow researchers to efficiently utilize the entire system for a single
application and will add flexibility in scheduling all applications on Kraken.
For the most scalable applications that require 16 GB/node, the additional
memory will effectively double the size of the largest jobs on the highest
performance system in the NSF portfolio.

This memory upgrade will allow users to run simulations at higher resolution by
running at larger scale, increase the fidelity of their simulations by allowing
for the incorporation of additional physical processes and/or variables, and
allow applications that are limited by their total amount of memory to run on
fewer nodes. Many large scale computational science applications are limited by
the amount of physical memory available on a node and computational researchers
expect to increase their memory requirements as the scale of the computations
increase. Increasing the amount of available memory will greatly increase the
flexibility in running more advanced multi-scale and multi-component
applications, including applications such as multidimensional supernova
simulations using CHIMERA, astrophysical and cosmological structure formation
with ENZO, nanoscale electronics with OMEN, seismic hazard research with the
Anelastic Wave Propagation code (AWP-Olsen), and computational chemistry with
NWChem and MADNESS. Broader impacts of this memory enhancement include support
for education and outreach via university classes and laboratory workshops at
the University of Tennessee-Knoxville, and at Morehouse College and Claflin
College. The upgraded system will provide a state-of-the-art platform allowing
students to gain experience with multi-core, massively parallel computational
techniques.