* 0933556
* Dielectric elastomer generators for wind energy harvesting
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,01/31/2013
* Qibing Pei, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Ram Gupta
* 01/31/2013
* USD 326,999.00

0933556 Pei

Project Summary Intellectual Merit: Wind energy presents a renewable, widely
distributed, abundant source of clean energy that has been largely untapped due
to the high installation cost, environmental impact, and intermittency of the
blade-turbine generators. The recent advances in dielectric elastomers provides
a unique opportunity to design a new category of wind electricity generators
wherein the active transducing material absorbs wind energy and converts it
directly into electricity. These electroactive polymers can undergo large
deformation and store a large quantity of elastic energy that is transduced into
electricity as the deformed polymers relax. The objective of the proposed
research is to study the aerodynamics associated with the large deformations in
dielectric elastomer films and the corresponding generation of electricity. The
PIs will 1) model and experimentally analyze the deformation and energy
transduction mechanisms in dielectric elastomer generators (DEGs), 2) use highly
accurate numerical simulation to model the aerodynamics of wind-membrane
interaction and use the simulated deformation of soft membranes to calculate the
maximum wind energy absorption and power generation density in the membrane, 3)
design and fabricated DEGs in the form factor of a flag based on the aerodynamic
simulation and the material's electro-mechanical characteristics, 4)
experimentally measure the generated power at various wind velocities and
correlate the results with the simulations and calculations, and 5) synthesize
new dielectric elastomers according to the aerodynamic requirements. The
research will result in the essential understanding of the wind energy
harvesting cycle and methodologies required to efficiently capture and transduce
wind energy using dielectric elastomers. Broader Impact: The research will
create a radically a new wind energy generator with an attractive and flexible
form factor, potentially high conversion efficiency, low-cost fabrication, and
scale invariability. The results should benefit other dielectric elastomer
applications in such important areas as biomedical devices, robotics, industrial
automation, and consumer electronics. The research findings will be disseminated
to the public through scientific and patent publications, conference
presentations, and education of undergraduate and graduate students. Graduate
and undergraduate students will participate in the proposed research and learn
techniques ranging from synthesis and characterization of new materials to
creating devices and measuring physical properties. As part of our commitment to
promote diversity, we plan to particularly encourage junior and senior
undergraduate women and minorities to carry out intern research, especially
those who show interest in pursuing an academic teaching or research career. We
will collaborate with the California NanoSystems Institute at UCLA to host high
school students from the Los Angeles Unified School District for 8-week summer
intern research in the PI's lab.