* 0933967
* 8th Edoardo Amaldi Conference on Gravitational Waves; June 2009, New York, NY
* MPS,PHY
* 05/15/2009,06/30/2010
* Szabolcs Marka, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Beverly K. Berger
* 06/30/2010
* USD 33,784.00

This award provides support for the 8th Edoardo Amaldi Conference on
Gravitational Waves. This biennial series is the major international forum for
scientific interchange in the developing field of gravitational wave science.
The meeting will be on July 21-16, 2009 on the campus of Columbia University in
the City of New York. The Amaldi meetings are held under the auspices of the
Gravitational Wave International Committee (GWIC), which oversees the scientific
program for the meeting. The full range of gravitational wave science will be
represented from research and development of ground and space based detectors to
pulsar timing, including results from data collected recently. Significant
emphasis will be placed on the connection between gravitational wave science and
other fields of observational astrophysics and astronomy. Additionally, progress
in modeling gravitational waves from astrophysical sources will be highlighted
in order to forge a stronger connection between experimental advances, numerical
simulation, and astrophysics theory. In addition, the organizers will welcome
interested students from local schools and universities and reach out to the
general public via a widely advertised public lecture. Participation of US and
international students at the conference will be strongly encouraged.