* 0933977
* URM:   Gateway to Graduate School:  Faculty/Student Collaboration in Environmental and Model Organism Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Janet Morrison, The College of New Jersey
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 09/30/2013
* USD 644,370.00

This award to The College of New Jersey (TCNJ) is funded under the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). The College of New
Jersey will establish an Undergraduate Research and Mentoring (URM) program that
provides an intensive, sustained research mentoring program for underrepresented
students in order to motivate and prepare them for graduate school in Biology.
The program will engage twenty students (two cohorts of 10, recruited in the
first two years of the five-year grant) from their freshman through senior
years, including 1.5 years of support from NSF as juniors and seniors. At least
11 faculty members will serve as research mentors/advisors, with research
programs spanning environmental biology and the biology of model organisms. The
program will developmentally increase the students' independence as apprentice
scientists. Freshman participants will do month-long mini-rotations through
three environmental biology labs and three model-organism labs, after which
students will choose the lab that interests them the most as their research home
for the next three years. After their freshman year, students will earn academic
credit for research courses that they take for participating in the program.
Students conduct full-time research in TCNJ's summer research program for one
summer, which they continue on during their junior and senior years. This
sustained experience will allow projects to come to fruition and be the basis
for scientific writing exercise as the students prepare their work for
publication with the faculty mentor. Students are expected to present their
research at one regional and one national scientific conference. The students
will be peer-mentored by a more senior-member in their lab, and eventually
become peer mentors themselves. The program includes visits to research
universities, a seminar series featuring minority scientists, mentoring and
skills-building workshops, an annual oral research symposium, application to
university REU programs and graduate school, and a graduate record exam (GRE)
preparation course. More information is vailable by contacting the Program
Director, Dr. Janet A. Morrison, morrisja@tcnj.edu, or by visiting
www.tcnj.edu/~biology/opportunities/ggsb.index.htm.