* 0933997
* EAGER: Studies of the Small-Scale Atmospheric Structure Associated with Turbulence Generation Using the SOUSY Radar and an Autonomous, Unmanned Mini-Glider
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Ben Balsley, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Robinson
* 08/31/2011
* USD 52,051.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The Investigator will develop a simple, effective, and inexpensive method of
obtaining very high-vertical-resolution atmospheric measurements made in close
proximity to the SOUSY radar beam in Jicamarca Peru (a NSF Upper Atmospheric
Facilities funded center). To make these measurements, the Principal
Investigator (PI) will use a GPS-controlled mini-glider (Databird) that will be
lifted to altitude using a meteorological balloon.

Following its release at altitude, the Databird will be programmed to glide to
the radar beam coordinates and then descend in a tight spiral around the radar
antenna to provide a high-resolution potential temperature profile virtually in
line with the radar beam. These potential temperature profiles will be used in
conjunction with radar obtained profiles of wind speed to produce profiles of
the local gradient Richardson number (Ri). The resulting Ri profile will then be
compared with concurrently-measured radar echo profiles to determine the
relationship between the turbulence-related echo strengths and local dynamic
instability criteria (Ri < 0.25). Results from this initial study have the
potential to provide new insights into the important relationship between local
dynamic instability profiles and turbulence echoes.

An additional important feature provided by the Databird measurements will be to
obtain information on recently-discovered atmospheric "overturning" events.
These events are visible in the potential temperature profiles and occur on
vertical scales of tens to hundreds of meters. Overturnings appear to be a
ubiquitous feature in both the troposphere and stratosphere, and probably extend
to much higher altitudes. Using the glider system, the investigator will examine
the (possibly) causal relationship between overturnings, critical Ri values, and
turbulence generation.

The success of this effort will provide first-time high-resolution /vertical/
measurements of the entire lower atmosphere between 0 km and 10 km. Vertical
resolution is important in this type of measurement, since most balloon borne
data does not provide sufficient information for modelers and theoreticians
because (1) the resolution is too poor and since (2) the balloon profiles are
typically smeared along-track (wind-driven balloons can be tens of km downwind
be the time they reach useful operating heights). Therefore, one can anticipate
that the data will be used extensively to improve models and theory as the
observing technique matures, and as observations are made at a variety of
locations and under a variety of different atmospheric conditions.

The investigator is involving young foreign scientists in Peru in this project.
Assuming that the initial tests are as successful, it is possible that larger-
scale program involving U.S. graduate students could be initiated. Student
participation could include all aspects of the glider design, including higher-
height capabilities, field work, analysis techniques, comparisons of results
with other types of data and models. Note that implementation of these ideas
must await the success of the tests to be conducted with the Databird system.