* 0933299
* Enhancing phytoremediation through callus-culture induced variations in wetland plants
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Dawn Reinhold, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 09/30/2013
* USD 299,332.00

0933299&lt;br/&gt;Reinhold&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For constructed treatment wetlands to effectively
phytoremediate surface waters and wastewaters polluted with complex mixtures of
recalcitrant and emerging organic pollutants, procedures for efficient
enhancement in wetland plants are greatly needed. Tissue-culture induced
variations provide a desirable alternative for plant enhancement; however, use
of selective, tissue-culture induced variations for plant enhancement has not
been explored in wetland plants. Therefore, the objective of this research is to
determine the efficiency of tissue-culture induced variations in producing
wetlands plants with enhanced phytoremediation capabilities utilizing Landoltia
punctata (duckweed) and Typha latfolia (cattail) as model wetland plants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will evaluate the central hypothesis
that inhibitory concentrations of organic pollutants during tissue culture of
wetland plants will produce regenerated plants with enhanced phytoremediation
capabilities. The rationale behind the proposed research is that development of
wetland plants with enhanced phytoremediation capabilities will increase the
capabilities of constructed treatment wetlands to reclaim polluted waters,
improving ecosystem health while decreasing shortages of clean waters for human
use. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will evaluate the potential for
tissue-culture induced variations to generate plants with enhanced
phytoremediation capabilities, with the specific aims
of:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(i) Evaluating the role of inhibition and pollutant
exposure in producing L. punctata and&lt;br/&gt;T. latifolia tissue cultures
with enhanced phytoremediation traits.&lt;br/&gt;(ii) Comparing enhancement of
phytoremediation capabilities with regards to a model organic pollutant
(3-trifluoromethylphenol) in tissue cultures and whole plants regenerated from
tissue cultures on inhibitory and non-inhibitory media. &lt;br/&gt;(iii)
Assessing phytotoxicity, uptake, and phytometabolism of halogenated phenols in
plants with enhanced phytoremediation capabilities for 3-trifluoromethylphenol
to evaluate whether enhanced plants possess enhanced phytoremediation
capabilities for multiple pollutants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will
employ methods to evaluate decreased susceptibility to inhibition and increased
rates of uptake and phytometabolism to assess phytoremediation capabilities of
tissues cultures and whole plants resulting from tissue-culture induced
variations under inhibitory and non-inhibitory conditions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is original by capitalizing on the
link between detoxification and phytometabolism of organic pollutants to create
a broadly-applicable method for enhancing wetland plants for phytoremediation
that does not include genetic engineering, thereby increasing the potential
applicability of the produced plants. Research is expected to yield the
following outcomes: &lt;br/&gt;(i) L. punctata and T. latifolia plants with
enhanced phytoremediation capabilities, &lt;br/&gt;(ii) protocols for
enhancement of wetland plants via tissue-culture induced variations that can be
expanded to include a broad range of organic pollutants and plant species,
and&lt;br/&gt;(iii) valuable knowledge on effects of inhibition, pollutant
exposure, and species on producing plants with enhanced phytoremediation
capabilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Overall, the research is significant because
it creates a new approach to enhance wetland plants for phytoremediation with
implications for design of innovative wetland systems for treatment of organic
pollutants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will broadly impact society and
science through integrating discovery and teaching, engaging underrepresented
groups, broadly disseminating results, and addressing environmental and social
challenges. The research will engage and train one graduate student and at least
two undergraduate students in active research that transcends engineering and
biology, while developing instructional materials on plant tissue culture for
environmental engineers to promote interdisciplinary learning. This project will
involve "undecided" female engineering students in research to encourage
commitment to and development of engineering careers. Research and educational
outcomes will be broadly disseminated through academic avenues, including
journal publications and conferences, and public avenues, including networking
with Michigan environmental consultants and publishing of educational outcomes
through publicly-accessible services. Finally, by reducing barriers to adoption
of enhanced wetland plants in constructed treatment wetlands, proposed research
will attend to three eminent environmental and societal challenges ? shortages
of clean water for society and ecosystems, increasing energy costs and
greenhouse gases associated with wastewater treatment, and trace contamination
of surface waters with emerging pollutants