* 0933393
* Hybrid molecular modeling and experimental study of structure and reaction kinetics at interface between electrode and polymer electrolyte phases
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2009,02/28/2015
* Hongtan Liu, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 02/28/2015
* USD 300,000.00

0933393 Zhou

Project Summary

Although great efforts have been focused on developments of more effective
and/or low cost electrocatalysts and polymer electrolytes for polymer
electrolyte fuel cells (PEFC) in the last 30 years, the essential technical
requirements for performance, durability, and cost have not been satisfied. One
of the major barriers for PEFC technology is the very slow reaction kinetics and
high activation polarization for the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) at the
cathode. The fact that the ORR exchange current density at the Pt/Nafion
interface is about 3 orders of magnitude lower than that at the Pt/sulfuric acid
interface suggests that the coupling between an electrocatalyst and an
electrolyte is critical. This provides a perfect case for theoreticians to study
and elucidate the mystery with respect to interfaces. Therefore, a unified
approach is proposed to focus on the electrocatalyst/electrolyte couple rather
than the electrocatalyst and polymer electrolyte separately.

Intellectual Merits: The objectives of this research are to elucidate the
fundamental mechanisms that cause the orders of magnitude differences in
reaction kinetics between different electrocatalyst/electrolyte couples, and to
establish a cost effective methodology for designing and computer-testing more
effective and/or low cost electrocatalyst/electrolyte couples for PEFCs. To
reach the objectives, a high throughput hybrid atomistic simulation methodology
will be developed and it will be assisted by in situ X-ray absorption analysis
to define the atomic structure or electric double layer (EDL) structures. This
methodology will be used to evaluate the electrochemical charge transfer and
polarization in ORR at the electrocatalysts/polymer electrolyte interface in
contrast to the electrocatalysts/liquid electrolyte (e.g.H2SO4) interface. The
unified approach in electrocatalyst and polymer electrolyte research is novel
and has the potential to improve our understanding of the fundamental mechanisms
of the EDL between an electrocatyst and a polymer electrolyte and the charge
transfer characteristics. Furthermore, the proposed research will also promote
the fundamental understanding of all other electrochemical systems that involve
solid-state electrolytes, such as high performance lithium-ion batteries,
photoelectrochemical cells, and supercapacitors.

Broader impact: The proposed work will (1) enhance ongoing PhD research programs
on PEFCs and solid-state supercapacitors by providing new tools of molecular
modeling techniques to the study of energy conversion processes; (2) attract,
encourage, and support outstanding undergraduate students to pursue a PhD study;
(3) integrate the information on molecular simulation into curricula of the
courses taught by the PI and Co-PI; (4) integrate the information into regular
community education tasks; and (5) promote education of female and minority
students.