* 0933785
* Collaborative Research: A Fundamental Investigation of Fire Initiation and Fire Behavior in Sparse Vegetation
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Shankar Mahalingam, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Arvind Atreyae Atreya
* 08/31/2010
* USD 98,951.00

0933785&lt;br/&gt;Mahalingam&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this
collaborative research project is to develop advanced modeling technology for
describing fire initiation and propagation in vegetation with low canopy bulk
density. The ability to predict the spread of wildland fires is paramount in
protecting life, property, and natural resources. Current operational models
predict overall fire behavior well for the conditions for which the model was
correlated (e.g., dead fuel beds), but they do not perform as well for live
bushes or trees with high moisture content. Detailed physical models, at either
laboratory or landscape scale, require improved sub-grid scale models of
combustion, especially to describe fire behavior in vegetation that does not act
like a dense fuel bed due to the relative sparseness of the vegetation. This
technology will be based on fundamental combustion measurements of live fuels,
but it will apply to models of landscape-scale fires. The research objective
will be achieved via four inter-related tasks: (1) flame propagation
measurements in live leaves and small branches, (2) fire spread measurements in
shrubs for varying bulk densities, (3) flame propagation models of bushes and
trees, and (4) multi-bush fire behavior models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research will provide a cohesive picture of the phenomenon of fire spread
starting from ignition of a single fuel element, such as a leaf, to a self-
sustaining fire spreading through a larger fuel array such as a forest. The
fundamental physical and chemical processes investigated are also relevant to
the problem of surface fire propagation leading to ignition of crown fires. An
improved fundamental understanding of fire behavior in sparse vegetation will be
beneficial in promoting better predictive capability in other areas such as fire
safety or arson investigation pertaining to identifying ignition sources.
Gaining an understanding of the conditions under which a fire may or may not
propagate within a sparse vegetative fuel bed will provide understanding of how
to control fire spread more effectively in these fuel types through improved
fuel management. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program focused on fire
behavior in sparse vegetation will stimulate interest in graduate studies among
ethnic minorities and women in engineering at both at UCR and BYU by providing a
new and innovative means of exploring ignition and combustion from single fuel
elements to fire spread through multiple fuel elements. Graduate and
undergraduate students trained at UCR and BYU will have the unique opportunity
to interact closely with scientists at the USDA Forest Service laboratories in
Riverside and Montana. This research has the potential to be used by
international organizations concerned with fire spread in shrub lands which
includes Australia, countries surrounding the Mediterranean Sea, South Africa,
and Chile.