* 0933936
* Research on Modeling Large Scale Dynamical Effects on Climate
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Raymond Pierrehumbert, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Anjuli Bamzai
* 08/31/2015
* USD 1,160,480.00

A broad range of climate dynamics research motivated by extra-solar planet
climate, current and past Solar System planetary climate, and deep-time Earth
climate will be pursued. A common feature of this class of problems is the focus
on collective behavior emerging from coupling of interesting fluid mechanical
effects to interesting effects from novel radiative transfer, novel
thermodynamics, or novel geochemistry. Specific problems include the effects of
clouds and subsaturation on the runaway greenhouse, the climate of Super-Earths
about M-dwarf stars, and the seasonal cycles of planets in highly eccentric
orbits. Problems related to the Neoproterozoic climate of Earth include the
effect of coupled dust/ice/climate evolution on deglaciation of the Snowball
Earth, the dynamical effects of carbon-dioxide condensation, and the nature of
the post-Snowball hothouse climate. In addition, several investigations bearing
on anthropogenic Earth climate change will be carried out, including modeling
related to the use of past mountain-glacier extent in paleothermometry,
investigations of the physical nature of feedbacks leading to high climate
sensitivity, and continued development of stochastic models of atmospheric
humidity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this project include
contributions to human resources development for addressing pressing problems in
climate change on Earth. The novel and imaginative problems suggested by extra-
solar planet climate are an effective way to motivate mathematicians, physicists
and astrophysicists at all career levels to get involved in basic problems in
atmospheric physics and dynamics. The demonstration of the universal
applicability of basic physical principles across planets with diverse climates
helps the public to build confidence in the physics on which forecasts of global
warming are based; moreover, the curiosity-driven research on such problems can
lead to unanticipated advances in things like radiative transfer modeling and
can help shake loose new ideas that may relate to Earth climate. Finally, by
contributing to the understanding of habitability, the research serves a deep-
seated human need for exploration and understanding the place of humanity in the
Universe, in much the same was as does research on cosmology.&lt;br/&gt;