* 0933027
* Ethics and Justice in Science and Engineering Training Program
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Karen Barad, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Linda Layne
* 09/30/2013
* USD 314,999.00

This project--supported by the Cross-NSF Ethics Education in Science &
Engineering Program--is a research and education program that trains science and
engineering graduate students alongside social science and humanities graduate
students to create ethical inquiries from within their own practice. The project
addresses a key problem in dominant methods of ethics pedagogy and inquiry: by
treating ethics and justice concerns as issues to be addressed after research
questions and engineering practices have formed, scientists and engineers
experience ethics and justices issues as supplemental, and not fundamental, to
their disciplines. This training program remedies this problem through training
graduate students how to identify and respond to moments within their own
research in which good scientific and engineering practices require
attentiveness to ethics and justice. To do this, it will revise the existing
case-study approach in engineering and science ethics education. Instead of
training students to step back and look at cases that have already transpired,
the program will train students how to create ethical inquiries from within
their own practice, in effect creating their own "case studies" as they arise
from within their own studies.

Through clarifying how science/engineering and ethics/justice meet, the training
program will open up new ways of doing science and engineering that provide
better accounts of the natural world and respond to a broader range of human
concerns. Fellows trained in producing robust and responsible scientific
practice will continue to propagate the methods as researchers and professors,
contributing to wider efforts to produce innovative practices that integrate
ethic and justice concerns into the very design of science and engineering
projects. Results of the project will be disseminated via public symposia and
online via the UCSC Science and Justice Working Group website in a format
accessible to interdisciplinary audiences. The PI and postdoctoral fellow will
disseminate pedagogical outcomes via conference presentations and journal
articles.