* 0933085
* The Interactions Between Vaporizing Liquid Droplets and a Turbulent Flow: Fully Resolved DNS and Experiment
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* John La Rue, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* William Olbricht
* 08/31/2013
* USD 306,000.00

0933085&lt;br/&gt;Elghobashi&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the proposed
numerical/experimental study is to enhance the understanding of liquid droplet
vaporization and mixing processes in a turbulent °ow. The numerical study
employs direct numerical simulations (DNS) to examine the two way interactions
between freely moving vaporizing droplets and isotropic turbulence. The droplets
will be fully resolved in 3D space and time, i.e. not treated as point
particles, and all the scales of the turbulent motion are resolved down to the
smallest relevant length and time scales. The emphasis will be on the two way
exchange of mass, momentum and energy between the vaporizing droplets and the
surrounding turbulent gas. The experiment employs a turbulence generating active
grid and optically accessible wind tunnel section to measure the evaporation
rate of free flying single droplets (i.e. one way coupling) in isotropic
turbulence with properties identical to those in the DNS. Anamorphic optics for
imaging and an interferometric fringe technique are used to provide a large
axial field of view with high resolution droplet-sizing
capability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed DNS study will be the first that fully resolves the flow inside and
outside a large number of freely-moving vaporizing droplets in a turbulent flow.
The detailed results of the proposed DNS, with two way coupling between the
droplets and turbulence, can be used to develop and verify the mathematical
models for the subgrid scales of large eddy simulations (LES) as well as
Reynolds averaged models. It should be emphasized that the detailed DNS data
which will be obtained from the proposed research are not available in any
published experimental or numerical study (Birouk &amp; Gokalp, 2006). The
proposed experimental study will examine the exects of turbulence on the
vaporization rate of a single droplet moving freely in isotropic turbulence. In
addition to enhancing the understanding of the physics of interaction between
turbulence and vaporization, the measurements will be used to validate our DNS
methodology since no other comparable experimental data exist for free flying
droplet evaporation in isotropic turbulence where the Kolmogorov length scale of
turbulence is smaller than the initial droplet size. Hence, the coupled
experiment and computations will determine the key interactions between
evaporation and turbulence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of the proposed study will have a
significant impact on the efficient utilization of energy. This impact stems
from the fact that the vaporization rate is the main controlling mechanism of
fuel droplet combustion and that liquid fuels are the most important source of
energy for all modes of transportation and will remain as such for the
foreseeable future. Understanding the physical details of the vaporization and
mixing processes in a turbulent flow is an essential prerequisite to
understanding the chemical reaction process and the eventual
control/optimization of the energy conversion process. The PIs have a record of
accomplishment in the field of study and in combining research and teaching,
including outreach to undergraduate students and underrepresented students in
the sciences. For example, three women Ph.D. graduates of the investigators are
now University Mechanical Engineering faculty (Univ. of California San Diego,
Univ. of Denver, Calif. State Univ., Los Angeles). In addition, the co-PI is
Regional Director for the California Alliance for Minority Participation (CAMP),
an NSF-funded activity to enhance the number and success of underrepresented
students in STEM fields. Through CAMP, this project can provide research
motivation for such students. The experiment in this investigation will also be
used as a demonstration in COSMOS, a summer residential program for talented
high school students interested in the sciences and engineering in which the co-
PI participates. Our DNS digitized data have been transmitted to universities in
Japan and Brazil as well as the European Science Foundation to be used as a
reference for researchers in Europe. A video made of these data showing the
motion of the longitudinal vortical structures in a spatially developing
turbulent boundary layer has been selected by Prof. G.M. Homsy (UCSB) to include
in the Multimedia Fluid Mechanics-II CD which provides a cross-platform,
interactive, visual resource, for students and professional alike. The results
of the proposed research will be disseminated similarly