* 0933391
* First Principles Design of Ionomers for Facile Ion Transport
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Ralph Colby, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Ram Gupta
* 08/31/2013
* USD 312,510.00

0933391 Colby

Current lithium batteries use a nanoporous polypropylene membrane filled with
lithium salts dissolved in high dielectric constant solvents as the separator
between electrodes. This technology has problems with safety and regardless of
the choice of anion, which moves 5-10X faster than Li+, resulting in anion
build-up at electrodes that significantly reduces battery efficiency, maximum
battery power and recharge time. The obvious choice for a replacement membrane
is a single-ion conducting polymer (ionomer) that has all anions covalently
bonded to the polymer, has no solvent to leak out of the battery and can easily
be made into a thin film. Unfortunately, the best ionomer membranes have Li+ ion
conductivities 100X too small for practical applications. The PI leads a five-PI
DOE-funded team that is attempting to design superior ionomers for lithium
battery membranes, but also is facing a very broad design space, with 30 polar
groups that could be added as side chains and 20 anions that could be attached
to polymers. Combined with at least five backbones that have low Tg, there are
thousands of possible combinations. Furthermore, he is a co-PI on a seven-PI
Army MURI aiming to synthesize ionomer membranes for actuators, which
additionally have flexibility in the choice of cation.

The intellectual merits of this research are two-fold: (1) The proposed research
will suggest anion, polar side group, backbone combinations worthy of synthesis
and directly aid the seven synthesis students on the two teams mentioned above.
(2) Ab initio calculations can be rapidly applied to a wide variety of anions
and cations in different polar media, enabling a detailed understanding of ion
interactions and solvation by polar groups, which should propel our modeling
efforts with Sanat Kumar at Columbia.

The broader impacts of our proposed research are three-fold. (1) The
understanding of how to design ionomers for improved ion-conduction will not
only impact advanced lithium batteries and actuators, but is also vital for
other battery membranes (such as commercial ones transporting F-) and the
membrane electrode assemblies for fuel cells. All ion-conducting membranes
suffer from the fact that only a tiny fraction of counter-ions participate in
conduction, and the proposed research directly addresses boosting the conducting
ion content. (2) Materials development in the energy field is expected to play a
very important role in the future of the United States economy and way of life.
(3) Graduate students trained in this "energy materials" arena will be in
enormous demand in both US industry and academia for at least the next ten
years. Penn State has superb undergraduates and research motivates them to
attend graduate school (15 of 25 undergraduate researchers in the PI's group
over the past 14 years have gone on to graduate school in science and
engineering) with many current undergraduates interested in "energy materials",
including current REU-funded student Daniel King, a Materials Science and
Engineering junior who has won our department's Undergraduate Research
Fellowship for three consecutive years.