* 0933497
* The psychology of scarcity:  its behavioral causes and consequences
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Eldar Shafir, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 08/31/2013
* USD 480,000.00

In this research the Principal Investigators embark on an examination of the
psychology of scarcity, and its associated computational challenges and
behavioral consequences and how they affect everyday decision-making. In
particular, the investigation focuses on scarcity in the realms of money and
time. In the case of money, this leads to the study of poverty from a different
perspective than has been traditional in poverty research. Specifically, the
project explores the notion that scarcity itself -- the chronic state of having
scarce resources -- creates a psychological state with identifiable
psychological and physiological markers, with non-trivial implications for
financial, health-related, and other decision behaviors. Optimal decisions
concerning health, economic well-being, and planning are more difficult for
those experiencing scarcity, it is suggested, because the unique and stressful
context of scarcity yields complex demands concerning tradeoffs, and produces
cognitive depletion, which renders the making of good decision all the more
difficult, with more severe ramifications due to the thinner buffers available
in the lives of the poor. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed studies explore the
characteristics of tradeoff thinking shown by people under scarcity, consider
some of the behavioral ramifications presumed to arise under conditions of
budgeting under scarcity, and then extend the analysis from financial scarcity
to scarcity in time. It is proposed that patterns observed under time scarcity,
among the "time-poor," are behaviorally -- and theoretically -- similar to those
observed in monetary matters amongst the money poor. The proposed studies range
from laboratory explorations of money and time budgeting and depletion, to field
studies of low-income people whose circumstances shift from slack to scarcity.
Implications for a variety of daily tasks, ranging from the take-up of benefits
to resisting temptation and adherence are explored. The proposed research
explores a profoundly different vision of some of the difficulties afflicting
the poor from those that are typically explored in the social and behavioral
sciences -- a view of the sources and consequences of fallible decision-making
under scarcity that very naturally suggests novel policy analyses and programs.