* 0933633
* Multiscalar Measurements in Supersonic Flames
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Adonios Karpetis, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Song-Charng Kong
* 08/31/2013
* USD 310,894.00

0933633&lt;br/&gt;Karpetis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When Chuck Yeager broke the sound barrier with the
first supersonic flight in 1947, the crucial technologies of the day that
enabled such an endeavor were associated with aerodynamic design and strength of
materials. During the last few decades a more insidious sound barrier,
associated with the combustion process necessary for propulsion, has imposed
practical limits on aircraft speeds. Specifically, flow through the engine may
become fast enough to compete with the chemistry that must take place for
complete combustion, resulting in suppression and, ultimately, extinction of
even the fastest flame. The research work in this award advocates a combined
experimental and theoretical approach to the study of high-speed flames for
aerospace propulsion. Its objective is to contribute to the fundamental
understanding of supersonic combustion and ultimately to enable the technology
that must be in place before new, commercial hypersonic aircraft can take flight
in the coming decades. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main issue that will be
addressed is the interaction between fluid dynamics and chemistry in turbulent
compressible flames operating at extreme conditions. The central hypothesis of
the present work is the importance of high Mach number and the associated
pressure variation it induces onto flame suppression and extinction. Line-
imaging spectroscopy of the rotational and vibrational Raman scattering will
allow for complete measurements of local thermochemistry; the technique is
capable of measuring pressure, temperature, and all major species along the line
of the laser in a single-shot fashion within supersonic flames. The line-imaging
experiments will also yield valuable information of two derived quantities:
conserved scalar and scalar dissipation rate. The first is invaluable in the
examination of flame structure, while the second serves as the best available
measurement of the local characteristic timescale of the flow field. Both
derived quantities will be used in this study to examine the flame suppression
and eventual extinction in high Mach-number flames. Spatial and scalar
supersonic flame structures will be examined in ¡¥canonical¡¦ configurations
designed to maximize the flow-chemistry interaction
effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fundamental understanding of the interaction
between fluid mechanics and chemistry under supersonic conditions is the key
expected outcome, and the experimental results from this work should prove
valuable for model development as well as computational comparisons. The study
of flow-chemistry interaction in turbulent flames that exhibit pressure
variation has large significance to a wide range of aerospace propulsion
applications, from jet engine combustors and afterburners, to pulse-detonation
engines and rocket exhausts. In addition, graduate and undergraduate students
will learn by participating in cutting-edge research involving laser diagnostics
and supersonic flames. Students working with the group will also benefit from
summer visits to Sandia National Laboratories and participation in conferences
and workshops. The PI will also develop practical experimental educational
modules on issues in optics and physics for use in grades 9-12. The modules deal
with fundamental issues in optics and physics, and are closely related to the
research aspects of the proposed work. Members of under-represented groups will
be engaged by the outreach as well as the research program&gt;