* 0933414
* Understanding Impacts of Climate Change on Energy Infrastructure in Urbanized Coastal Area
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Robert Bornstein, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 12/31/2012
* USD 387,256.00

0933414&lt;br/&gt;Gonzalez&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objective of this
research is to identify asymmetric warming-cooling trends in coastal areas and
the associated impacts on energy demands. Recent results of observational
studies have suggested an asymmetric warming in coastal California not captured
by global scale climate models or analyses. As a consequence, for this research
it has been hypothesized that climate change impacts at inland sites in
California have increased summer daytime horizontal temperature gradients, which
have increased the strength and frequency of cool summer marine sea-breeze flows
into heavily populated and highly polluted California coastal plains, which in
turn decrease the demand for electrical energy for cooling. To test this
hypothesis, the unique thermal surface gradient will be studied in detail along
California coastlines and the specific implications for changes in average and
peak electricity demands will be investigated. The approach will be to
investigate the changes in both climatological degree days (for both heating and
cooling) and in heat waves (in terms of frequency and severity), and to
correlate these changes with topography, sea breeze patterns, urban centers, and
distance from the coast. The climatological analysis will be correlated with
existing energy demand information from electric and gas utilities in the state
to determine spatial and temporal trends. The climatological analyses will be
projected into the future (50+ years) with a mesoscale atmospheric model, which
will be driven by downscaled information from Global Circulation Models based on
IPCC scenarios. The modeling will address the relative effects of global warming
(different scenarios) and land use changes, as reflected in changes of energy
variables (degree days, peak electricity and gas demands). The project is a
joint collaboration of two minority serving universities (CCNY and San Jose
State University) and Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory.