* 0933219
* Collaborative Research: Developing Novel Surface Immobilized Photocatalysts Using Functionalized C60
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Pedro Alvarez, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Karn
* 08/31/2012
* USD 200,235.00

0933219/0932872&lt;br/&gt;Alvarez/Kim&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is well known that
C60 (buckminsterfullerene) and some of its functionalized derivatives can
photochemically produce reactive oxygen species such as singlet oxygen and
superoxide. This conversion of light energy to oxidizing power has been
extensively studied and applied for photocatalytic organic synthesis and
photodynamic therapy. Although fullerene-based photocatalysis is also a
promising sustainable approach for water treatment, such aqueous phase
applications have been limited by the difficulty to make C60 accessible to
target pollutants in water, since pristine C60 is virtually nonwettable. Even if
C60 is rendered water soluble (for example, by functional derivatization), it is
challenging to prevent C60 release to product water and recycle it for prolonged
use. The overarching objective of the proposed research is to overcome the above
limitations and develop environmentally benign C60-based photocatalysts for
water and wastewater treatment and reuse. They plan to achieve this goal by
immobilizing photoactive form of C60 onto easily recoverable support materials
via covalent bonding. Specific research objectives include: 1) developing new
and enhancing existing methods to immobilize C60 and selected functionalized C60
onto support material surfaces; 2) quantifying their photochemical reactivity,
mainly related to 1O2 production, as a function of support substrate and water
chemistry; and 3) evaluating these novel photosensitizers for degradation of
selected organic contaminants and inactivation of a representative
microorganism. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;They hypothesize that: 1) chemical
attachment of C60 and C60 derivatives to polymeric surface is achievable without
any significant loss in photochemical activity for 1O2 production which
originates from C60s cage structure; 2) C60 based catalyst will exhibit minimal
reduction of photocatalytic activity after prolonged use due to the chemical
stability of C60, and 3) immobilization via covalent bonding will minimize
catalyst release to environment and enhance recycling. Validity of these
hypotheses forms a foundation for developing an innovative C60-based
photocatalysis process. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a two-institution
collaboration that brings together expertise in photoactive nanomaterial
synthesis, fundamental photochemistry, and photocatalyst application for
oxidative degradation of organic contaminants and inactivation of
microorganisms. They will initially employ selected homogenized and immobilized
forms of tetrakis- and hexakis-C60 adducts with carboxylic, hydroxyl, and amine
moieties. Specific tasks include: 1) syntheses of water-soluble functionalized
C60, C60(or derivatized C60)-coated beads, and C60 (or derivatized
C60)-incorporated polymer; 2) characterization of photochemical properties of
these materials with focus on kinetics and mechanisms of 1O2 production using
wet-chemical method, electron spin resonance (ESR) trapping technique, and laser
flash photolysis (LFP); and 3) kinetics and mechanistic studies on
photocatalytic oxidation of selected organic pollutants and inactivation of
representative microorganisms (bacteria and virus). This is one of the first
attempts to apply fullerene-based photocatalysis in environmental engineering.
They are motivated by the unique properties of C60, including 1) exceptional
photocatalytic activity, 2) ability to use visible light for photoexcitation,
and 3) chemical stability. Immobilization of C60 is conducive to prevention of
secondary contamination and facilitating recycle and reuse, which will encourage
further research on applications of fullerene-based photocatalysis. For example,
surface immobilized C60 could be applied for antibacterial surface synthesis or
air purification. Fundamental understanding gained on how the photocatalytic
properties of fullerenes change upon attachment and bactericidal mechanisms will
also be important to inform ecotoxicological risk assessment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ensuring access to inexpensive and clean sources of water
is one of the greatest global challenges of this century. Nanotechnology offers
opportunities to leapfrog over traditional infrastructure-intensive technologies
to develop more sustainable approaches for water management. This project has a
great potential to develop safe, easy to implement, and reusable C60-based
photocatalysts that require only sunlight for water remediation and reuse.
Results will be broadly disseminated in publications and integrated into
undergraduate and graduate courses. They will also train students in an emerging
area where qualified professionals are in short supply. These students will gain
interdisciplinary and collaborative experience with applications of
nanochemistry, photochemistry and environmental engineering.