* 0933144
* Pressurized Metered Dose Inhaler Formulations for the Pulmonary Delivery of Nanotherapeutics to and through the Lungs
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Sandro da Rocha, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Eddie Chang
* 08/31/2013
* USD 339,999.00

0933144&lt;br/&gt;da Rocha&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a health care and
nanotechnology related research project. The lungs have been recently recognized
as an attractive pathway to the bloodstream. Besides its noninvasive nature,
aerosol inhalation therapies have several other advantages when compared to oral
and parenteral approaches for the systemic delivery of therapeutics. The large
absorptive area of the lungs and small aqueous volume that cover the lungs
surface tend to favor rapid drug uptake. However, reduced concentrations of drug
metabolizing enzymes (compared to those in the liver and gastrointestinal tract)
help improve drug bioavailability. Aerosol inhalation therapy is also the most
sensible route for the regional administration of therapeutics to the
respiratory tract. Pressurized metered dose inhalers (pMDIs) are the most widely
used devices for oral inhalation therapies due to their low cost, excellent
compliance, and good aerosol characteristics. It is surprising (at least at
first), therefore, that there are no commercial pMDI (or any other oral
inhalation type) formulations for the systemic delivery of drugs, and important
lung disease such as lung cancer and pulmonary tuberculosis are still being
treated with i.v. and oral type formulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The lack of success in the development of propellant
based aerosol formulations for treating such medically relevant diseases is
related to our poor understanding on fundamental properties of HFAs such as
solvation forces and difficulties in applying advanced/microscopic techniques to
probe such systems under pressure. A basic understanding of how therapeutics
interact with the lung epithelium, and their transport is also preventing the
further development of aerosol formulations. In this work, the investigators
address both issues (formulation development and lung therapeutic interactions).
Propellant based aerosol formulations for the efficient delivery of
nanoconstructs to and through the respiratory tract will be developed based on a
combined computational and experimental approach. Systematic transport studies
of candidate formulations containing the nanoconstructs will be investigated in
model pulmonary epithelial membranes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Upon completion of this project, the investigators
expect to develop novel pMDI formulations capable of efficiently delivering
nanotherapeutics to and through the lungs. The research work will continue to be
inclusive of undergraduates and area (Detroit) high school students, besides the
involvement and training of graduate students. These opportunities are expected
to enrich students and broadly impact the community. The privileged location of
the Chemical Engineering Department at WSU allows the investigators to naturally
outreach African American students, a largely underrepresented sector of the
society in science and engineering. International collaboration and outreach
with partners at institutions in South America will also continue.