* 0933058
* A Fluid-Structure Interaction Study in Wind-Turbine Blades
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Fernando Ponta, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Ram Gupta
* 08/31/2013
* USD 174,162.00

0933058 Ponta

Limitations in the current blade technology constitute a technological barrier
to further reductions in wind-energy cost. Blade manufacturing is labor-
intensive and requires highly-qualified manpower, a bottleneck that reflects
into the increasing share of the cost of the rotor as turbine size increases.
Huge size differences complicate extrapolation of experimental data from the
wind tunnel to the prototype scale. Hence, a key to introduce new technological
solutions that improve the economics of blade design, manufacturing and
transport logistics, without compromising reliability, is to reduce the
uncertainties related to blade aeroelastic dynamics. The objective of the
proposed research is to get a better understanding of the underlying physics
through improved mathematical computational models of the fluid-structure
interaction process. This Virtual Test Environment where innovative prototype
blades may be tested at realistic full-scale conditions, with a reasonable
computational cost, would combine two advanced numerical models in a parallel
HPC supercomputer platform: A model of the unsteady separated flow using
Vorticity-Velocity Self-Adaptive algorithms; and a model of the structural
response of heterogeneous composite beams using Dimensional-Reduction techniques
on the blade sections.

Intellectual Merit: The intellectual merit of this work is the advancement of
computational mathematical models for the complex fluid-structure interaction
problems that play a critical role in wind-turbine blade design, providing also
a fundamental tool for a better understanding of the underlying physics. Besides
its clear relevance to turbo-machinery development, studying the nonlinear
dynamics of fluid-structure interaction provides insights into a widespread
physical topic which makes appearances in many scientific disciplines and
several branches of Engineering. In cases where a rotational component is added
to the relative motion of a body due to the intrinsic operation of a certain
mechanism, the scientific challenge is still greater. These phenomena manifest
themselves at a wide range of scales and present excellent opportunities for
scientific discovery with a richness of technical application.

Broader Impacts: This work will advance industrial development in wind-energy
technology while promoting teaching and learning at both the undergraduate and
graduate levels by motivating engineering students to lead research at the
frontiers of applied mathematics and computational mechanics. This work would
also have transformative effects in the development of wind turbine blade
technology through synergistic activities in collaboration with a high-tech
company located in the region. Besides contributing to the local economy, these
activities would help students gain experience from an industrial setting. This
work intrinsically broadens the participation of underrepresented groups in
research: both the PI and the PhD students involved in this project are from
under-represented groups.