* 0933971
* Individual: NSF Presidential Award for Excellence in Science, Mathematics and Engineering Mentoring (Gerard Parkin)
* EHR,DUE
* 04/01/2011,09/30/2017
* Gerard Parkin, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 09/30/2017
* USD 10,000.00

Dr. Gerard Parkin is an inspirational mentor who has had a profound impact on
the many students that he has taught both in the classroom and research
laboratory. In addition to his role as Professor of Chemistry at Columbia
University, Dr. Parkin has focused efforts on community oriented teaching and
has educated high school, middle school, and elementary school children about
aspects of chemistry. Dr. Parkin made it possible for the students of a newly
opened New York City public school (75% underrepresented minorities and a motto
"Strength in Diversity") to utilize the teaching laboratories in the chemistry
department at Columbia University and provided a program of experiments for the
students. Dr. Parkin secured financial backing from Bruker AXS to support a
symposium and workshop on Structural Methods in Chemistry that exposed a large
number of high school students to the important and advanced scientific
technique of X-ray diffraction and also provided an excellent example of
integration of research and education. Dr. Parkin works to train students in
performing research and seeks other ways to aid their professional development.
He brings women students sponsored by the National Science Foundation from other
universities (typically non-PhD. granting institutions) into his group, thereby
providing them with graduate level experience in research. Faculty at nearby
teaching universities also select Parkin's laboratory to spend their sabbatical
doing research. Both of these interactions are in accord with the NSF mandate of
broadening participation of underrepresented groups and academic institutions
that are less than full participants in the science and engineering enterprise.
Since the New York public school whose students Dr. Parkin brought to Columbia's
teaching laboratories consists of 75% underrepresented minorities, educating
these students about science and engaging them at an early stage of their
careers will have a tremendous impact on the long term objective of encouraging
minorities to take on careers in science.