* 0933670
* High throughput quantification of conformation and kinetics of DNA-protein complexes
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2009,05/31/2014
* Bennett Goldberg, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Rajakkannu Mutharasan
* 05/31/2014
* USD 330,000.00

0933670&lt;br/&gt;Unlu &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF award by the Biosensing
/CBET program supports work by Professor Ünlü at Boston University to study
conformation and kinetics of DNA-protein complexes on a high-throughput
platform. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DNA function and DNA repair depend on
interactions with proteins - histones, transcriptional proteins and nucleases
among them. The regulation of gene transcription involves the formation of
specific protein - DNA complexes that bring distant regions of DNA together and
can sharply bend or kink the DNA. These conformational changes are postulated to
play an important role in the recognition of specific binding sites on DNA by
proteins and thus detailed understanding of the conformation and dynamics of
formation of specific complexes are of considerable biological significance. Yet
current technology does not exist to access the length scales necessary to
directly measure these biomolecular conformation. Current fluorescence methods
do not provide the necessary resolution and while the electron microscopy has
high resolution it destroys the sample. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
program will develop and demonstrate a platform technology for the precise
quantified measurement of conformation of DNA-protein complexes in their native
environment. Our approach combines innovations from Boston University (BU) and
Technical University of Munich (TUM), merging optical interference techniques
with surface electric field driven, highly-ordered DNA arrays.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A method that precisely measures the shape of DNA-protein
complexes in a high-throughput array format can address a range of important
questions about the biophysics of the conformation and orientation of DNA-
protein complexes. The success of this proposed program will provide a unique
tool with significant cost reduction and increase in speed in structural
measurements of DNA-protein complexes and allow for the study the basic
principles of regulation and expression of genes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
significant educational outcome of this program will be training at least two
graduate students. The students involved in the research will have the
opportunity to practice and perfect communication skills within a professional
context through journal clubs, summer schools, research seminars, and
participation in local, national, and international conferences. They will work
closely with international collaborators from Germany and Singapore. Students
also will have the experience and training of expositing to a lay audience, best
exemplified by presenting in middle and high school classrooms, or working with
teachers in summer research and immersive science classes, or with urban high
school students in lab research to build motivation to pursue a STEM career.