* 0933984
* ORGANIZATIONAL: Women in Science and Engineering Mentoring Initiatives
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2014
* Veronica Arreola, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 04/30/2014
* USD 10,000.00

The Center for Research on Women and Gender (CRWG) at the University of Illinois
at Chicago (UIC) created the Women in Science and Engineering (WISE) program in
2002, to address the limited participation of women in the science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) disciplines. The overall goal of WISE is to
recruit, retain and advance girls and women in STEM fields. Since its
conception, WISE has reached out to girls and young women at various stages of
the pipeline, from grade school through undergraduate education. Specifically,
WISE has: a) built a strong network with community organizations and local
businesses to attract grade school girls (K-12) to mathematics and science
disciplines, b) provided tutoring for pre-college young women to improve their
mathematics and science college proficiency scores, and c) implemented a
comprehensive peer mentoring program for undergraduate women in STEM majors,
including a residence hall floor and a student organization. WISE adopts a
comprehensive and developmental approach to recruit more women at UIC by
promoting an educational climate that attracts, prepares, mentors and supports
women, early in their educational pursuits through undergraduate and graduate
school and in the transition to their professional careers. WISE emphasizes the
need for equity in higher educational environments, such as mathematics and
science disciplines, standardized proficiency testing and technology. WISE
successes include: Girls' Electronic Mentoring in Science, Engineering and
Technology (GEM-SET), where 750 6th-12th grade students have received online
mentoring from 220 STEM professionals; GEM-SET Mentoring for Success, where
weekly mentoring and math tutoring has resulted in a 90% enrollment of the
target group in advanced STEM placement and honors courses; WISE mentoring
initiatives in which participants have a 80% 4-year graduation rate compared to
a 50% 6-year graduation rate for the overall UIC campus; WISE residence hall
that has doubled in size to accommodate 30 women majoring in STEM fields; and
WISE travel grants that have allowed over a 100 graduate women to present
research at professional meetings and conferences.