* 0933092
* In-Silico Study of the Structure and Dynamics of VHH Nanobodies
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Fernando Escobedo, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Friedrich Srienc
* 07/31/2012
* USD 154,868.00

0933092 Escobedo

Intellectual merit

In Camelids (Llamas, Alpacas, Bactrian Camels), a subset of antibodies found in
these animals is unique in that the antigen-binding site has only 3 loops and
the variable region is thus made by a single-domain denoted VHH (which contrasts
with the larger two-domain, 6 loop variable region of conventional antibodies).
VHHs thus represent the smallest such structure produced in nature. The goal of
this project is to develop a molecular modeling framework to address fundamental
questions on the relationship between aminoacid sequence and the structural and
dynamical behavior of the binding site of VHH domains. In particular, it is
intended to (1) elucidate the key residues and interactions that underlie the
appearance of canonical (typical) and non-canonical structures in VHHs and (2)
to elucidate the functional relevance of loop flexibility and canonical vs. non-
canonical structures on the binding affinity to antigen sites (epitopes).

Broader impacts

This work is expected to help the broad bioengineering community interested in
the design of antibodies. Such engineered antibodies are important for novel
applications in medicine, separations, and catalysis. Elucidating the structure
and dynamics of the active site of antibodies and the way how small antibodies
bind ligands and proteins is of key importance to understand their biological
function. This work is thus also expected to be complementary to that of
scientists who use NMR and x-ray crystal analyses to determine biomolecular
structure. The proposed modeling work is synergistic with the experimental work
performed by several research groups in the world who have been studying the
structure of uncomplexed and complexed VHH systems. This work will gear up a
collaboration with a colleague at Cornell who is interested in epitope-mapping
studies for antibodies and VHHs. The main educational outcome will be the
training of a Ph.D. student during two years, who will get valuable experience
working in the growing interfacial area that lies between biology, physics, and
computational modeling. In addition, it is expected that at least one Cornell
undergraduate researcher will be associated with the project during two regular
Semesters. Scientific results will be disseminated through professional meetings
and an outreach effort to provide educational software to the local high school.
Results from this investigation will be used in at least two classes: a new
molecular simulations course and the advanced thermodynamics core course.