* 0933228
* Novel Electroanalytical Techniques for Study of Phase Transformation Electrodes
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Chunsheng Wang, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 08/31/2013
* USD 344,606.00

0933228&lt;br/&gt;Wang&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;Lithium ion batteries have been recognized as a critical
technology to enable the advanced electric vehicles (EV) and hybrid electric
vehicles (HEV). An obstacle of the traditional Li-ion batteries to the EV/HEV
applications is their low peak power. Recently, numbers of phase transformation
materials (such as LiFePO4, Li4Ti5O12) have emerged as promising electrode
materials for the EV/HEV applications because of their superior power output.
However, the mechanism for such excellent performance is still not fully
understood due to the lack of accurate electroanalytical techniques to study the
kinetics of Li insertion/extraction in these materials. The existing
electroanalytical techniques, such as cyclic voltammetry (CV), potentiostatic
intermittent titration (PITT), galvanostatic intermittent titration (GITT), and
electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS), rely on the classic Fickian
diffusion in a solid solution phase and thus are not valid for phase
transformation electrodes. The lack of electroanalytical techniques for phase
transformation electrodes has delayed the exploration of high-power rechargeable
batteries. &lt;br/&gt;The recent breakthrough in mixed-control phase
transformation theory achieved by the PI provides a unique opportunity to
develop new electroanalytical technologies for phase transformation electrode
materials. Different from the moving boundary phase transformation model
assuming that the phase transformation is only controlled by Li-ion diffusion,
the mixed-control phase transformation theory accounts not only the Li-ion
diffusion, but also the phase-interface mobility that depends on the interface
coherence, misfit strain/stress, deformations and defects. &lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this research is to develop novel electroanalytical techniques by
integrating the mixed-control phase transformation theory with GITT, PITT, EIS
and CV techniques. The obtained novel electroanalytical techniques are going to
be used to systematically investigate the relationships between the material
properties (micro-structure, particle size and composition), phase
transformation kinetics and the electrochemical performance. The existing high
power electrode materials will be optimized and the next generation high power
electrode materials will be developed. In the preliminary study, the PI has
determined the interface mobility and the lithium diffusion coefficient in the
two-phase region of two types of LiFePO4 using the mixed-control model.
Determining the diffusion coefficient and the interface mobility in phase
transformation electrode materials and obtaining fundamental understanding of
the structure-property relationship are needed for developing next generation of
high-power electrode materials. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will provide techniques for electrochemical
analysis of phase transformation in electrodes. The fundamental relationships
between the material chemistry, structure, composition, phase transformation
kinetics, and electrochemical properties of phase transformation electrodes will
be investigated. New generation of high-power electrode materials will be
created based on the findings of this research, which could accelerate the
EV/HEV development. Although this research concentrates on electrode materials
for Li-ion batteries, the electroanalytical techniques to be developed as part
of this project can also be used for any ion-insertion electrodes including
hydrogen, magnesium, and sodium storage materials. &lt;br/&gt;Broad Impacts
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The knowledge created from this research could be applied
to a broad range of applications, including nitriding, carburizing and
carbonitriding processes in metals and alloys. This research will provide
research opportunities and educational activities for both graduate and
undergraduate students. Outreach activities will be extended to the public to
raise the awareness of the future of energy technology. The application of high-
power batteries in EV/HEVs could reduce the dependence on foreign oil, improve
urban air quality, and reduce greenhouse gas emissions. The PI also plans to
write scholarly reviewed articles and articles describing this research to non-
specialist audiences.