* 0933720
* Environmental Implications of Engineered Nanomaterials on the Important Environmental Model Daphnia
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Rebecca Klaper, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara Karn
* 07/31/2013
* USD 337,578.00

0933720 &lt;br/&gt;Klaper&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An understanding of
the environmental, health, and safety implications of engineered nanomaterials
is fundamental to the progression of the emerging field of nanotechnology.
Engineered nanomaterials are being proposed for use for applications ranging
from medicine to environmental cleanup, which will ultimately lead to their
release into the environment, either directly or as waste. As many pollutants
reach the aquatic environment it will become increasingly important to assess
the environmental implications of nanoparticle release, including their
potential impact on species within aquatic ecosystems. Many regulatory
organizations are struggling to identify how to assess potential environmental
impacts associated with nanomaterials as they exhibit properties that are
distinct from their larger counterparts. Studies to date have focused on
cellular toxicity rather than whole organism studies, and have included limited
types of nanomaterials in any one study leading to difficulties in creating
theories about how nanomaterial properties influence the interaction with key
organisms. The PI's lab has found that nanomaterial composition and surface
chemistry has an influence on the responses of the aquatic crustaceans in the
genus Daphnia. Questions that need to be addressed include: A) Do nanomaterials
with similar surface chemistry have similar impacts on aquatic organisms or is
the composition of the core of the nanomaterial more important? B) How do
different nanomaterials interact with the physiology of aquatic organisms? In
this experiment, Daphnia pulex will be used as a model aquatic organism to
conduct experiments on the impacts of various nanomaterials from molecular and
physiological responses to population level responses. General toxicity
experiments, physiological and behavioral assays will be used to determine the
impact of exposure to several nanomaterials of differing chemical composition.
Impacts of exposure on molecular physiology will be conducted using quantitative
PCR of key genes as well as microarrays for global gene expression analysis. D.
pulex is a model aquatic species for ecology and toxicology and is now a
recognized model species for studies of the impact of environment changes on the
genome. Using this species, results from nanoparticle experiments can be
compared to genomic and toxicology information that has already been developed
for other compounds and will take advantage of the resources available for this
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this project are to determine
the characteristics of nanomaterials that make them toxic to aquatic organisms,
using Daphnia pulex as a model species. The ultimate goal will be to identify
the ways in which nanomaterials may be developed to be less toxic to aquatic
invertebrates. Specifically they will 1) determine the impact of changes in
nanoparticle chemical structure and surface chemistry on the general toxicity to
Daphnia pulex, 2) determine the potential sublethal impacts on reproduction,
physiology, and behavior, and 3) determine the molecular effects of
nanomaterials on Daphnia pulex by characterizing gene expression patterns
specific to each exposure. This molecular data will provide an indication of the
mechanism by which nanomaterials alter the physiology of aquatic
invertebrates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project proposed here will take a
focused approach to examine how alterations in structure and surface chemistry
of one class of nanomaterials (those based on fullerene carbon structures) will
affect the interaction of a particle with the aquatic ecological, toxicological
and genomic model species, Daphnia pulex. Taking this approach will provide
insight into how structure and surface chemistry play a role in nanomaterial-
organism interactions and will provide hypotheses with which to test with other
types of particles with different core structures. The ultimate product will be
not only toxicological data but a tool with which to evaluate other
nanomaterials. In addition the project will provide a means to train students in
an interdisciplinary manner that is requisite for understanding the
environmental implications of nanotechnology.