* 0933626
* Complex Hydridges of Lithium, Aluminum and Boron for Hydrogen Storage
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Armin Ebner, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Ram Gupta
* 08/31/2012
* USD 300,000.00

0933626&lt;br/&gt;Ritter&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of an on-board
hydrogen storage system for automotive applications is a daunting challenge.
Although there are many technical targets and design criteria that must be met,
four of the most important ones are the system volume and weight, discharging
and charging rates, thermal management associated with charging, and dormant
system over-pressurization. It is common for many materials to release copious
amounts of heat during charging. Unless a complicated heat exchanger system is
integrated into the on-board filling operation, off-board refilling has to be
used. It is also common for many materials to release hydrogen uncontrollably
during dormant heating. To prevent hydrogen from being vented to the environment
to circumvent over pressurization of the storage system during dormant heating
either a complex on-board "hydrogen on demand" system is integrated into the on-
board storage system or a material that only releases hydrogen at temperatures
above some minimum level is needed. The PI and his team have discovered and are
proposing to study and fully develop such materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Based on complex hydrides of Li, Al
and/or B and various catalysts and dopants, reversibility of this new class of
materials has been fostered in two ways: first, through the use of a novel
Physiochemical Pathway Approach (PPA) and second, through the use of a simple
Thermal Hydrogenation Approach (THA). These two transformative approaches
developed by the PI and his team utilize either a liquid complexing agent or
high temperature, in conjunction with one or more catalysts, and a hydrogen
atmosphere to foster reversibility in novel Li, Al and/or B complex hydrides.
The PI recently demonstrated the PPA with LiAlH4, which can now be
rehydrogenated with reasonable rates at ambient temperature and low pressures of
3 to 60 bars. They also applied the THA successfully to the new class of Li, Al
and B complex hydride materials that so far exhibit a reversible hydrogen
storage capacity in the 6 to 9 wt% range, reasonable discharge and charge rates
in the 300 to 400C range, and reasonable charge pressures of around 100 bars. As
a key objective, it is proposed herein to elucidate the rich chemistry
associated with Li, Al and/or B complex hydrides through both the PPA and THA to
understand the structure-property-discharge-charge relationships that will allow
for the design and control of material performance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: It is anticipated that the fundamental
insight gained from this project will allow the PI and his team to develop new
and better materials. In the end these new materials will constitute a new class
of high capacity, high temperature, reversible hydrogen storage materials that
have the potential to meet or exceed the design criteria being sought for
automotive applications. Unique educational opportunities are also afforded to
two PhD students. Through the PI's established interaction with the Separations
Research Program at UT-Austin, these students will have an opportunity to
interact with representatives from the top chemical and petrochemical companies
in the world.