* 0933588
* PEET:   Antlion Systematics:   building global expertise in the Myrmeleontidae (Insecta: Neuroptera)
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2016
* John Oswald, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Continuing Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 12/31/2016
* USD 749,496.00

Antlions constitute a large group of neuropteran insects that play important
ecological roles in arid-land habitats as a dominant class of small, soil-based
predators. Our knowledge of the diversity, evolutionary history, and ecology of
antlions is still very incomplete. Only half of the estimated 3000 world species
have been scientifically described, and the historical relationships among these
species remain poorly known. This project will address two high-priority areas:
first, the development of a new global framework for antlion classification
based on a rigorous phylogenetic analysis of molecular data from a large number
of selected species; and second, the description of new species and completion
of comprehensive monographs and identification keys. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
address the recent precipitous decline in the global expertise-base of antlion
taxonomists, this project will provide education and training opportunities for
multiple graduate and undergraduate students in the fields of antlion
systematics and informatics. Project results will include the production of new
print works that address the identification, diversity and interrelationships of
antlion species, and the development of new on-line resources that will
integrate information on antlions into the global digital infrastructure of
biodiversity informatics. &lt;br/&gt;