* 0933034
* IDR: Olfactory processing of flow and odor structure within a turbulent plume
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Joseph Humphrey, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Dimitrios Papavassiliou
* 08/31/2014
* USD 575,552.00

0933034 Reidenbach

Many terrestrial and aquatic organisms use their sense of smell to locate food,
identify mates, and find suitable habitats by tracking odors dispersed within a
turbulent plume. Measurements of chemical plumes show that odorant
concentrations are filamentous and the instantaneous spatial and temporal
structure of a plume greatly depends upon the turbulent wind or water flow
field. These odor signals are sampled by the olfactory organs of animals
navigating in a plume and presumably provide information about the odor source
location. Chemical detection and tracking behavior is not only important
ecologically, but can also provide insight into the design of artificial
sensors. Many animals (insects, crustaceans, etc.) actively sample odor-laden
fluid using appendages (antennae or antennules) that contain rows of chemo-
and/or chemo-mechano sensilla (aesthetascs). The crayfish, Procambarus clarkii,
will act as a model system for the detailed analysis of flow field effects and
odorant exposure on neural responses. A combined particle imaging velocimetry
(PIV) and planar laser induced fluorescence (PLIF) system will measure
simultaneous fluid structure and odor concentrations within a large scale plume,
created within an 11 m long recirculating flume. This information will then aid
recreation of the detailed flow and odor dynamics surrounding an antennule and
individual aesthetascs within a specially designed micro-flow chamber.
Electrical responses of brain neurons to odors restricted to different regions
along the antennule sensor array will determine how spatial and temporal
dynamics may regulate central processing of odor input, and the extent to which
hydrodynamic inputs to one region of the antennule may modify the central
response to odors detected at a separate location. The ease of access to the
mechano- and odor-detecting sensilla, and the ability to keep the antennule-
brain preparation alive for many hours during monitoring, make this animal ideal
for electrophysiological investigation of olfactory processing. This work will
be supported by theoretical and numerical analysis, as well as scaled model
experiments to determine how flicking kinematics and antennule morphology affect
convective-diffusive transport, and physical-chemical capture of odors by
crayfish antennules. The interdisciplinary team with expertise in optical flow
measurement techniques, experimental and computational fluid mechanics and
sensory and single-cell neurophysiology will study the complex interaction
between chemical plume structure and sensory ecology of all animals living in
aquatic and terrestrial environments. During this study the PIs will organize an
international symposium on Sensors and Sensing in Biology and Engineering,
integrating the results into graduate and undergraduate courses taught by the
co-PIs and to an existing NSF-funded education initiative at UVa aimed at
introducing science and engineering concepts and principles to children in the
middle schools using especially designed Engineering Teaching Kits (ETK).
Finally, the PIs will develop an intellectually accessible, sensors-based ETK
with an interdisciplinary senior year team, aimed at female, minority and
disadvantaged children.

This research is cofunded by the BIO Directorate.