* 0933643
* Engineering Mature Microvascular Networks to Improve Pancreatic Islet Transplantation
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Edward Botchwey, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Kaiming Ye
* 07/31/2012
* USD 285,969.00

0933643 Botchwey

Intrahepatic infusion of islets isolated from human donor pancreas is the
commonly accepted method for reversal of diabetic hyperglycemia in clinical
transplantation. The development of an alternate transplant site which could be
conditioned by the localized administration of anti-inflammatory agents, and/or
other compounds to induce neovascularization could facilitate use of fewer
islets and consistent islet graft success using a single donor pancreas. Toward
this end, the proposed research will elucidate the fundamental mechanisms by
which sphingosine1-phosphate (S1P) receptor subtype signaling regulates adult
microvascular remodeling in diabetic animal models. Diabetes is a well known and
significant risk factor in the development of vascular disease, and diabetes is
known to impair new blood vessel formation and endogenous neovascularization of
ischemic tissue. Therefore, the proposed research specific aims will address the
overarching hypothesis that selective pharmacological activation of S1P receptor
subtypes S1P1 and S1P3 induces formation of mature microvascular networks in
diabetic animals by promoting recruitment and proliferation of upstream mural
support cells (smooth muscle cells and pericytes) on arteriole microvessels. Aim
1 will determine the role of selectively induced S1P1/S1P3 signaling during
pharmacological induction of arteriogenesis in diabetic mouse dorsal skinfold
window chambers; Aim 2 will determine the role of selective S1P1/S1P3 signaling
during tissue ischemia and consequent arteriolar remodeling in diabetic mice
using in a spinotrapezius model. The intellectual merit of the proposal concerns
how selective activation of S1P receptor subtypes by engineered S1P receptor
targeted compounds can be utilized to locally suppress early inflammatory events
and induce neovascularization and topics critical to improving pancreatic islet
transplant success. Moreover, as many significant aging associated diseases
arise from impaired or abnormal function of microvasculature, the development of
effective strategies to promote formation of mature microvascular networks is a
critically important medical need with potential for transformative broader
impact on treatment of many important diseases. Integrated education activities
will emphasize cultivation and advising of integrated Capstone Design teams to
1) establish multiple peer-to-peer relationship that cross ethnic, cultural, and
economic boundaries, 2) give students an appreciation for the impact that TE/RM
applications can make on human health worldwide. A short course in regenerative
medicine will also be developed and taught at the University of Ghana to
cultivate greater participation in new "globally distributed design" teams
within the NSF-sponsored BME Planet Network.