* 0933557
* Tailoring the Surface Reactivity of Amorphous Silica Materials through First Principles-based Atomistic Modeling
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2010,08/31/2014
* Gyeong Hwang, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 08/31/2014
* USD 250,000.00

0933557&lt;br/&gt;Hwang&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A theoretical research program
based on first principles quantum mechanics is planned with the goal of: 1)
understanding the surface structure and chemistry of amorphous silica (a-SiO2)
materials associated with point-like defects, surface charges, external
stresses, and chemical additives, and 2) using this mechanistic understanding
toward development of a detailed model for the controlled synthesis of silica-
supported semiconductor (silicon [Si]) and metal (gold[Au]) nanostructures which
have various novel applications such as nanocrystal memories, optical
interconnects, and microporous catalytic membranes for hydrogen purification.
Atomic-level manipulation and accurate determination of the surface structure
and function of amorphous oxides has long been an issue of importance due to
their many applications in electronics, optics, catalysis, and sensors. However,
the difficulty of direct characterization has impeded progress towards
understanding the complex nature of amorphous oxide surfaces. Recent advances in
theoretical techniques and computing power now make it possible to explore
chemical and physical phenomena occurring at the oxide surface at the atomic
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A research program is planned that exploits these
recent advances and harnesses the synergism possible by seamlessly coupling
various state-of-the-art theoretical methods that range from quantum chemistry,
molecular mechanics, to statistical theories. The research will explore Si/Au
nanoparticle synthesis on a-SiO2 because of their technological relevance and
potential; however, the fundamental insight gained into how oxides function and
control the synthesis, structure and function of supported nanomaterials will be
generally applicable to additional systems. Three intertwined subtasks will be
addressed, including: 1) determining the surface structure and strain of thin
a-SiO2 films, particularly in the presence of defects and chemical additives
(such as B, P, N and Ti); 2) formation and nature of surface and near-surface
defects in a-SiO2, with particular emphasis on the role of external stresses,
surface charges, and chemical additives; and 3) effects of surface defects,
additives, charges, and strains on the growth, structure and function of Si and
Au nanostructures on the defective/modified/strained a-SiO2 surfaces. Successful
completion of this project will be facilitated by: leveraging the PI's
prior/ongoing research; utilizing the supercomputer facility at UTAustin; and
collaborating with UTAustin experimentalists who have worked extensively on the
growth and properties of oxide supported semiconductor and metal
nanostructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This project represents
the first systematic theoretical effort that attempts to explain and predict the
complex surface structure and chemistry of amorphous oxides associated with
defects, strains, charges, and chemical additives, as well as the growth,
structure and function of Si and&lt;br/&gt;Au nanoparticles supported on a-SiO2.
While current experimental techniques alone are limited to providing
complementary real space information, the PI anticipates that this fundamental
mechanistic understanding will greatly contribute to realizing atomic-level
control of the surface chemistry of amorphous silica materials with existing
experimental techniques, and in turn the nucleation and growth of supported Si
and Au nanostructures. The outcome will further provide valuable hints on how to
achieve the desired structural, electronic and chemical properties of the
silicon-silica and gold-silica nanosystems for future electronic, sensing,
heterogeneous catalysis, and hydrogen fuel cell
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The research provides a broad
interdisciplinary training to students in the nationally important areas of
nanoelectronics, hydrogen and fuel cells, encompassing: the growth, structure
and function of oxide-supported semiconductor and metal nanostructures;
engineering of oxide surface and interface properties; and state-of-the-art
computational methods and applications. The fundamental understanding and
computational tools obtained from this work can also be applied to explore many
important behaviors and properties associated with a variety of nanomaterials.
The activity also aims to recruit and train minority and women students and
educate K-12 and undergraduate students, as well as the general public about
newly emerging nanoelectronic and hydrogen fuel technologies as well as
computational nanotechnology.