* 0933271
* Equipment Proposal:  Multiple Capillary Probe Inlet System for Spatio-Temporal Studies of Catalysis in Multi-Functional Reactors
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Michael Harold, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* George J. Antos
* 08/31/2011
* USD 85,000.00

0933271&lt;br/&gt;Harold&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multi-functional and periodically-operated
catalytic reactors are emerging, particularly in environmental and energy
related applications. A common thread these catalytic reactors is the complex
nonlinear interactions of multiple chemical and transport processes that give
rise to spatial and temporal gradients of concentration and temperature. The
rational design and operation of the catalyst and reactor requires a
comprehensive understanding of these interactions, hopefully in the form of a
predictive model that developed through systematic experimentation and analysis.
The classical approach of measuring outlet concentration for a range of space
velocities does not provide the level of detail needed to elucidate reaction
pathways and reactor performance features, or to compare with rigorous reactor
models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To this end, the PI will employ a multiple
capillary probe mass spectrometer inlet system for carrying out spatially-
resolved studies of catalysis in multi-functional reactors. The system will be
coupled with an existing quadrupole mass spectrometer and incorporated into a
recently built advanced bench-scale reactor system. The mass spectrometer system
will be used to resolve the concentrations of selected reactants and products in
catalytic processes with spatial and/or temporal gradients, including periodic
NOx storage and reduction for which the PI is supported by a current NSF grant,
coupled periodic NOx storage and reduction and selective catalytic reduction,
and autothermal reforming in catalytic membrane reactors, the subject of a
recent NSF grant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The intellectual
merit of the proposed work comprises the spatial and temporal resolution of
species concentrations and temperature during flow and reaction in catalytic
reactors. These measurements will provide essential information about reaction
pathways and the nature of reaction-transport interactions leading to
propagating concentration and temperature fronts. The detailed insight gained
from these measurements will be utilized in the development of microkinetic and
reactor models leading to improved designs and operating
strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The broader impact of this
study is the development of spatially-resolved mass spectrometry as a new tool
to study catalysis in heterogeneous reactors and to closely couple such
experiments with spatial/multi-dimensional catalytic reactor modeling. The study
will advance the understanding of emerging catalytic processes critical to the
environment and alternative energy; specifically lean NOx storage and reduction,
selective catalytic reduction, and hydrogen generation and purification during
autothermal reforming in catalytic membrane reactors.&lt;br/&gt;