* 0933828
* Reaction Engineering of Covalent Adaptable Polymer Networks
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Christopher Bowman, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 08/31/2012
* USD 275,233.00

0933828&lt;br/&gt;Bowman&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The formation of crosslinked thermosetting polymers
is ubiquitous in our society in applications such as coatings, adhesives,
composite materials, dental materials and rapid prototyping. Unfortunately, the
same crosslinked structure that is the origin of many of the desirable
mechanical and thermal properties results in the polymer shape and properties
being fixed upon polymerization, traditionally requiring degradation of the
crosslinks to change either. Additionally, the polymerization process itself
leads to significant stress development and ultimately warping, material
failure, and the requirement of complex curing processes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI plans to develop monomers that polymerize to form a
new material class referred to as Covalent Adaptable Networks (CANs). These
materials combine the advantageous properties of covalent networks with the
ability to reverse the polymer network structure on demand. Once these networks
are formed, he will demonstrate and understand the various properties that can
be achieved by subsequent adaptation through controlled reactions within the
polymer network, as triggered either by uniform or patterned exposure to light,
by temperature changes, or by exposure to an electromagnetic field. Polymeric
materials such as these that are adaptable and able to respond 'on demand' with
control of stress, shape, plasticity and composite organization are critical to
the development of adhesives, thermosetting composite materials, biomaterials,
polymeric coatings, and metamaterials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI plans to
expand the capabilities of crosslinked polymer networks by this synthesis,
characterization, and development of externally triggerable CANs. These advances
are achieved by developing materials and processes that enable polymerization,
network reversibility, flow, shape memory, crack healing, and composite
organization upon exposure to heat, light, or electromagnetic fields. This
research program is divided into four principal aims: (i) Design and synthesize
new functional monomers that contain allyl sulfides (AS) so that the benefits of
AS-based adaptable networks are expanded to a broader range of conventional
thermosets, (ii) Synthesize multifunctional Diels-Alder (DA)-based polymer
networks in which the polymerization and reversible crosslink formation are
controlled by exposure to an electromagnetic field, either concurrent with or
after the polymerization, (iii) Develop and optimize reaction conditions to form
patterned composite metamaterial structures from the DA-based polymer networks,
and (iv) Use the aforementioned research as a means for training a diverse group
of at least 10 undergraduate students and 4 graduate students in the discovery
learning process and in the fields of polymer science and reaction engineering.
Transformational discoveries will occur in regards to metamaterials fabrication,
reversible polymer network design, and remotely controllable polymer network
structures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
achievement of these goals could lead to advances that provide a foundation for
future technology developments. Specifically, this research will establish a new
range of available crosslinked materials and reaction methodologies that are
appropriate for the formation of a wide range of polymer network structures.
These networks will be valuable in ascertaining the fundamental structure of
crosslinked polymers, as both the microscopic and macroscopic nature of the
network are controllable. New techniques will also be developed to reduce
polymerization induced shrinkage stress. The coupling of polymerization
kinetics, highly localized heat transfer, and Brownian motion of particulates as
necessary for metamaterial formation will yield significant intellectual
advances. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developing
this new class of polymeric materials helps to overcome a problem with
crosslinked polymers by providing a means for reversibly controlling the shape,
stress, and strain of crosslinked networks post-polymerization. With the
hysteresis heating, one will be able to remotely eliminate fatigue and
facilitate crack healing in structural thermosets and composites and the
patterned exposure of the DA-based CANs will enable complex 3D composites to be
formed with an almost infinite array of possible material properties.
Applications in processes as varied as structural adhesives, 3D prototyping,
MEMS, dental materials, optical materials and composite materials all could
benefit from the successful completion of this work. The number and diversity of
the graduate students impacted by the research will be heightened by interaction
with the Department of Education GAANN program that the PI currently directs.
Undergraduate students will participate directly in the research through
independent study projects and research experiences for undergraduate grants.