* 0933921
* URM:   Biology Research Fellowships for Undergraduates at Cornell University
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Ronald Harris-Warrick, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Sally E. O'Connor
* 09/30/2013
* USD 971,247.00

This award to Cornell University is funded under the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). Cornell University will establish
am Undergraduate Research and Mentoring (URM) program to engage under-
represented minority students in intensive mentoring and research experience and
prepare them for graduate studies in the biological sciences. The Cornell
Biology Research Fellowships program will serve 35-50 Cornell undergraduates
(7-10 per cohort) during the five-year period of the grant. NSF funds will
support seven students in each cohort, or a total of 35 students. Through
participation in research seminars and by shadowing faculty, freshmen and
sophomores will have the opportunity to explore different fields of biology
before applying to the program. The Biology Research Fellowships will offer a
carefully designed set of activities that includes two years of funded research
internships in faculty laboratories, a seminar series focusing on reading the
scientific literature, writing research proposals, preparing and delivering
scientific presentations, GRE preparation, and choosing and applying to graduate
programs. Students are also involved in community outreach and peer-mentoring.
Faculty mentors, all of whom have strong records of successfully training
undergraduates in their laboratories, include at least twenty scientists whose
research fields span the range of biology. The students will participate in all
aspects of life in an academic laboratory: learning the approaches and
techniques of their field, analyzing experimental results and developing new
questions, and preparing the results for publications. All students will write
an honors thesis, and faculty mentors will encourage and facilitate co-
authorship on publications arising from research in which the students have been
involved. The Biology Research Fellowships will produce young scientists who can
serve as role models or mentors to groups traditionally underrepresented in the
sciences. During the program, students will begin to experience and contribute
in those roles by working with underrepresented minority students (pre-freshmen,
freshmen, sophomores) as well as through outreach to high school students and
teachers. More information is available by contacting the URM Program Director,
Dr Steven Kresovich (sk20@cornell.edu), or Dr. Myra Shulman (mjs59@cornell.edu),
or by visiting the Cornell Office of Undergraduate Biology website at:
http://www.biology.cornell.edu/brf.