* 0933510
* IDR - Carbon Nanotube Aerogel Networks for Next-Generation Thermal Management
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Kevin Pipe, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 08/31/2013
* USD 965,874.00

AWARD ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0933510&lt;br/&gt;McGaughey
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A persistent
need exists to develop novel materials that may advance the thermal management
of various engineering devices such as microelectronics circuitry. This proposal
deals with the development of a lightweight, high thermal conductivity rigid
porous material that is formed of a network of fused carbon nanotubes. The
resulting material could be attached to various heat generating devices, and
liquid coolants could be passed through the porous matrix, resulting in
significantly enhanced cooling of the device.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: The proposed material is to be fabricated of fused carbon nanotubes.
Measurements of the thermal conductivity and permeability of the rigid matrix
will be made to determine how these properties vary with the structure of the
matrix. Models will be developed to predict the phonon transfer within the
carbon nanotube network, and how the transfer is affected by the molecules of
the fluid that flows through the matrix. Finally, models will be developed to
predict the permeability of the matrix, and its effectiveness in serving as a
thermal management material. A multidisciplinary team of investigators with
backgrounds in Mechanical Engineering, Chemical Engineering, and Materials
Science and Engineering will be involved in the fabrication, experimentation,
and modeling of the multiscale thermal transport phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact: The proposed research is expected to lead to new, lightweight materials
for thermal management of a wide range of devices. A lecture series on nanoscale
materials is proposed for inclusion in the undergraduate curriculum. The
lectures will be dovetailed with current classes, and an assessment strategy
will determine the efficacy of the effort. In Pittsburgh, a program to excite
middle school girls about engineering, involving hands on workshops for the
students is proposed. Girls from underrepresented groups are targeted. A similar
workshop, involving the Society of Women Engineers is proposed for Ann
Arbor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;