* 0933674
* NSF-EPA Workshop on Life Cycle Aspects of Nanoproducts, Nanostructured Materials, and Nanomanufacturing: Problem Definitions, Data Gaps, and Research Needs
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2009,01/31/2011
* Delcie R. Durham, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Paul L. Bishop
* 01/31/2011
* USD 69,999.00

0933674 &lt;br/&gt;Theis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a proposal to convene a
workshop on life cycle research needs and opportunities of nanotechnological
materials, manufacturing methods, and products. Research on life cycle aspects
of nanotechnology has lagged overall research efforts, and even the small (but
growing) effort on environmental, health, and safety is devoted largely to
understanding the fate, transport, and toxicological properties of
nanostructured materials - rather than life cycle resource demands, emissions
and environmental implications. Despite widespread agreement on the importance
of the life cycle perspective, current research efforts with regard to life
cycle assessment per se are miniscule by comparison and exhibit no discernable
trend. The lack of a concerted research effort on life cycle and nanotechnology
means that a number of critical issues that impact environmental quality are not
being adequately addressed. These include resource availability and allocation,
energy requirements, manufacturing efficiency, supply chain management,
environmental properties of nanomaterials, waste generation, and end-of-life
management (which includes disposal, containment, and recycling/reuse).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A focused, two day workshop is planned with a core of
12-15 expert invitees. Additional attendees will bring the total to
approximately 50 individuals. Each invitee will prepare in advance a two-page
paper that addresses one or more of a series of critical questions that frame
the proceedings. These will be circulated and discussed in advance among all
attendees. The goal of the workshop is to establish the basis for a focused
research program that comprehensively addresses the environmental impacts of
nanotechnology using the life cycle approach. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
workshop is differentiated from other nanotechnology research efforts by its
specific focus on life cycle assessment methods, research needs and findings.
The specific objectives are to (1) review existing research, assess the state of
science, and identify gaps in the knowledge base regarding the life cycle of
nanotechnological products and processes; (2) develop a critical understanding
of combinations of nanostructured materials, their manufacturing processes, and
resultant products that offer the greatest promise for improvements for society,
as well as those that offer little promise or have a high probability of
creating or worsening environmental hazards (3) develop a research plan to
address the needs identified (4) establish a pathway forward that could be
pursued by an intergovernmental, or joint intergovernmental-private, initiative
on the life cycle of nanotechnology; and (5) explore the basis of a life cycle
regulatory framework for nanotechnological applications
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will result in a focused research strategy
for managing and improving the environmental profile of nanotechnologies. The
principal output of the workshop will be a final report, or white paper, to NSF
and EPA that will (1) summarize the state of knowledge, gaps, and research and
regulatory needs of life cycle applied to nanotechnological products; (2)
provide a rationale for the need for a focused research program on life cycle
and nanotechnology that includes an analysis of costs and benefits; and (3)
develop an initial plan for such a research program that will explore how it
might be structured (including the potential for a joint government-private
partnership), suggest necessary funding levels, and prioritize research areas.