* 0933496
* Capstone Design and Rehabilitation Engineering at the University of South Florida
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Rajiv Dubey, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 08/31/2015
* USD 124,960.00

0933496&lt;br/&gt;Dubey&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Mechanical Engineering Capstone
Design course at the University of South Florida (USF) has evolved over the past
several years into an ideal course arrangement. The course, based on a 15-week
semester, gives students the opportunity to work on 'real-world' problems in a
structured amount of time. The time constraints imposed on the students mimic
the deadlines that industries must meet. The majority of the course project
ideas, in the form of problem statements, are provided by the Center for
Rehabilitation Engineering and Technology, which is based at USF. The center
identifies barriers of accessibility for individuals with disabilities. The
Center for Rehabilitation Engineering and Technology supplies an instructor and
provides the funds to construct the prototypes. Additionally, the PI is the
associate director of the Center for Rehabilitation Engineering and Technology
and has close affiliations with the School of Physical Therapy, on-campus
Shriners Children's Hospital, and the James A. Haley Veterans Hospital for
access to the target population.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A highlight of this
proposal is the inclusion of the development of recreational devices for persons
with disabilities. Devices or systems to enable people to return to work or
enhance function at home are crucial for one's independence, however being able
to enjoy leisure activities greatly improves one's quality of life and restores
human dignity. Several of the project ideas are an outcome from an exciting and
unique collaboration with the Theatre and Dance Program in the College of the
Arts at USF. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The proposed design and
development of the capstone projects will provide intellectual merit by
furthering assistive and rehabilitative technologies to assist persons with
disabilities to independently perform the activities of daily living. Not only
will the students become knowledgeable and skilled in engineering principles,
the design process, and product development, but there is great potential for
any developed technologies to advance technical and scientific knowledge, via
broad dissemination. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through the dance and engineering
partnership an exciting, rare, and inventive opportunity is presented to
incorporate the arts perspective in engineering design. The students benefit
from this novel educational experience, which encourages them to design
innovative devices for a dynamic and diverse problem set. This allows the
students to stretch creatively and will likely have a far-reaching positive
impact on their lives. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This class will
provide a broader impact in the engineering, assistive technology and
rehabilitative areas through innovative research in rehabilitation technologies
implemented at the undergraduate education level. Unlike traditional senior
design courses, this class encourages students to pursue careers in
rehabilitation engineering due to its focus on assistive technologies. The
training that these students receive through this course will strengthen their
job prospects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Furthermore, through the Center the
students will have direct and continual contact with professionals and people
with disabilities who are potential users of the devloped devices. This contact
will begin in the background gathering/brainstorming phases of project
development and will continue to the prototype phase where the students will
solicite feedback regarding the practical utilization of their devices. An
opportunity, that is not currently available, will be provided through this
grant for an undergraduate to be involved as an instructor helper. The Research
Experience for Undergraduates (REU) program will be utilized to outreach to
different underrepresented educational sectors. Also, the instructors have a
close working relationship with the Engineering Office of Recruitment and
Retention who provide access to a variety of students fitting the NSF inclusion
criteria. Several students are currently involved in The Florida-Georgia Louis
Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation.