* 0933218
* MIDGEPEET:   A Collaborative Effort to Increase Taxonomic Expertise in Understudied Families of Nematocerous Diptera
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2015
* Bradley Sinclair, University of Tennessee Institute of Agriculture
* Continuing Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 07/31/2015
* USD 750,000.00

Diptera, or true flies, are among Earth's most species-rich groups of organisms.
Biting and nonbiting midges make up over 10% of the species, with a
disproportionate number that are economically and medically important, including
those that feed on blood, transmit disease agents, and facilitate aquatic
nutrient cycling. Research will focus on net-winged midges, nonbiting midges,
meniscus midges, sand/moth flies, black flies, and solitary midges; all are
taxonomically challenging, understudied, and insufficiently staffed with
expertise. The project will provide new information on biodiversity and ecology
of these flies and a phylogenetic framework for natural classification and
testing of biological hypotheses. New species will be described, identification
keys prepared, and phylogenetic analyses conducted using morphological,
molecular, and cytological data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The project team will
educate the next generation of taxonomic experts through a synergistic process
involving workshops and integrated methodologies and collaborations. The work
will involve applications of modern technology, including internet-accessible
electronic publications and identification keys, digital image galleries of
specimens, digital reproductions of taxonomic literature, electronic species
distribution maps, nomenclatural databases, and interactive databases of GIS-
compatible specimen data. Museum collections will be augmented with material
from fieldwork. Long-term benefits will include infusion of taxonomic and
biodiversity expertise into the scientific community.