* 0933559
* Predictive Design of Nanocrystal Photovoltaic Materials Based on the Phonon Bottleneck Effect
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Xianfan Xu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Ram Gupta
* 07/31/2012
* USD 324,673.00

0933559&lt;br/&gt;Ruan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of the proposed research is to understand and reduce thermalization
loss in solar cell materials by using the phonon bottleneck effect in
nanocrystals, and therefore to increase the energy conversion efficiency. Due to
the broadband of solar spectrum, photons with energy higher than the bandgap can
generate hot electrons at a temperature much higher than the lattice. Normally
these hot electrons rapidly pass their excess potential energy to the lattice
through electron-phonon scattering processes, losing their excess energy to heat
and causing lower solar energy conversion efficiency. In nanocrystals the
continuous bands become discrete energy levels and the spacing can be engineered
to be larger than the energy of a single phonon, making the electron relaxation
through phonons a slow process. This "phonon bottleneck effect" can lead to
significantly reduced electron-phonon relaxation rates and enhanced solar cell
efficiency. However, the current understanding of this phenomenon is very
limited - the experimental data are often inconsistent, and the theoretical
models are only qualitative, preventing the predictive design of optimum
nanocrystals that maximize the phonon bottleneck effect.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits: In this study, the PIs will integrate
theory, simulation, synthesis, and characterizations to minimize the hot
electron relaxation in nanocrystal solar materials. A non-adiabatic molecular
dynamics method will be developed to simulate the phonon-assisted hot electron
relaxation rates, and will be used to determine the optimum size, shape, and
surface terminations that give the slowest hot electron relaxation. Based on the
numerical results the PIs anticipate to gain a profound understanding of how
atomic structures of nanomaterials affect their electron-phonon coupling. The
computed nanostructures with optimum electron-phonon coupling will be
synthesized with precise size and shape control. These materials will then be
characterized using femtosecond lasers for the slowed relaxation rates. Solar
cells based on these optimized quantum dots will be fabricated and tested and
their efficiencies will be compared with their bulk counterpart. The combined
computation, synthesis, and characterization will allow optimization of the
nanocrystals to achieve the phonon bottleneck effect and higher solar cell
efficiency. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: The research addresses one of
the grand energy challenges for the nation. The project is part of the PIs'
efforts to include fundamental physics into an integrated research-education
effort in energy transport and conversion. The new knowledge acquired from this
project will significantly enrich the courses taught by the PIs. The PIs have
been actively recruiting underrepresented groups in their research programs. The
team will extensively engage in energy education and outreach activities for
K-12 and local community through workshops, seminars, and demonstration
projects. The PIs will also engage in the outreach activities with the heat
transfer and nanotechnology research communities via nanoHUB and thermalHUB