* 0933780
* Advancing Green Reactor Engineering by Fundamental Characterization of Multiphase Flows
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Milorad Dudukovic, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 08/31/2013
* USD 253,625.00

0933780 Dudukovic

Intellectual Merit

Many green chemistries, with theoretically high atom and energy efficiencies, do
not result in green processes due to failure in scale-up because of inadequate
quantitative understanding of the interactions between fluid dynamics, transport
and kinetics. Scale-up and design are often based on empiricism when attempting
to accommodate new chemistries in old reactor types. This leads at best to
suboptimal efficiencies and performance and at worst to failure. A systematic
approach that can generate scale-up and design procedures based on science
rather than empiricism is needed to reduce the risk of scale-up and enable the
realization of new technologies to full potential. The development of such
methodology for multiphase (gas-liquid reactors) and its application to a
bioreactor and carbon dioxide expanded liquid reactor, both employed for green
processes, is the subject of this project.

The rational design of multiphase reactors, which is a prerequisite for
implementation of green engineering, will be enhanced as follows: 1) the state
of the art of measurement techniques in multiphase reactors will be advanced to
provide quantitative descriptions of the flow, mixing and phase interactions in
systems that are currently difficult to quantify, and 2) these newly developed
techniques will then be used to quantitatively describe the fluid dynamics in
two multiphase reactors - a bioreactor and a carbon-dioxide expanded liquid
(CXL) reactor, which play a role in green processes.

Broader Impact

The acquired knowledge of the developed measurement techniques and their use in
providing the foundation for scale-up of green processes will be documented and
disseminated through a variety of means that integrate the proposed research
with education. The multi-scale character of this important problem, its
significance, and the systems approach needed to establish the engineering
methodology for scale-up and design, provides an excellent opportunity for
mentoring of a young post-doctoral researcher in developing the expertise of
integrating this complex multi-scale information into modern engineering design
based on science. The benefits of this project will reach far beyond the
developed measurement techniques, and green-engineered multiphase reactors. The
developed methodology will be applicable to many other multiphase processes and
will generate new knowledge of opaque multiphase flows at elevated temperatures
and pressures.

Undergraduate and graduate students will be trained in the emerging fields of
energy and environmental sustainability. In addition, via the MAGEEP (McDonnell
Academy for Global Energy and Environment Partnership and via I-CARES
(International Center for Advanced Renewable Energy and Sustainability),
(http:/mcdonnell.wustl.edu) launched recently by Washington University, there
will be an international audience for dissemination of these results and for
teaching a new science-based engineering scale-up methodology developed as part
of this project. As part of a major initiative in "Energy and Environment",
Washington University is starting to offer M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in Advanced
Energy Technologies. The results of this research will be integrated in the
existing reaction engineering courses and the new environmental sustainability
courses currently being developed. The results of this research will be widely
disseminated by presentations at conferences, journal publications and through
appropriate websites and networks. All attempts will be made to recruit female
and/or disadvantaged minority students to the project. Also, outreach to the
local high school students, especially female and/or disadvantaged minority
students, will be made to bring them to campus and expose students to the lab
setting and green engineering principles and practice via presentations,
discussions and lab demonstrations.