* 0933484
* Influence of diameter and chirality of single-walled carbon nanotubes on their fate and effects in the aquatic environment
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Patrick Ferguson, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara Karn
* 09/30/2013
* USD 436,013.00

0933484&lt;br/&gt;Saleh&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Single-walled carbon nanotubes
(SWNTs) have emerged as high-performance nanomaterials with numerous
applications, including electronic, optical, medical, and structural composite
technologies. Because of their anticipated role in large-scale industrial
production, there is little doubt that SWNTs will ultimately find their way into
our aquatic environment. The unusual physicochemical characteristics of SWNTs
compared to other nanoparticles -- particularly their very large aspect ratio
and complex colloidal behavior (e.g. aggregation) in aqueous solutions --
preclude meaningful theoretical predictions of their colloidal stability and
transport behavior. Furthermore, there is a complete lack of fundamental studies
on the effects of SWNT structural properties (e.g. diameter and electronic
structure) on their fate, transport and biological interactions in aquatic
systems. Consequently, there exist no reliable methods to predict the fate and
implications of SWNTs in natural aquatic environments based on measurable
physical properties of these nanomaterials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of
this proposal is to fundamentally understand the effect of structural properties
of SWNTs on their fate and biological behavior in the natural aquatic
environment. The study design involves systematic evaluation of aggregation,
deposition, organic compound sorption, and uptake/toxicity in fish (Japanese
medaka) for semiconductive SWNTs for a range of electronic structures (with
consequent variation in diameter and chirality). These studies will be fully
novel, as there are no fundamental studies reported in the literature examining
the effect of basic structural properties on environmental fate and implications
of SWNTs. The research proposed will address the following aims. (1)
Fractionation of semiconductive SWNTs by diameter/chirality using density
gradient ultracentrifugation; (2) examination of aggregation and deposition
kinetics of diameter/chirality-sorted SWNT fractions as a function of organic
matter concentration and ionic strength using state-of-the-art dynamic light
scattering, quartz crystal microbalance, and conventional column-flow transport
experiments; (3) determination of the effect of SWNT diameter/chirality on
organic contaminant adsorption using common headspace-partitioning methods; and
(4) assessment of the uptake, bio-distribution, and toxic effects of
diameter/chirality-sorted SWNTs in Japanese medaka fish after waterborne- or
dietary exposure using near-IR fluorescence spectroscopy and microscopy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will fill a critical gap in the
scientific literature by providing a systematic understanding of the effects of
structural properties on SWNT fate, transport and biological behavior. Results
of this study may lead to structure-property relations for SWNTs in aquatic
environments, allowing a priori predictions of their fate, transport and effects
and therefore meets the definition set forth by the NSF for transformative
research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The expected research outcomes and benefits
include implementation of techniques to systematically separate chiral SWNTs; a
complete understanding of the effects of electronic structure on colloidal
stability, deposition, and sorptive properties; role of SWNT electronic
structure on biological uptake and toxic effects; and finally an increased
knowledge-base on the influence of surface structure on the behavior and effects
of nanomaterials in the aquatic environment. This increase in basic scientific
understanding will ultimately lead to structure-activity relationships from
which we may build strategies to assess risks of nanomaterials in the ambient
environment, as is currently possible for molecular environmental contaminants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed activity will generate critical knowledge to
better understand the environmental implication of a commercially important
class of nanomaterial. The majority of requested funds are directed toward the
training of doctoral students in an emerging and interdisciplinary research
topic. This research will lead to discovery and understanding through teaching
and exploration. It provides for student education, mentoring, and research in a
novel and highly relevant area that is of immediate and critical importance to
our society. This project has potential to involve minority students through
student exchange activities with two minority institutions. Dissemination of the
research results is planned through conference presentations and peer-reviewed
publications.