* 0933294
* Aqueous Oxidation of Methanol by V-Containing Biocatalysts
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2009,12/31/2012
* Israel Wachs, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* George J. Antos
* 12/31/2012
* USD 367,000.00

0933294 Wachs

The selective oxidation of CH3OH to HCHO over supported vanadium oxide catalysts
has emerged as the model system for gas phase oxidation reactions over oxide
catalysts in recent years because the structure-activity relationship for this
catalytic system is becoming fairly well understood due to recent extensive
fundamental characterization and theoretical studies. Selective oxidation
reactions with supported vanadium oxide catalysts in aqueous media, however, are
problematic because hydrolysis of the bridging V-O-Support bonds. In order to
circumvent this issue, inorganic-organic vanadium complexes are typically
employed as oxidation catalysts in aqueous media. For example, the human enzyme
vanadium haloperoxidase (VHPO), an insulin mimic that lowers glucose levels in
blood, is an excellent aqueous oxidation biocatalyst. Thus, there is currently
an excellent research opportunity to bridge the oxidation catalysis fields of
gas-solids over inorganic supported vanadium oxide catalysts and
V-complexes/V-enzymes in aqueous media by using CH3OH oxidation as a redox 2
electron chemical probe molecule.

Intellectual Merit. The objectives of this proposed research are to (1)
establish effective characterization methods and approaches for the study
vanadium oxide catalysts in the aqueous phase in the presence of HOOH and CH3OH
environments with time-resolved in situ and operando spectroscopy studies in the
millisecond to minutes time scale (Raman, UV-vis, 51V NMR, EPR, rapid scan ATR-
IR and quick-XANES/EXAFS), (2) extend the in situ and operando spectroscopic
characterization methodologies to aqueous vanadium haloperoxidase and its
functional organic mimics in HOOH and CH3OH environments, (3) apply the advanced
methodologies to study the VOx structures, oxidation states, reaction
intermediates, mechanism, and kinetics of homogeneous vanadium haloperoxidase as
a biocatalyst for the aqueous phase oxidation of methanol, (4) develop an
effective method to "heterogenize" vanadium haloperoxidase by anchoring the
enzyme onto a solid support, (5) examine the catalytic effect of a rich aqueous
electron environment (to be imposed by an electric current) on catalytic
activity of homogeneous as well as immobilized vanadium haloperoxidase, and (6)
examine the effect of site directed mutagenesis (genetic engineering) on the
VHPO catalytic activity.

Broader Impact. The proposed research program would extend the previous gas-
solid CH3OH oxidation catalysis studies to liquid phase oxidation of CH3OH and
also bridge inorganic catalysis with aqueous bioinorganic catalysis of enzymes.
The development of time-resolved in situ and operando spectroscopic
methodologies for investigating aqueous phase catalysis of inorganic and
bioinorganic catalysts will be significantly advanced by this undertaking and
will have wide reaching implications for numerous aqueous phase catalytic
applications. Application of time-resolved in situ or operando spectroscopic
approaches to enzyme catalysis and methanol oxidation by vanadium
haloperoxidases is essentially nonexistent and, therefore, much is still not
known about the fundamentals of these reactions (mechanism, kinetics, reaction
intermediates, structural rearrangements, etc.). An outcome of the proposed
research program will be the development of a faster, more efficient, selective
biocatalyst for oxidation reactions and a thorough fundamental understanding of
the mechanism and functionality of characteristic amino acid residues (ligands)
necessary for enzyme biocatalytic activity. Vanadium haloperoxidase may provide
a "green" alternative to traditional inorganic catalysts currently used in
oxidation reactions and the new fundamental insights may assist in the
development of improved pharmaceuticals, therapeutics, and management of
diabetes. The versatile nature of vanadium haloperoxidase catalysis may also
lead to biocatalytic improvements in multiple industrial applications.