* 0933642
* Collaborative Research: Explicit filtering and adaptive mesh refinement for large-eddy simulation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Fotini Chow, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Dimitrios Papavassiliou
* 08/31/2013
* USD 257,382.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

0933642/0932613 Chow/Balaras

Large-eddy simulation (LES) is one of the most promising numerical techniques
for modeling complex turbulent flows in a variety of applications ranging from
engineering to geophysical flows. Today, one of the main obstacles to the
widespread use of LES for such applications is the lack of high-accuracy
numerical techniques that efficiently accommodate complex boundary conditions.
The advent of structured adaptive mesh refinement (S-AMR) solvers combined with
immersed boundary methods offers new opportunities for LES since they can
accommodate complex boundary conditions, efficiently distribute computational
nodes and at the same time maintain most of the features of structured solvers.
A combined S-AMR/LES approach, however, requires the development of filtering
and modeling strategies that can deal with the complexity and flexibility
inherent to adaptive grids. This study seeks to overcome these challenges and
make LES a robust simulation tool for a large range of practical applications,
by developing and testing explicit filtering and reconstruction approaches that
allow turbulent fluctuations to accurately cross coarse-fine grid interfaces in
S-AMR. Previous attempts showed significant improvement over traditional
results. These developments will be easily transferrable to existing codes of
respective research communities. In addition, these developments will transform
LES use in engineering and geophysics by improving fundamental aspects of
turbulence modeling and enabling the simulation of flow in complex geometries
that were never before possible due to high numerical errors and high
computational cost. The particular focus applications in this study will enable
the discovery of new physics of rough-wall boundary layers and set new standards
for accuracy/efficiency in computations of atmospheric contaminant dispersion in
urban environments. In addition to graduate students, this project will support
a postdoctoral researcherat UC Berkeley for one year. Career counseling and
grant writing training will be provided through interactions with both PIs.
Student class projects will help create a public interactive website to upgrade
the current pages in Wikipedia on LES and adaptive mesh refinement. The Wiki
websites will aid in spreading nderstanding of the limitations but also of the
great potential of LES as a universal simulation tool.