* 0933081
* MSB/PEET:   PolyPEET:   Enhancing taxonomic expertise in the Polyporales
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2016
* David Hibbett, Clark University
* Continuing Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 12/31/2016
* USD 789,108.00

The Polyporales is a diverse group of fungi that includes "bracket fungi,"
crust-like forms, gilled mushrooms, and others. Recent years have seen much new
information on how the major groups of polypores are related to each other, but
genus-level classification remains poorly resolved, and it is likely that many
species remain undiscovered. To understand the diversity of Polyporales,
classical taxonomic approaches must be combined with morphology and modern
molecular methods. Unfortunately, however, few mycologists have expertise in
both areas, and many of the world's experts are retired or are nearing
retirement. The goals of this project are: 1) To train the next generation of
fungal taxonomists with expertise in morphological and molecular methods; 2) To
produce comprehensive monographs of selected genera of Polyporales; 3) To create
informatics resources for mycologists and the general public; 4) To promote
development of an international community of Polyporales taxonomists; 5) To
encourage participation in science by members of underrepresented groups; and,
6) To raise awareness about mycology among high school students and educators.
The proposed research and training activities will be conducted by an
international team of four "Principal Collaborators," and five "Trainees,"
including three PhD students and two early-career post-doctoral
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As decayers and pathogens, Fungi have profound
impacts on human affairs. They also function as beneficial symbionts, provide
food, drugs, and other useful biochemicals, and serve as model systems for
genetics and molecular biology. However, it is estimated that only 5-10% of the
species of Fungi have been described. The Polyporales contains many wood-decay
fungi, as well as timber pathogens. They play an important role in the carbon
cycle, and produce diverse enzymes that break down lignin and cellulose.
Monographic studies in Polyporales will improve understanding of biodiversity
and will provide resources for applied research into biofuel production,
bioremediation, and other "green" technologies.