* 0933145
* Elucidating Microbial Electron Transport Mechanisms For Optimizing Biocatalyzed Processes
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Yuri Gorby, J. Craig Venter Institute, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Theresa Good
* 08/31/2011
* USD 281,559.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0933145&lt;br/&gt;Orianna
Bretschger&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research has shown that Microbial Fuel Cell (MFC) systems
can be used as cultivation tools to isolate microbial biofilms that perform
Extracellular Electron Transfer (EET) to electrode surfaces. The Principal
Investigators (PIs) will use MFC systems inoculated with wastewater samples to
isolate phylogenetically diverse biofilms that perform EET. These biofilms will
be characterized by applying metagenomic and metatranscriptomic analyses to
explore diversity and gene expression associated with changes in MFC operation.
These data will be used to: 1) identify genes associated with EET; 2) elucidate
EET pathway in the microbial community; 3) devise strategies for controlling
community dynamics for stable systems operation; 4) create new genetic markers
that can be used to monitor EET in-situ during system operation. Furthermore,
the knowledge gained about gene families associated with EET can be applied to
other biotechnology applications that are controlled by EET processes, such as
biosensors and fermentation technology. These data can also be employed in a
bioinformatics effort to identify candidate organisms that could serve as ideal
biocatalysts in biotechnology applications reliant on EET
reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project contributes to a broader impact by: 1) providing opportunities for
postdoctoral research, publication opportunities, and presentations at
scientific meetings; 2) facilitating interdisciplinary undergraduate research in
the areas of molecular biology, electrochemistry, genome sequencing and
metatranscriptomic analyses; and 3) utilizing the developed bioelectrochemical
systems as demonstration tools for community outreach programs including the San
Diego Science Festival and local high school speaking opportunities. In addition
to research opportunities, post-doctoral fellows will also be involved with
grant writing, and mentored about career development and collaborative research
opportunities within other institutions. Undergraduate interns will be
integrated into the publication development process and invited to present their
research during JCVI group meetings and seminars. This research is expected to
produce numerous peer-reviewed publications in high impact journals, which will
contribute to the professional development of the new PI, post-doctoral fellows
and undergraduate interns.