* 0933350
* Research Starter Grant:   Characterization of Genetic and Biochemical Mechanisms of Iron Acquisition by Pseudomonas mendocina strain ymp
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Jonathan Awaya, University of Hawaii at Hilo
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 08/31/2010
* USD 50,000.00

Iron is the most abundant element on earth and thus it is not surprising that
most forms of life have evolved an obligate dependence on iron. However, under
aerobic conditions the majority of iron exists as insoluble ferric mineral
forms. In response to such environmental pressures, prokaryotes have evolved
strategies such as the use of siderophores for sequestering iron from a limited
soluble supply. Siderophores and siderophore-producing microbes have indeed been
shown to have significant effects on rates of mineral dissolution. Pseudomonas
mendocina strain ymp has been studied for siderophore production and mineral
dissolution, but very little is known about the genetic content of any strain of
P. mendocina. The goals of this research project are to characterize genes
involved in iron uptake by both siderophore-mediated pathways, and by
unanticipated iron uptake pathways. The characterization of such pathways in P.
mendocina will lead to a greater understanding of how microorganisms play an
important role in biogeochemical processes as well as potentially providing
unique solutions to enhance bioremediation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts &lt;br/&gt;This project will facilitate student training in the field of
environmental molecular microbiology by integrating classroom education and
laboratory training for minority undergraduates and graduate students of Hawaii.
The University of Hawaii at Hilo is dedicated to undergraduate education and is
a minority-serving institution. Approximately 68% of students are residents of
Hawaii and 21% of those students are Native Hawaiian. The project will have the
following educational components: 1) providing hands-on training of
undergraduate and graduate students in a multidisciplinary laboratory using
molecular, biochemical, and microbiological techniques; 2) mentoring and
bringing in minority undergraduates to the laboratory to work on environmental
molecular microbiology projects as summer research interns; 3) developing a
laboratory-based course in environmental microbiology, which integrates
classroom discussions/lectures and hands-on experience for senior
undergraduates. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;