* 0933537
* Collaborative Research thru NSF I/UCRC Full Grant: Center for the Integration of Composites into Infrastructure (CICI)
* ENG,EEC
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2015
* Antonio Nanni, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Raffaella Montelli
* 06/30/2015
* USD 315,000.00

Center for the Integration of Composites into Infrastructure (CICI)
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IIP-0934097 &lt;br/&gt;West Virginia University
&lt;br/&gt;GangaRao &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IIP-0934182 &lt;br/&gt;North Carolina
State University (NCSU) &lt;br/&gt;Rizkalla &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IIP-0933996
&lt;br/&gt;Rutgers University (RU) &lt;br/&gt;Balaguru
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IIP-0933537 &lt;br/&gt;University of Miami (UM)
&lt;br/&gt;Nanni &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this proposal is to start a new I/UCRC
"Integration of Composites into Infrastructure (CICI)" with a focus on ushering
applications and cost-effective rehabilitation schemes using composites in civil
and military structures. The lead institution of the proposed Center is WVU with
RU, NCSU and UM as research partners. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This new IUCRC will
focus on creating new products for specific applications such as pre-cast
composite bridge decks and pavement panels, and protection systems to increase
the service life of infrastructure damaged by natural and man-made disasters
such as earthquake and terror attack. Advances in processing of composites will
lead to environmental benefits, as estimates indicate that natural fiber based
composites can be manufactured at one-fourth the BTU level of comparable steel
sections, and similarly self-cleaning structural composites will help oxidize
car exhaust. The Center will integrate scientific endeavors complementing the
strengths of all four universities to advance the composite knowledgebase and
applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The center activities will enhance the
international competitiveness of the American industry in the area of composites
including modular construction and rapid deployment techniques using natural and
bio-materials; thus reducing carbon emissions into the atmosphere. The Nation as
a whole would benefit as composite and hybrid material use would, in general,
lead to structures of higher safety, shorter construction times and longer life
spans at a reduced overall cost with the creation of new job opportunities. The
Center plans to recruit graduate students from under-represented groups,
including minorities and women by reaching out to the undergraduate student
population at each university. In addition, Historically Black Colleges and
Universities will be contacted to recruit their students for center activities.
The PIs also plan to publish in various journals and conferences to promote the
scientific research and knowledge dissemination, and will utilize separate
funding mechanisms to educate practicing engineers and end users who are not
familiar with composites.