* 0933621
* RAMAN MICROSCOPE FOR PROBING NANO-BIO INTERFACES AND COMPLEX SYSTEMS
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Nicholas Turro, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 08/31/2010
* USD 70,000.00

0933621&lt;br/&gt;Somasundaran&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is for the
acquisition of an analytical grade confocal Raman microscope for the UFL/CU
I/UCRC NSF Center for Particulate and Surfactant Systems (CPSS) at Columbia
University, for a shared use with other departments. The instrument is essential
in advancing current and planned research at CPSS in such areas as 1) health and
environmental safety and chemical reactivity of nanoparticles (NPs); 2) greener
chemicals for industries; 3) new silicone surfactants and polymers with enhanced
performance. Among current projects in the Department of Earth and Environment
Engineering and other departments which would also definitely benefit from the
use of Raman are: 1) carbon dioxide sequestration, alternative energy, gas
separation membranes; 2) biocolloid engineering for medical applications in
molecular imaging and targeted therapy; 3) determination of geological processes
through identification of dissolved volatiles in high silica magmas,
identification of mineral phases in multi-micron sized inclusions within host
crystals; 4) new nanoelectronical systems; unique electronic, rotational,
vibrational and spin interactions between an incarcerated guest molecules with
the inner concave walls of a C60 host.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
1) Unique, fast, accurate, and non-intrusive techniques of Raman spectroscopy
will be developed for in situ locating of NPs and characterizing of their
electronic, surface, and lattice properties, wettability, agglomeration, and
deposition as well as reactivity (adsorption, acid-base, redox properties, and
the capacity of NPs to generate or scavenge reactive oxygen species, interaction
with cell membranes) at natural and engineered interfaces as well as in cells,
bacteria, emulsions, and suspensions. 2) Based on the scientific data obtained
through Raman and other complementary spectroscopic and microscopic methods, a
new paradigm of nanotoxicity of NPs will be developed. 3) In combination with
other experimental methods and theoretical modeling, Raman microscopy will be
used to understand the synergistic effects of green surfactants with
conventional surfactants, polymers and their hybrids at molecular and
upramolecular levels. Fundamental mechanisms and predictive models for the
aggregation behavior and structure-performance relationship will be proposed and
tested. 4) For the first time, a systematic fundamental vibrational
spectroscopic study will be performed on the surface and interfacial activity of
silicone surfactants/polymers on cotton fabric, as a function of silicone
molecular architecture. The information generated will be used to expand the
existing knowledge base to develop new hybrid silicone structures and to
identify other materials with unique interfacial
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The use of Raman microscopy in
our research efforts will allow 1) the generation of critical knowledge required
to address challenges in the emerging fields of green technologies,
nanotechnology and nanoscience, colloid science, geoscience, medicine, and
materials research; 2) the development of new technological solutions based on a
better understanding of novel and complex materials and their interactions with
biosystems at the molecular level, in particular, fostering innovation in a
broad range of industries that employ surfactants, polymers, and nanoparticles;
3) the enhancement of interdisciplinary and inter departmental collaboration; 4)
the training of undergraduate and graduate students on an instrument with
utility across a wide range of disciplines, promoting their education and their
team interaction; 5) the expansion of the scope of the spectrochemistry
community into the emerging areas of applied sciences and engineering, which
will certainly boost new high quality interdisciplinary research. The research
will help to increase the number of minority students in various laboratories,
as we are aiming to train more minority students through the Engineering
school's special Undergraduate Research Involvement program. Minority students
will benefit through first hand experience in methods of scientific research,
working with advanced analytical techniques, and learning about their
applications in industrially relevant areas. The PI will integrate a part of the
employed experimental studies to develop a laboratory module for use in his
courses Introduction to Surface and Colloid Chemistry and Applied Surface and
Colloid Chemistry.