* 0933810
* Addressing Ethics in the Natural Course of Research: A Joint Research Course for Philosophy of Science, Engineering, and Science Graduate Students
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2009,03/31/2014
* Vivian Weil, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 03/31/2014
* USD 325,029.00

This combined research and education project--supported by the Ethics Education
in Science and Engineering program at NSF--develops a graduate course, for
science, engineering and philosophy of science graduate students to engage in
joint research and address ethical issues as they naturally arise in research.
Through several repetitions followed by assessment and evaluation, the full
credit, semester long course will be honed so that it can serve as a model
adaptable in many settings and formats.

As complex, multi-disciplinary research projects proliferate, observers
recognize that the failure of philosophers of science, scientists, and engineers
to engage directly with the other two areas is a deficiency. Science is
radically social, and experimentation, understanding, knowledge products, and
process are enabled by meanings, rules and values that are established by
specific communities to make cooperation among its members possible and
successful. Many of these elements in the internal dynamics of a scientific
community become problematic when placed in a situation of cooperation with
members of other communities. Language differences alone -- setting aside other
significant differences -- can bring about misunderstanding and too quick
dismissal of work in another discipline that might be valuable for collaborative
projects.

The detailed study of science has shown the value of interdisciplinary and
multidisciplinary cooperation. But the success stories are often accidental,
against the grain of the enculturation of the members of each community and the
community's own values. As emerging technologies create new opportunities and
bring forth new hazards, many acknowledge that attention to ethics and social
responsibility is essential in these new areas. To respond, the proposed course
exposes graduate students to a view of science, engineering, and philosophy of
science that makes the social and normative aspects of each an essential and
valuable part of their understanding of their respective disciplines and
research opportunities.