* 0933958
* URM:   Enhancing Minority Undergraduate Student Research Experiences in Ecology and Environmental Science
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Dafeng Hui, Tennessee State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 07/31/2014
* USD 614,520.00

An award has been made to Tennessee State University (TSU) to establish an
Undergraduate Research and Mentoring (URM) program in order to significantly
increase the number of under-represented minority students who are prepared for,
and motivated to, pursue graduate studies in Ecology and Environmental Science.
A cohort consisting of six students will be recruited each year in the first
three years of the grant, and NSF funds will be used to support each
undergraduate participant for a total of two years. Over the 4-year period of
the grant, a total of eighteen students will participate in the program. The TSU
URM program involves an intensive year-round research training and mentoring for
undergraduates. At least six faculty members from three departments at TSU will
serve as mentors and engage the students in research in a wide-range of
ecological and environmental disciplines, including global change ecology,
microbial ecology, environmental biology, water quality, bio/phytoremediation,
and ecological modeling. Students will be paired with faculty mentors, who will
provide them guidance at all stages of their laboratory research. In addition,
the participants will be prepared for graduate school through activities that
include GRE preparation and enhancement of communication skills, both oral and
written. Students will also be encouraged to spend a summer at one of the
research-intensive universities (such as NSF REU sites), to enhance their
experience in research. Students are also expected to present their work at a
scientific meeting. Additional information is available by contacting Dr. Dafeng
Hui, the NSF URM Program Director, at dhui@tnstate.edu, or by visiting
http://www.tnstate.edu/NSF-URM.