* 0933076
* Direct measurement of dissolved organic nitrogen concentration and 15N/14N ratio
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Dennis Hansell, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Simone Metz
* 09/30/2013
* USD 356,314.00

Dissolved organic nitrogen (DON) plays a significant role in terrestrial,
marine, and atmospheric environments, but is a poorly understood part of the
earth's nitrogen cycle. The concentration and isotopic composition of DON can be
measured accurately in waters where minimal concentrations of inorganic nitrogen
exist; however, there are currently no methods that can directly measure the
concentration or isotopic composition of DON in aqueous samples where dissolved
inorganic forms of nitrogen are present. Traditionally, the concentration of DON
is estimated from the measurement of total dissolved nitrogen, but when DON
makes up only a small fraction of the total dissolved nitrogen, it is difficult
to accurately estimate the DON concentration with certainty.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address this issue, scientists from the University of
Miami Rosenstiel School of Marine and Atmospheric Science are developing a new
and potentially transformative method for studying organic nitrogen in the
ocean. By developing such a technique scientists will be able to directly
measure dissolved organic nitrogen, as well as the nitrogen isotopic
composition, which will provide scientists with a better understanding of the
global nitrogen cycle. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Upon successful development of this
new method of measuring oceanic nitrogen, scientists will be able to
differentiate between natural and anthropogenic sources and sinks of DON, which
will enhance our understanding of the controls on the fertility of the ocean, as
well as its potential to sequester CO2 from the atmosphere. This research will
also provide support for a postdoctoral researcher and a graduate student.