* 0933763
* Thermal Transport and Energy Conversion in Thermoelectric Nanocomposite Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Daryoosh Vashaee, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 08/31/2012
* USD 199,914.00

0933763&lt;br/&gt;Vashaee&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thermoelectric materials have the potential to
directly convert waste heat into electrical energy. Nanocomposite bulk
thermoelectric materials can be fabricated quickly and inexpensively, and in a
form that is compatible with existing thermoelectric device configurations.
Unfortunately, existing theory of thermoelectricity is not able to
&lt;br/&gt;predict correctly the thermoelectric properties of such structures,
and often hundreds of samples might need to be grown and measured, in the quest
to identify optimum nanostructures in terms of high efficiency and low
cost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This proposal aims to develop a
capability to predict the relevant properties of thermoelectric nanocomposite
materials. A nonequilibrium Green?s function technique will be developed to
account for the natural coupling of scattering of phonons and electrons, as well
as other quantum effects. Issues such as crystal orientation and strain will be
accounted for to determine their effects on the bulk thermoelectric properties.
Model predictions will be compared with measurements of thermoelectric
properties of synthesized nanocomposites to optimize the nanoscale features of
the material, the material composition, the doping concentration(s), and the
material processing parameters to improve the efficiency of such inexpensive
thermoelectric materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Development of
highly efficient, inexpensive thermoelectric materials is a key to reduce both
energy consumption and harmful emissions on a large scale. The research will be
integrated into new graduate courses to be developed at Oklahoma State-Tulsa.
Undergraduate students will be involved in the research. Recruitment of students
from underrepresented groups in conjunction with the Oklahoma Louis Stokes
Alliance will be pursued. Participation in an educational program at the Tulsa
Children?s Museum for K12 students will occur.