* 0933853
* PEET:  Taxonomic Expertise in True Bugs:  Systematic and Monographic Research on Assassin Bugs (Heteroptera:  Reduviidae)
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2009,03/31/2016
* Christiane Weirauch, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 03/31/2016
* USD 778,121.00

The assassin bugs (Reduviidae) are charismatic members of the order Heteroptera
or "true bugs." There are many species of assassin bugs, and they exhibit
remarkable diversity, not only in the way they look but also in their behavior.
Many assassin bugs are beneficial because they eat potentially harmful insects.
However, some species feed on vertebrate blood and carry Chagas disease, which
affects millions of people in South and Central America. Unfortunately, we do
not know how many species of assassin bugs exist, nor do we have good ways to
identify them. Very few taxonomists study assassin bugs, which makes it hard to
know much about their evolution, behavior, or even where they all live. This
project will assemble an international team of scientists to train students in
the evolution and classification of insects, with a special focus on the
assassin bugs. The research will combine fieldwork and studies of museum
specimens with powerful descriptive and analytical approaches as well as
development and use of bioinformatics tools, while focusing on five subgroups of
the assassin bugs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biodiversity information on an
ecologically extraordinary group of insects will become available while
advancing knowledge on species that are of medical importance and of interest as
natural enemies. At least five graduate level trainees and five undergraduate
students will be trained in systematics of Reduviidae and the true bugs.
Monographs, online tools including identification keys, an electronic catalog
and a digital library of taxonomic literature, images of type specimens, species
pages, and movies documenting assassin bug behavior will make the group
accessible to educators, ecologists, those dealing with integrated pest control,
and the general public.