* 0933239
* Structure-Function Relationships for Early Transition Metal Carbide and Nitride Cataysts
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2009,04/30/2013
* Xiaoqing Pan, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* George J. Antos
* 04/30/2013
* USD 536,999.00

0933239 &lt;br/&gt;Thompson &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Early transition metal (Group
IV-VI) carbides and nitrides are a fascinating class of materials with a broad
range of potential applications including use as catalysts for energy and
environmentally sustainable processes. These relatively low cost materials can
be produced in nanoscale form with surface areas as high as 200 m2/gr, have been
demonstrated to be active for a number of industrially significant reactions
including water gas shift and alkane isomerization, and are thermally and
chemically stable. The design of nanoscale early transition metal carbide- and
nitride-based catalysts would benefit significantly from a better understanding
of relationships between their structural, compositional and functional
properties. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to elucidate key
structural and compositional features that govern the catalytic properties of
early transition metal carbides and nitrides using two commercially relevant
test reactions, the water gas shift (WGS) and Fischer-Tropsch Synthesis (FTS).
The principal techniques that will be employed to accomplish the project goal
are ultrahigh resolution transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and in situ
x-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS). The TEM and XAS results will be
complemented by results from infrared spectroscopy and x-ray photoelectron
spectroscopy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This effort is responsive to the Catalysis
and Biocatalysis Program goal of supporting multidisciplinary research on the
synthesis and characterization of catalysts that function at the nanoscale.
Potential applications for nanoscale carbide- and nitride-based catalysts
include the production of hydrogen and "green gasoline" via FTS, and
consequently the project supports efforts related to energy diversity and
reductions in greenhouse gas emissions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of the proposed research lies in a significant expansion of the knowledge
base for early transition metal carbide and nitride catalysts. While the
database of reactions catalyzed by these materials has grown, there is little
fundamental information about relationships between their structure, composition
and function. The ultrahigh resolution TEM will allow, perhaps for the first
time, high resolution imaging of the non-metal atoms in the metal atom matrix of
the catalyst. In addition, XAS, one of only a few in situ methods, will provide
the type of compositional, structural and electronic information needed to
develop unambiguous correlations. Relationships derived during the proposed
research will significantly enhance our fundamental understanding of the
character of carbides and nitrides, and could facilitate their design and
development as catalysts and catalyst supports for the sustainable production of
a variety of chemicals and fuels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With regard to the
broader impacts, the proposed research will engage under-represented minority
high school, undergraduate and graduate students in socially relevant research.
The proposed project will leverage on-going education and outreach activities
including the Michigan-Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation and
Undergraduate Research Opportunity Program. Through an expansion of the
University of Michigan Chemical Sciences at the Interface of Education (CSIE)
program, undergraduate and post-doctoral chemical engineering and materials
science students will be able to add education to their professional studies. In
addition, through a collaboration with the IDEA Institute, teachers from the
Detroit and Ypsilanti School Districts, both of which have large populations of
underserved students, will be engaged in summer camp programs focused on
microscopy and surface science. Researchers engaged in the proposed project have
long-standing commitments to increasing the participation of underrepresented
groups in authentic research and integrating research into educational
activities.