* 0933985
* Five Year Renewal of Wireless Internet I/UCRC
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Henry Bertoni, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 08/31/2013
* USD 630,165.00

IIP-0933985 Polytechnic University of New York Bertoni

This is a proposal to renew the Polytechnic University's participation in the
Wireless Internet Center for Advance Technology (WICAT). The multi-university
center consists of the University of Virginia, Virginia Tech, and Auburn
University. WICAT, with Polytechnic as the lead institution, has 25 companies
and 8 federal and state agencies as industry associates. The Center research
addresses cooperative communications and networking; extending battery life of
portable terminals; and wireless applications and associated information
delivery. Finding new and better ways to meet the demands on wireless networks
will continue to be the goal of research being carried out in WICAT overall, and
at the Polytechnic site inn particular. Polytechnic University currently has 8
industry associates and has generated over $300,000 in membership fees. Thus,
Polytechnic University meets the minimum I/UCRC requirements for Phase II (YRS 6
through 10).

Wireless internet research is critical to maintaining the United States lead in
the information technology explosion. Renewal for a second five-year period of
the Polytechnic site will allow continuation of research activities directed
towards four major thrusts that are essential for widespread deployment and
interconnection of wireless devices through the internet and other networks. The
proposed research will continue to study networks built from codes that
cooperate at the physical and network layers, and to demonstrate their
capabilities through hardware implementations. Proposed research on wireless
network security will address problems whose solutions have become even more
urgent since WICAT was founded.

WICAT will create tools to enable businesses and consumers to take advantage of
the enormous diversity of technologies and services that characterize every
aspect of the wireless internet. This breadth is of benefit to both students and
companies regarding employment opportunities. The breadth of WICAT interactions
will provide cultural diversity. At the Polytechnic site, there are two female
and one physically challenged faculty members; and, Polytechnic University
itself has students from 30 states and 50 foreign countries. Laboratories for
hardware implementation and network security will serve undergraduate, as well
as graduate students, providing them access to a wider view of technology.