* 0933838
* Multi-Scale Particle-Based Simulation of Disordered/Ordered Interfaces for High Efficiency Solar Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Stuart Bowden, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Ram Gupta
* 08/31/2012
* USD 316,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-
5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0933838&lt;br/&gt;Honsberg&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/
&gt;The cost of solar cells must be reduced by a factor of two in order to
achieve grid parity. There are a number of new technologies which can achieve
this goal, including advanced silicon, thin film (CdTe or CIGS), organic solar
cells, or, in the longer term, nanostructured photovoltaics. A commonality among
these systems is the predominance of transport mechanisms across
disordered/ordered interfaces that control the device performance. Existing
modeling programs and approaches do not model such effects, requiring a
particle-based approach such as Monte-Carlo modeling, which can accommodate
hopping transport, recombination, and opto-electronic processes. In addition,
the calculations are complicated by the long time scales required for
photovoltaic applications, making a multiscale approach essential. The goal of
this project is to develop a novel modeling approach to simulating and
understanding materials and interfaces where ?hopping? transport controls the
transport and recombination, and then experimentally verify and demonstrate the
ability to match and predict behavior of novel solar cells. The research will
optimize two specific experimental systems (a-Si/Si and organic/Si) and
demonstrate the ability to achieve both transport and low recombination across
such interfaces. Future goals are to use the tool for other solar cell
approaches and materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal has several
scientific novelties as its intellectual merits. One scientific advance is the
development of a multi-scale particle-based, Monte Carlo approach suitable for
modeling disordered/ordered material interfaces. The improved understanding of
these interfaces will be used to develop a match between simulated and
experimental minority carrier lifetime curves of a-S/Si and organic/Si
interfaces, and then develop optimized solar cells based on these interfaces. In
addition to new models, the final scientific advances are to identify approaches
to controlling the interface and demonstration of improved solar cells using
this understanding, and allowing development of novel solar cell structures.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has substantial broader impacts. First, it
addresses a limiting issue for a range of novel solar cell approaches, from
existing commercial devices to novel nanostructured, organic or dye-sensitized
devices, allowing new, higher efficiency and lower cost photovoltaic approaches.
In addition, it will provide unique educational opportunities beyond the
research training afforded to the graduate student involved with the project.
The collaboration of different groups will be formalized through a class on
photovoltaics, which combines the viewpoints and expertise of the different
groups. The collaboration will result in a ?simplified? Monte Carlo simulator
that allows visualization of the transport in such complex structures. It will
be added to the existing photovoltaic educational website developed by the PIs,
which attracts about 1,000 visits a day.