* 0933583
* Active Self-assembly Driven by Chemistry:  Enhanced Kinetics, Reduced Errors, Novel Patterns and Adaptive Nanostructures
* ENG,CBET
* 10/15/2009,09/30/2013
* Yunfeng Shi, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Eddie Chang
* 09/30/2013
* USD 234,317.00

0933583&lt;br/&gt;Shi&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to understand active self-assembly of
chemically driven nanoscale building blocks using multi scale simulations.
Motivated by natural systems, self assembly technique offers spontaneous,
massively parallel structure formation from bottom-up. So far, most research
efforts have been focused on static self assembly that is thermally driven
towards a thermodynamic equilibrium. Significant challenges remain on how to
control the kinetics, assembly defects and to broaden the types of structures
that can be self-assembled. Less attention has been paid to dynamic self
assembly that evolves to a non equilibrium steady state under a dissipative
driving force. Indeed, dynamic self assembly is the dominant assembly mode in
biological systems that ought to be learned. A few investigations on dynamic
self-assembly utilized either macroscopic building blocks under non chemical
forces, or biological building blocks propelled by biomolecular motors. However,
the self assembly of nanoscale building blocks driven by chemical reactions,
which is more relevant to today's nanofabrication techniques, is largely
unexplored. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using state of the art simulation techniques,
active self assembly of nanoscale building blocks will be investigated. The
dissipating chemical energy will be introduced by means of exothermic catalytic
reactions. These reactions can influence the assembly process by: (1) providing
a mechanical driving force via a chemomechanical coupling; (2) inducing a
conformational change of the building blocks; (3) altering the chemical
composition, temperature and flow of the environment. Therefore, the dissipative
chemical force can influence the momentum, interaction and shape of the building
blocks as well as the fluid environment. As a consequence, active self assembly
should possess attractive properties including enhanced kinetics, reduced
assembly errors, adaptability and novel assembly patterns. Through this proposed
effort, molecular-level understanding of the complex behavior of active self
assembly will be developed, the benefits of active self assembly will be
demonstrated and the design rules for experimental realization will be
distilled.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader scientific impacts are two fold. First, the dynamic self assembly
considered here, i.e., the assembly process of nanoscale building blocks driven
by catalytic chemical reactions, provides an attractive, fully tunable system to
investigate the non equilibrium pattern formation. The insights revealed here
will have broad implications in physics, biology and social science. Second, the
suite of simulation techniques to be developed is unique that is capable of
modeling hydrodynamics, diffusion, catalytic chemical reactions and
conformational changes concurrently. Thus it can be used to study diffusion
reaction coupling, energy conversion processes and other bio-mimetic systems at
the molecular level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI is devoted to building a long
term out reach partnership with the Troy High School. The planned activities
include delivering lectures to the high school students and organizing science
tours to Rensselaer, in an effort to attract underrepresented students into
science and engineering. The research tools developed in this effort, including
the simulation, visualization and analysis software, will be freely available to
researchers worldwide.