* 0933957
* URM:   Mentoring Minority Students to Graduate Success through Year-Round Research Projects
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2009,04/30/2013
* William Terzaghi, Wilkes University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 04/30/2013
* USD 61,638.00

This award to Wilkes University is funded under the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). Wilkes University will establish an
Undergraduate Research and Mentoring (URM) program to increase the number of
under-represented minority students who pursue graduate studies in the
biological sciences. A cohort consisting of four students will be recruited each
year in the first four years of the grant, and NSF funds will be used to support
each undergraduate participant for a total of two calendar years. Over the
5-year period of the grant, a total of sixteen students will participate in the
program. Participants will enter the program in the summer following their
sophomore year, when they join teams of undergraduates working on year-round
research projects mentored by one of eight participating faculty. These projects
are directly tied to the mentor's primary interests, which range from
invertebrate development and animal behavior to ecology and plant genomics.
Participants will also follow individualized curricula designed to foster
success in graduate school, including courses emphasizing oral and written
communication skills, interpretation and analysis of the primary literature,
experimental design and data analyses, and preparation for graduate record exam
(GRE). In addition, the Department of Biology will collaborate with the
university's Center for Global Education and Diversity to provide academic and
co-curricular mentoring specifically tailored to help under-represented groups
successfully enter graduate research programs. This will include visits from
minority scientists, visits to research institutions, social functions and other
activities related to enhancing students' acceptance into a field with few role
models. Participants will be selected out of a pool of minority students
recruited from Wilkes and nearby community colleges, based on academic
performance, interviews, recommendations and interest in graduate research. More
information is available by contacting the Program Director, Dr. William
Terzaghi, at william.terzaghi@wilkes.edu, or by visiting the program website at
http://wilkes.edu/urm.