* 0933688
* Fundamental investigation of transport phenomena in convectively actuated biochemical reactors
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Victor Ugaz, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 05/31/2013
* USD 325,000.00

0933688&lt;br/&gt;Ugaz&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major opportunity in the
development of medical diagnostic instrumentation is the highly inefficient
design of conventional polymerase chain reaction (PCR) thermocycling hardware.
Operation of such hardware is slow, expensive, and consumes considerable
electrical power to repeatedly heat and cool the reagent mixture. An alternative
thermocycling approach is to harness natural convection to perform rapid DNA
amplification via the PCR. The proposed design makes use of natural convection,
is inherently simple, and consumes minimal electrical power making it well
suited for portable applications. &lt;br/&gt;This research is aimed at
understanding the fundamental processes that underlie thermally driven
biochemical reactions in convective flow fields. The underlying structure of
these flows is characterized by rich complexity because of operation in a
transition regime associated with the onset of buoyancy driven turbulence. This
regime has not been extensively probed owing to challenges associated with the
inherently chaotic motion. The research involves detailed 3D characterization of
velocity and temperature fields inside PCR reactors using coordinated particle
image velocimetry and laser induced fluorescence of dispersed thermochromic seed
particles. Computational fluid dynamic studies will determine the extent to
which the observed phenomena can be captured. These results will (1) guide
development of improved computational techniques and constitutive models which
in turn will (2) enable the design of new convective thermocycling devices for
ultra rapid PCR.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The experimental and
computational capabilities developed will deliver new insights and innovations
by probing complex single and multiphase flows at the micro and nanoscales with
a level of spatial and temporal resolution that is currently
unavailable.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The potential to achieve an order of
magnitude increase in reaction speed will spur development of portable,
inexpensive, and rugged DNA analysis instrumentation. In addition to the
commercial impact associated with making PCR more affordable, this technology
will spawn new ways to teach physics and molecular biology through the
development of educational experiences for undergraduates at the interface
between the physical, chemical, and life sciences. The underlying principles of
this technology are highly relatable (for example, the flow is established in
the same way as in a lava lamp), making it ideal to target K12 audiences in
addition to undergraduate students. This will provide an innovative way for
students to see how fundamental knowledge can be applied to produce real,
working products.