* 0933856
* Development and Application of Simulation Methods for Clathrate Hydrates Phase Equilibria
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* David Wu, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Eddie Chang
* 09/30/2012
* USD 346,667.00

0933856 Sum

Clathrate hydrates are non-stoichiometric solids (generally hydrates of methane)
with intriguing molecular structures consisting of water cavities enclosing
small non-polar molecules. Accurate and reliable predictions of hydrate phase
equilibria require knowledge of the hydrate composition, a quantity that is not
easily accessible, but is greatly needed given the increasing importance of gas
hydrates in the energy resource landscape. To date, much of the knowledge on
hydrate phase equilibria derives from predictions based on the solid-solution
theory by van der Waals and Platteeuw, which albeit practical, has several
fundamental shortcomings. This proposal undertakes a fundamental study to
investigate the molecular thermodynamics of clathrate hydrates in terms of their
composition. The specific objectives for this project are to develop a rigorous
computational methodology to determine the composition and distribution of
guests in hydrate cavities and to then apply it in the prediction of three-phase
(Lw-H-V) equilibria of clathrate hydrates.

Intellectual Merit. To achieve the stated objectives, this study will develop
and implement computational methods capable of determining solid phase
equilibria. To accomplish this, two main tasks will form the core of the study:
i) Develop and implement a novel algorithm for solid-phase Gibbs ensemble Monte
Carlo with helical boundary conditions to rigorously capture solid phase
equilibria, initially applied to model systems and water/ice, for the eventual
application to clathrate hydrates, and ii) Perform GEMC and classical
thermodynamic integration (TI) simulations, in a parallel effort to determine
the composition and distribution of one or more guests in clathrate hydrates,
including at conditions along the three-phase (Lw-H-V) equilibrium. Although
laborious, the parallel effort with the thermodynamic integration method will
validate and extend the applicability of the method. The proposed work is novel
and transformative in that: i) the methodology overcomes severe sampling
inefficiency that heretofore prohibited direct solid phase simulations using
Gibbs ensemble Monte Carlo, and ii) it will be the first to directly evaluate,
either through simulation or experiment, the absolute equilibrium composition
and distribution of guests in the hydrate cages. If successful, this study will
greatly expand the scope of practical simulations to the many areas that involve
solid phase equilibria, and significantly advance the underlying science of
clathrate hydrates phase equilibria underpinning applications such as their
increasing role as a prominent energy resource.

Broader Impact. This study will develop a framework toward more accurate and
reliable methane hydrate phase equilibria predictions, which are routinely
needed in industry, and consequently provide better knowledge on how to account
for the composition of guests in the hydrate structure. Hydrate phase equilibria
plays a central role in all current areas of technological interest on hydrates.
In addition, the PIs and graduate students will be involved in the outreach
activities coordinated by Prof. Barbara Moskal at CSM. This program supports
students and teachers from elementary to high school by providing direct contact
with the PIs in an out of the classroom to prepare and deliver lessons and
instruction materials. The current CSM GK-12 program serves three public schools
systems in the Denver area with large representations of minority students. In
collaboration with Prof. Moskal, the PIs will develop materials focused on the
science of clathrate hydrates, their potential importance in energy
technologies, as well as an introduction to molecular simulation. The PIs are
also closely involved with the Center for Hydrate Research and the NSF Renewable
Energy MRSEC at CSM. Clathrate hydrates is central in the research and
educational activities of these centers, and the impact of this work will
potentially extend to other timely projects in the centers by leveraging mutual
interaction and collaboration among PIs and students