* 0933015
* Optical and Dynamic Nuclear Polarization Approaches to Hyperpolarization of Nanoparticles for Molecular Imaging
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Charles Marcus, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2012
* USD 300,000.00

0933015 Marcus

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

The overall goal of the proposed research is to functionalize Si nanoparticles
to target common cancers, enhance the NMR signal of these particles using
dynamic nuclear polarization (DNP), and characterize the hyperpolarized
particles in vitro. These are vital steps toward our overall objective of
developing a novel molecular imaging probe based on MRI of hyperpolarized
silicon nanoparticles, to provide a novel tool for measuring and imaging
biological processes in health and disease. The use of hyperpolarized noble
gases for lung imaging has clearly demonstrated the benefits of imaging
hyperpolarized agents, providing both dramatically increased detection
sensitivity as well as eliminating all background signals. Recently, 13C imaging
of 13C-hyperpolarized metabolites has provided a method for rapid metabolic
profiling. However, the very short nuclear relaxation times of hyperpolarized
agents used, typically less than 60 s for most 13C agents, is much too short for
the imaging of targeted molecular probes that require several hours to both
reach and bind their targets. The investigators have demonstrated that Si
nanoparticles can be surface-coated, have their polarization enhanced by over
three of orders of magnitude compared to room temperature Boltzmann
polarization, and that the 29Si nanoparticle spins can exhibit nuclear
relaxation times >500 s. Investigators have also shown that this relaxation time
can be tailored for the application by modifying particle size. The present
proposal focuses on functionalization of the nanoparticles to target common
cancer cells and efforts to maximize and retain the hyperpolarization of the Si
nanoparticles during delivery. Such 29Sibased imaging agents will provide
powerful and much needed new tools for targeted molecular imaging, cell tracking
and the detection of tumors. The proposal consists of three specific aims. The
first aim is to develop targetable Si nanoparticles that can be hyperpolarized;
the second aim is to develop high efficiency dynamic nuclear polarization; the
third aim is to perform standard NMR and MRI on the functionalized
nanoparticles, before and after hyperpolarization.