* 0933468
* The effect of biological surfaces mimics on amyloid deposits formation
* ENG,CBET
* 10/15/2009,09/30/2012
* Daniel Forciniti, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Continuing grant
* Eddie Chang
* 09/30/2012
* USD 200,037.00

0933468 Forciniti

The objective of this study is to determine the effect of the presence of an
interface on the ability of peptides to form amyloid deposits. The formulation
and testing of the hypotheses presented in this proposal will build the
foundations for making further advances in the prevention and/or cure of amyloid
diseases. The proposed research is divided into five tasks: 1) Formulation of
the model and adaptation of a MC suite already developed in our laboratory; 2)
Use of the simulation package to study the aggregation of peptides in bulk and
at solid liquid interfaces; 3) Synthesis of a family peptides and fabrication of
biological membrane mimics; 4) Experimental studies of the stability of the
peptides in bulk under different solvent conditions; 5) Experimental studies of
the formation of amyloid deposits at the solid/liquid interface. The following
questions will be addressed: 1) Is the formation of amyloid deposits a truly
universal phenomenon 2) Does the surface function as a nucleation site and 3)
What features of the surface are more likely to induce the formation of
aggregates and secondary structure within those aggregates Should the surface be
hydrophobic or hydrophilic? Do specific sites on the surface play a dominant
role in the formation of the aggregates. Is the presence of a particular pattern
at the surface needed for the formation of aggregates To address these
questions, the PI will continue with the philosophy that only partial answers
can be obtained by research compartmentalized in either experimental or
theoretical beans. A well integrated approach consisting of both theoretical
(Monte-Carlo simulations) and experimental work (synthesis of new peptides, use
of dynamic light scattering, and atomic force microscopy) is more likely to
achieve success in answering of these questions.

Intellectual Impact

Pursuing and achieving the goals of this project will impact science and
engineering by advancing the knowledge of debilitating diseases and by improving
the understanding of protein stability. The overall philosophy of our approach
will set standards for the construction of model systems to study biological
processes. The development of computer codes and the fact that the codes will be
freely available to the rest of the community will advance computational
biology. The experimental work proposed will stretch to its limits current
experimental techniques, promoting the development of more adequate techniques.
The conviction that research in the biological sciences must consist of a
combination of carefully planned experiments and sophisticated machine
simulations that transpires from the approach will motivate other researchers to
take similar avenues.

Broader Impact

This research will lay the foundations for a better understanding of the
formation of amyloid fibrils. Because of that, human health sciences and society
will benefit from the findings. The P.I. has a solid record as an educator of
undergraduate students in his research laboratory. Therefore, relatively heavy
undergraduate participation in this project is expected. The P.I. has also been
able to attract most (if not all) the minority students that joined the graduate
program at the Chemical Engineering Department of Missouri S&T. The P.I. will
personally recruit minorities from minority institutions to participate in this
project. The project will produce two Ph.D. in Chemical Engineering educated in
state of the art techniques and with the necessary expertise to become the
educators and researchers of the future. The P.I. will visit regional high
schools with the purpose of showing that Chem. Eng. is not a dry discipline by
establishing a bridge between biology and engineering. This project is
particularly well suited for that purpose because of the clear connection with
disease. The P.I. will use return of indirect funds to invite science high
school teachers from local schools to work in the P.I. lab during the summer
months.