* 0933778
* Light Metal Solid Solution Alloys for Hydrogen Storage
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Zak Fang, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Ram Gupta
* 09/30/2012
* USD 305,992.00

0933778&lt;br/&gt;Fang&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the past decades, the searches for solid
hydride materials for hydrogen storage focused on intermetallic compounds that
store hydrogen in interstitial spaces in the crystal lattices, or, more
recently, on complex metal hydrides that are inorganic salt-like compounds of
anions such as [AlH4]-, [NH2]-, and [BH4]-. Light metal ionic hydrides are
another class of materials that have high capacity and reversibility. However,
these ionic hydrides are thermodynamically too stable. The challenge is to
destabilize them without significantly sacrificing their capacities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits: Using light metal solid solution
alloys (LMSSA) for hydrogen storage is a new approach that has not been
investigated in the past. Compared to reactions involving ordered compounds, the
hydrogenation and dehydrogenation of random solid solutions have more
flexibility for thermodynamic tuning. Recently, preliminary experimental results
obtained by the PI and his group have demonstrated that Li-Mg solid solutions
can hydrogenate and form solid solutions of their hydrides, i.e. Li-Mg-H3-x,
rather than physical mixtures of xLiH+yMgH2. This is a significant discovery
because when the relative composition of Li and Mg varies within the solid
solutions, the equilibrium pressure of hydrogen varies accordingly. When this
approach is extended to meta-stable solid solutions such as Li-Al, ideal
hydrogen storage properties are predicted based on basic thermodynamic theory of
solutions. Motivated by this discovery, the PIs propose a comprehensive research
program to investigate and understand the potentials of a series of light metal
solid solution alloys for hydrogen storage. Extensive and systematic
experimental studies with theoretical support will be carried out to investigate
the thermodynamic and kinetic properties of a series of LMSSA, including Li-Al,
Mg-Al, Li-Mg, Li-Mg-Al and Mg-Si. The objectives are to 1) Understand the
fundamental thermodynamics of light metal solid solution alloys and their
reactions with hydrogen, 2) Establish a new approach for developing hydrogen
storage materials based on light metal solid solution alloys, and 3) Establish a
database of hydrogen storage properties of light metal solid solutions
alloys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Both the scientific research and
its integration with education activities proposed in this program have broad
implications by addressing current national needs in the energy area as well as
addressing long-term educational issues. The integrated education plan consists
of the following activities 1) Developing a new course on materials science and
technology for energy production, storage, delivery, and conservation; 2)
Mentoring of postdoctoral researchers and training undergraduate and graduate
students in hydrogen storage materials research; 3) Outreaching to k-12 schools
and children from under-represented groups; and 4) Establishing a web site to
disseminate research results and educate the public on renewable energy and
energy conservation.