* 0933292
* Nonlinear Dynamic Loadings and Responses for Wind Turbine Reliability
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Brian Feeny, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Ram Gupta
* 07/31/2013
* USD 280,254.00

0933292 Feeny

Project Summary

As wind turbines increase in size, challenges in their reliability and
maintenance increase. With the larger wind turbines, gearbox bearing failures
become more frequent, often well before the designed life of the bearing. This
means that loadings, and failure mechanisms, are not yet sufficiently understood
to help the design process. It is likely that there exist unknown dynamical
loading cases.

Intellectual Merits: The aim of this work is to improve the understanding of
wind-turbine blade loadings and how they translate to loadings on the gearbox.
Loadings on the blades can induce oscillations in a variety of ways.
Oscillations in the blades imply dynamic loadings transferred to the gearbox.
Understanding these dynamic loadings is essential to the design of reliable
gears and bearings, and hence economically viable wind turbines. This work will
involve nonlinear perturbation analysis of resonances and stabilities on
reduced-order, nonlinear models of the blades. The identified resonances would
provide test case parameters for simulation packages such as FAST, Romax, and
Simpack simulations. The benefits of reduced-order nonlinear perturbation
analysis are (1) the identification resonances as functions of parameters. This
gives guidelines for choosing parameters in simulations packages. (2) the
identification of "unexpected" resonances, such as subharmonics, superharmonics,
and hysteretic primary and secondary resonances. Some of these resonances may
have coexisting stable solutions that depend on initial conditions, or could be
associated with "dangerous" bifurcations. The modeling includes nonlinear
stiffness and mixed nonlinearity (velocity, acceleration, and displacements),
direct excitations and parametric excitations acting on nonlinear terms, due to
cyclic aerodynamic loading and gravitational loading. The reduced order model
will be coarser than simulation packages, but will lead to analytic expressions
relating behavior to parameters, and will guide parameter choices for higher
fidelity simulations. So the nonlinear studies will assist future, high fidelity
simulations.

Broader Impacts: The resulting improvements in bearing designs will lengthen the
bearing life, and reduce maintenance efforts, and the associated enormous costs.
This will help overcome one important issue that currently impedes the wind
turbine industry from reaching its full potential. As such, results will be made
available to the NREL Gearbox Reliability Collaborative. The project will train
a doctoral student on wind turbine dynamics and design. The project will also
support undergraduate researchers, exposing advanced undergraduates to research.
Under-represented minorities and women will be sought through the Sloan program
and the MSU AAGA program. The PI will add wind-turbine dynamics to his
participation in an MSU Mathematics Science and Technology summer Mechanical
Engineering class for middle schoolers.