* 0933938
* Student-Centered Education in Molecular Life Sciences: Essentials for Educating the Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Undergraduates ASBMB Conf; Colorado Springs, CO; August 5-8
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2010
* Ellis Bell, Colorado College
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/2010
* USD 23,800.00

The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology (ASBMB) conference
on Student Centered Education in the Molecular Life Sciences will be held on
August 5-8, 2009 at Colorado College in Colorado Springs. This provides a unique
opportunity for bioscience educators to attend a meeting devoted solely to
improving their teaching, mentoring and research as it relates to undergraduate
biochemistry and molecular biology (BMB) science education. The meeting involves
participation of and support from a number of NSF- and foundation-funded groups
including Project Kaleidoscope, POGIL, SMART Teams, and the Teagle Foundation to
provide opportunities for dissemination of new pedagogies that have emerged in
recent years. Goals of the meeting are two-fold: 1) to supply undergraduate
educators with innovative, comprehensive approaches to teaching and research
along with providing them with tools for implementation in their own work and 2)
to provide them with networking and mentoring opportunities. No similar meeting
has been organized in the field of BMB education for many years even though the
value of quality education for undergraduates has been well recognized by
national societies in various science disciplines within the past five to ten
years. At this meeting, BMB educators can devote time exclusively to improving
their teaching and research by adapting various successful models that will be
presented and developing their own action plans. Plenary talks will frame
strategically planned hands-on workshop/discussions sessions to provide
successful models for involving undergraduate students inside and outside the
classroom.

Broader Impacts: A meeting designed specifically for diverse undergraduate
professors is a broader impact in and of itself. The meeting will allow PUI
faculty to link their teaching and scholarship in meaningful ways while also
providing opportunities to expand their service work into the classroom by
participating in Service Learning and other K-16 science activities. Results of
the conference and the action plans will be presented in various forums
including publication in ASBMB Today and in the journal Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology Education. Travel awards will be provided to the diverse
graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, and faculty at PUI as well as minority
serving institutions.