* 0933942
* Can a Spray Infused Boundary Layer Alter the Air-Sea Momentum Transfer Rates in High Winds?
* GEO,AGS
* 01/15/2010,12/31/2012
* Brian Haus, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 12/31/2012
* USD 386,830.00

Recent field and laboratory observations have consistently shown that the bulk
aerodynamic drag coefficient levels off in the range of winds from 30-35 m/s.
Above this threshold there are differences in the observed trend from the
limited number of reported observations. Highly repeatable laboratory drag
coefficient measurements for wind speeds up to 50 m/s showed no dependence on
wind speed. In contrast, aircraft-based observations and sub-surface velocity
profiles indicated that the drag coefficient decreased at higher winds. There
were large uncertainties inherent in both studies. Potential mechanisms for a
decreasing drag coefficient have been proposed; while in contrast there also are
proposed mechanisms that would lead to the drag coefficient leveling off for
winds greater than 40 m/s. These theoretical models invoke different spray
effects on the air-sea momentum transfer as the primary reason for the predicted
drag coefficient trends.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This experimental effort will
provide a direct test of the effect of high spray concentrations on the drag
coefficient. Controlled volumes of spray will be injected into the air-sea
boundary layer in high winds in a series of laboratory experiments. A wide range
of spray droplet sizes, concentrations and inflow velocities will be tested.
This will enable us to accomplish two primary objectives, the first being to
determine the trend of the drag coefficient in very high winds. The second will
be to elucidate the mechanisms responsible for the observed trend. Sufficient
spray will be injected to create a multi-layer flow to test the so-called
sandwich model. By varying the inflow velocity and droplet size, surface short-
wave suppression effects of enhanced spray and its corresponding effect on the
drag coefficient will be evaluated. The along-wind velocity of the incoming
spray will be varied to provide a direct comparison with other model
predictions. A robust control volume approach will be used in the Air-Sea
Interaction Saltwater Tank (ASIST) facility, wherein the water surface slope is
used to determine the bulk shear stress. This will allow reliable determination
of the drag coefficient, even in extreme conditions (winds up to 54 m/s). The
focus will be on the high-wind regime (35-54 m/s) where the observed trend of
the drag coefficient in previous lab and field observations with wind speed is
not established and the models for the spray effect diverge. The effect (if any)
of spray concentration, droplet size, layer thickness and ejection (infusion)
velocity on the drag coefficient will be quantified. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
current lack of improvement in skill in hurricane intensity forecasting
demonstrates that there are fundamental weaknesses in understanding of the air-
sea heat, moisture and momentum fluxes in extreme winds. This study will help to
resolve the question of what effect spray loading has on the air-sea momentum
flux. This has important implications for the expected maximum potential
intensity of hurricanes. This project will help to constrain the momentum
transfer coefficient used in predictive hurricane models, thereby contributing
to improved intensity forecasts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Additional impacts of the
research will be support of the PhD thesis project of a graduate student who has
already made significant advances in understanding of the moist-enthalpy
transfer rates in extreme conditions. Community outreach has been a significant
ongoing activity at ASIST. The bulk methods employed in this research are
conceptually simple to incorporate into presentation materials. These will be
made available to the community groups that tour the facility (and the facility
web site) to enhance public understanding of the fundamental processes related
to hurricane intensification or decay.