* 0933857
* Inertial Effects in Porous Media Flows: Experimental and Theoretical Analysis
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* James Liburdy, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* William Olbricht
* 08/31/2013
* USD 299,999.00

0933857&lt;br/&gt;Wood&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. This proposal
focuses on a pore scale investigation of flow and transport in porous media,
with a particular emphasis on dispersion at Reynolds numbers where inertial
effects in the flow field become important. We are proposing a combination of
experimental work, new theory development, and computation for exploring the
importance of inertial contributions to flow and transport in porous media.
Inertial flows in porous media have significance in a wide array of applications
in the field from predicting the performance of packed bed reactors to
understanding subsurface groundwater remediation. In such applications, the
Reynolds number is often in the inertial range, but almost all theoretical
studies of flow and transport in porous media have assumed Stokes (non-inertial)
flow. In the proposed research, we plan to (i) make unique high resolution three
dimensional and three component velocity measurements using particle imaging
velocimetry (PIV) in index of refraction matched porous media to determine the
influence of the inertial flows on dispersion, (ii) extend existing theory (via
volume averaging) to describe the asymptotic and pre asymptotic flow and
transport (dispersion) when inertial flows are present, and (iii) conduct high-
resolution computational fluid dynamics simulations of the flow and transport
processes at the sub-pore scale both as direct corroboration of the experimental
work, and in support of the upscaling theoretical effort.. Our focus will be on
moderate (non turbulent) particle Reynolds numbers in the range 10 &lt; Rep &lt;
150+, but we will also conduct more limited experimental and theoretical
investigations in the unsteady laminar and turbulent flow regimes (Rep &gt;
150+). The hypotheses associated with the proposed research are summarized as
follows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hypothesis 1. The transition from Darcy flow to
nonlinear (Forchheimer Ergun) flow can be explained by the pore scale
redistribution of momentum that occurs when complex flow structures (helical
vortexes, jets, regions of back-flow) are generated in the transition from
Stokes to inertial flows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hypothesis 2. The complexity of
flow structure during inertial flows will increase the dispersion tensor more
than would an equivalent non inertial (Stokes) flow for the same Reynolds
number. This will be most evident for the transverse dispersion component of the
dispersion tensor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hypothesis 3. As the particle Reynolds
number increases, the influence of the transient evolution of the dispersion
tensor becomes greater (in the sense that the residence time of solutes will
become correspondingly shorter in a finite bed). This influence will be manifest
by the dependence of the dispersion tensor on bed location or bed
length.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. We have identified broader impacts
that the proposed work will have in the areas of (i) promoting discovery and
understanding while promoting training and learning, (ii) enhancing networks and
partnerships, and (iii) participation of underrepresented groups. These are
summarized as follows. Promoting Training and Learning. We have proposed efforts
to promote training in learning at the undergraduate level (through an existing
mentoring arrangement with the OSU NASA undergraduate Microgravity Flight Team
[MGFT]), K-12 level (by expanding our existing interactions with the OSU SMILE
outreach program, and providing visual fluid mechanics demonstrations that
excite students to the power of scientific experimental measurements), and
graduate level (by arranging to send a student to the Pacific Northwest National
Laboratory [PNNL] for a summer research experience). These educational
activities are described in greater detail in Section 4.1 of the proposal.
Enhancing networks and partnerships. This proposal expands existing
collaborations between the PIs and researchers at PNNL, and also establishes a
new inter departmental interaction among PIs Wood and Liburdy. The collaboration
with PNNL is important because (i) PNNL has proven to provide excellent
opportunities for graduate students (as described in Section 4.1), (ii) there is
a well equipped user facility at PNNL (EMSL) that has provided research
equipment and expertise to PI Wood in the past, and (iii) the lab has the
potential to provide employment opportunities to our students. These
opportunities are described in additional detail in section 4.2 of the proposal.
Participation of Underrepresented Groups. The PIs are committed to promoting
diversity and encouraging the participation of underrepresented groups. The K-12
educational outreach described in section 4.1 is very effective at reaching
under represented groups, particularly girls. The PIs have had particular
success in encouraging women to pursue PhD studies, and this will remain a focus
in the future.