* 0933563
* Novel Metal-Organic Framework/Polymer Membranes for Facilitated Gas Transport
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* John Ferraris, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Rosemarie D. Wesson
* 08/31/2014
* USD 307,799.00

0933563&lt;br/&gt;Ferraris&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF award by the
Chemical and Biological Separations program supports the work by Professor John
P. Ferraris, Kenneth J. Balkus, Jr., and Inga H. Musselman at the University of
Texas at Dallas to design, fabricate and test mixed matrix membranes (MMMs) for
gas separations. This project will utilize novel materials that simultaneously
target selected separations and provide improved interfacial contact with the
polymer matrix. We have discovered that high loadings of nanoporous metal-
organic frameworks (MOFs) in polymers can provide the long sought after
breakthrough technology. MOFs offer some of the highest surface areas ever
reported as well as the selective adsorption of gases involved in industrially
important separations including CO2, CH4, O2, and N2. Many of these metal-
organic frameworks have exceptional thermal and chemical stability such that
MOFs could be competitive with zeolites for commercial separations. This novel
class of materials has enabled us to fabricate MMMs with unprecedented loadings
[&gt;80% (w/w)], which we believe is the key to finally realizing the promise of
mixed-matrix membranes for gas separations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of this project on energy and the environment include numerous tasks
that will lead to the integration of research and multilevel education in the
area of membrane science and novel nanomaterials. The success of this
potentially high impact research effort will lead to significant benefits to
society including replacement of energy-intensive separations with membranes
resulting in both energy and economic savings. A strong educational component
will coincide with the research activities that will engage students at both the
graduate and undergraduate levels as well as students from underrepresented
groups and women. The skills acquired by students during this project will
enhance their preparation for careers in membrane engineering, nanotechnology,
energy, and materials science. In addition to seminars and course development on
membranes and their applications, we seek to engage students at all levels in
the study of membranes and nanomaterials. We are also committed to high school
student research experiences through a number of summer programs and anticipate
that this project will also impact the community at large by educating our high
school teachers and students.