* 0933605
* When particles should not stick: Understanding the causes for unfavorable particle deposition
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* German Drazer, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Eddie Chang
* 08/31/2013
* USD 299,997.00

0933605&lt;br/&gt;Drazer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study of particle deposition
at solid liquid interfaces is central to a number of technological applications,
such as filtration, oil recovery, paints, and water treatment, just to name a
few. Originally proposed to explain aggregation phenomena in colloidal
dispersions DLVO theory has proven extremely successful and robust to describe
particle deposition when the conditions are favorable. On the other hand, there
is a clear disagreement between the theory and experiment for the deposition of
colloidal particles under unfavorable chemical conditions, that is, when
electrostatic repulsion creates a barrier to particle deposition. In most cases,
the observed deposition is larger than that expected from theoretical models,
such as the classical colloidal filtration theory (CFT). Although several
explanations have been proposed to address this discrepancy our understanding
remains fragmented and there is no unified description that successfully
explains deposition under unfavorable conditions. In addition, most experiments
measure effluent concentrations or other quantities that are only indirectly
related to deposition. In order to determine why deposition under unfavorable
conditions deviates strongly from the classical treatment of particle
deposition, a series of simple experiments that provide not only average results
but also detailed information on individual deposition events at the particle
level and their statistical distributions will be performed. In addition, the
proposed experiments will be performed under simple and well controlled geometry
and flow conditions, to further enable a direct comparison with theoretical
predictions and to suggest corrections to the theory where
needed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed work will help resolve a long standing issue as to why unfavorable
deposition exists in the first place. In addition, understanding particle
deposition and reentrainment will impact a wide range of disciplines, such as
oil recovery strategies and microfluidic devices. Therefore, there is an
important engineering rationale in understanding the underlying causes for
particle deposition under unfavorable conditions. Whether surface charge
heterogeneities or poor determination of the surface potential of the collector
is at the root of the observed discrepancies is unclear. The design of simple
and versatile experiments to address these issues will lead to an ideal platform
to study the fundamentals of particle deposition from both an experimental and
theoretical perspective. Moreover, the proposed particle tracking experiments
will provide detailed information on the deposition phenomena at the level of
individual particles that can be directly compared with Brownian dynamic
simulations. In addition, the tools that will be developed in this project will
allow, in the future, studying the deposition of more complex colloids, such as
bacteria, viruses, or minerals of various shapes and surface charge
distribution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broad Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact of this work lies in both education and outreach activities, as
well as on its technologically enabling capabilities. Training will be provided
to graduate, undergraduates, and high school students in an interdisciplinary
environment that includes a strong exposure to the fields of materials and
interfacial science as well as transport phenomena. It will also provide
experience in a broad range of experimental, modeling and simulations tools and
methods. The PIs educational philosophy is designed to foster a true passion for
science in students by giving them opportunities to actively produce scientific
material, rather than acting as passive consumers. In the lab, undergraduates
and high school students are encouraged to present their findings within the
group and externally, including authorship in peer reviewed scientific
publications. From a scientific and technological perspective understanding
particle deposition will impact several disciplines, such as oil recovery
strategies. In fact, one of the major problems in oil production is the drastic
reduction in permeability of reservoir rocks due to clays and other minerals
released in the form of fine particles during injection. Another area that would
benefit from the present work is that of microfluidic devices and lab-on-a-chip
systems. A large number of microfluidic devices involving the transport of
suspended species are being investigated for potential applications in areas
that range from medicine, to the detection of explosives. In many cases,
colloidal deposition and clogging of fluidic channels is an important problem.