* 0933596
* Tripolar Concentric Ring Electrodes (TCREs) for Brain Computer Interface
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Walter Besio, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Ted A. Conway
* 08/31/2013
* USD 347,744.00

0933596&lt;br/&gt;Besio&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Summary: Nearly two million people
in the U.S., and many more worldwide, suffer from severe motor disabilities
brought on by neuromuscular impairments, such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
(ALS), brainstem stroke, cerebral palsy, and spinal cord injury (SCI). A Brain
Computer Interface (BCI) provides those persons who cannot use or have limited
use of their muscles but are cognitively intact with an alternative for
communication and control. Noninvasive electroencephalography (EEG) based BCIs
have obvious clinical benefits over BCI systems that require surgeries for
implantation, but they suffer from poor spatial resolution and low signal-to-
noise ratio (SNR), a critical drawback. The investigators seek to develop a new
electrode technology - tripolar concentric ring electrodes (TCREs) - to
significantly increase the spatial resolution, SNR, and consequently the
communication transfer rate (bit rate) and decrease the training time of EEG
based BCIs. Previous attempts to improve EEG based BCIs primarily depended on
signal processing techniques without addressing the limitations of the disc
electrode, resulting in at best suboptimal outcome. Instead, the investigators
will focus on improving the electrode configuration, a new path, to improve EEG
and consequently the performance of BCI. The motivation of this work is the
superior characteristics of TCREs over disc electrodes, which are strongly
supported by preliminary results. To achieve the research objective, experiments
are proposed to systematically establish the benefits and practicality of TCREs
for BCI through both computer modeling and tests on healthy and SCI persons.
Through the university-clinical collaboration, the investigators will have
access to a sufficient number of SCI patients and other potential end-users of
the technology. The clinical collaboration provides a streamlined mechanism
which will facilitate the translation of the research outcomes to practice. The
proposed project also serves an education objective of recruiting and training a
new generation of scientists from diverse backgrounds who are capable of
interfacing between multiple scientific fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. By using
unique TCREs rather than conventional disc electrodes, the investigator is
taking an innovative approach to address the critical drawbacks of EEG based
BCI. &lt;br/&gt;2. For the first time, the effort will be focused on
transforming the electrode design to enhance EEG and consequently the
performance of BCI. &lt;br/&gt;3. A critical clinical benefit of the approach
taken is that it is noninvasive, substantially reducing the risks and costs
associated with BCI systems that require surgical implantation. &lt;br/&gt;4.
The knowledge and technology resulting from the research itself will (a)
significantly enhance the state of knowledge in the field of BCI and EEG; (b)
above and beyond the field of BCI, provide a powerful tool for understanding
brain activity and neural disorders in general; and (c) have extensive
applicability in the broad space of technologies to aid persons with motor
impairments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1.
This work will strengthen the infrastructure for research and education in 3
ways: (1) instituting collaboration across engineering fields and universities,
(2) establishing clinical collaboration with VA medical center and a regional
hospital, and (3) integrating K-8 education at a Native school. &lt;br/&gt;2.
The proposed work is highly interdisciplinary and bridges Biomedical
Engineering, Electrical Engineering, Computer Science, and Neuroscience. The
ability to recruit students from underrepresented groups is enhanced by this
breadth. &lt;br/&gt;3. Graduate and undergraduate students with disabilities and
from underrepresented groups will work jointly and gain cutting edge research
experience in both academic and clinical settings. &lt;br/&gt;4. An outreach
project with a local minority school will provide young minority students (3~8
grade) the opportunity to directly participate in research experiments.
&lt;br/&gt;5. Collaboration is established with "Students for a More Accessible
Campus" (SFAMAC) to broaden the participation of students with disabilities and
raise awareness for research to aid persons with disabilities in the community.