* 0933966
* Novel Self Assembly of siRNA for Efficient and Safe Delivery
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2009,11/30/2013
* Huixin He, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Athanassios Sambanis
* 11/30/2013
* USD 300,000.00

0933966&lt;br/&gt;He&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal describes an
integrated approach for interdisciplinary research, education, and outreach in
nanotechnology and biomedical engineering. The objective of the research is to
develop an innovative and nontoxic delivery platform that will enable cell
specific delivery of small interference RNAs (siRNAs) to silence their targeted
oncogenes both in vitro and in vivo. The other objective of this research is to
seek an extensive understanding of the fundamental physicochemical
characteristics, especially nanomechanical properties, of siRNA nanoparticles
with their biological performance. To reach these goals, the proposal has three
associated specific aims: (1) To develop a novel approach for assembly and
delivery of siRNA without toxicity using labile Au nanoparticles modified with
several low generation dendrimers. (2) To engineer the surface of siRNA
nanoparticles for target delivery, and to study the mechanical properties of the
individual siRNA nanoparticles (both with and without Au nanoparticles
encapsulated, and both engineered and non-engineered). (3) To determine
structure/property-biodistribution, biological potency, and toxicity
relationships of the siRNA nanoparticles in vitro and in vivo.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: A novel siRNA assembly approach where
Au nanopartices (Au NPs) will be used to dramatically enhance non toxic, low-
generation dendrimers to efficiently condense siRNA to discrete nanoparticles.
However, the Au NPs can be controlled "in" or "out" of the final siRNA
complexes, which is the key difference from previous reports. The potential
toxic problem accompanied with the Au NPs will be solved by selectively removing
the Au NPs before the siRNA complexes are delivered. In addition, to satisfy the
requirements for in vivo targeted delivery of siRNA through a systemic route,
the formed siRNA nanoparticles will be engineered by a layer-by-layer modular
approach to enable them for spatially- and temporally- controlled release in
specific sub-cellular compartments. These properties will add additional
therapeutic activities and further decrease the side effects of RNAi-based
therapy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the physicochemical properties, the
nanomechanical properties of the individual siRNA nanoparticles from various
formulations will be studied by single force microscopy. By combining the
biological investigation of these siRNA nanoparticles, this proposal will link,
for the first time, the physicochemical properties and the nanomechanical
properties of the siRNA nanoparticles with their cellular internalization,
circulation, biodistribution, and therefore, their targeting and therapeutic
efficacy during in vitro and in vivo systemic delivery. The improved
understanding of these relationships will lead to future design and development
of new materials and strategies for efficient and safe delivery of siRNA, and
therefore help to realizing its full therapeutic potentials. Successful
completion of this research will also provide critical understanding how we can
utilize information obtained from various multifunctional nanomedicine platforms
which are constructed by engineered inorganic nanocarriers (relatively hard) to
guide the development of efficient organic nanocarriers (relatively soft) and
vice versa. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The proposed investigations
are fundamentally and practically important for efficient and safe siRNA
delivery. The proposal focuses on design multifunctional siRNA nanoparticles
capable of cell specific delivery and silencing of gene expression of EZH2 genes
for breast cancer therapy. Given the widespread applications of siRNA in
numerous fundamental and therapeutic applications, the knowledge gained from
this project will have far reaching scientific and economic impacts on
pharmaceutical and biotechnology industry and health care. The educational plan
will bring nanoscience tools and concepts to a wide range of students on two
campus of Rutgers known as the most diverse in the nation. The inherently
interdisciplinary nature of this research will produce students with exceptional
training in nanotechnology, biomedical engineering, molecular biology, and drug
delivery. Research activities designed for undergraduates and high school
students will promote more gifted minority students into the nanoscience ranks.
Extensive outreach to the Newark area, a minority-dominated region, will raise
the public awareness of the impact of nanoscience and nanotechnology.