* 0933694
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Smart Sediment Grains and the Incipient Motion of Coastal Heterogeneous Sediments
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Pai Chou, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Dimitrios Papavassiliou
* 08/31/2013
* USD 200,000.00

Foster/Chou&lt;br/&gt;0933409/0933694&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NOAA estimates that
the large local, state, and federal financial investments in nourishment
projects to maintain existing beaches is returned ten-fold through tourism
dollars alone. As sea level rises and population demands on our shorelines
increase, some experts predict the socioeconomic and ecological pressures on the
beaches and coastal planners will also rise. These projects are generally
successful at temporarily restoring the beach width, however re-nourished
sediment more quickly erodes as it has different characteristics than the
"native" sediment. The PIs will develop and experimental program for these
studies. Theories for the motion of sediment largely neglect any unsteady
contributions from the passing waves or more local turbulent disturbance. The
existing applied engineering models based on such principles have relatively low
skill when predicting the onshore transport of sediment in moderate wave
climates (e.g small wave periods of 3-5 s and wave heights of roughly 1 m) with
weak mean flows where beaches rebuild and could significantly benefit from an
improved understanding of nearshore sediment dynamics. The hypothesis the PI's
seek to test is that in wave-driven coastal environments where the flow regime
is unsteady and the sediment characteristics can be heterogenous, the incipient
motion of a sediment bed results from a combination of the shear stress gradient
and the horizontal pressure gradient. The PIs will test this hypothesis by
developing a new wireless Lagrangian sensor, the Smart Sediment Grain. The
specific objectives for this project are to develop a theoretical formulation
for the incipient motion of sediment in response to random free surface gravity
waves, extending Sleath's 1999 formulation; develop a Smart Sediment Grain (SSG)
to measure the three-dimensional acceleration of individual motes (or grains);
and finally observe the motion and transport of heterogeneous sediments (both
natural and smart particles) through a comprehensive full-scale laboratory
observation. Full-scale observations will be performed at the Ven Te Chow
Laboratory at the University of Illinois (UIUC). Observations will be obtained
for a range of natural grain classes (0.2 &lt; d50 &lt; 20.0 mm) and also for a
range of lighter particles that will allow for a range of the full parameter
space relevant to coastal environments. This effort represents a synergistic
collaboration between a wireless technology expert and a sediment transport
scientist. This effort is transformative in its application of state-of-the-art
MEMs technology to resolve longstanding fundamental questions regarding the
motion of intermittently mobile sediment beds exposed to free surface gravity
waves. There exist wide-ranging broader impacts of this effort that include
increasing the participation of underrepresented groups, transitioning high
technology to society, entraining k-12 students into science and engineering,
and increasing the predictive skill of coastal management models. This project
will provide support for the Ph.D. studies of a minority female student. The PIs
will participate in outreach programs at the Joan and James Leitzel Center at
UNH and through Girls Inc, Eureka! Ongoing collaborations with TUDelft will
provide an opportunity to model the successful Dutch methods for transitioning
scientific findings to the larger engineering community.