* 0933242
* Freely-Falling Granular Powder Streams as Sensitive Probes of Interparticle Forces
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2012
* Heinrich Jaeger, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
*  Ashok S. Sangani
* 06/30/2012
* USD 306,675.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0933242&lt;br/&gt;Jaeger&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
better understanding of the behavior of powders is becoming increasingly
important as industrial processes require smaller and smaller particle sizes. In
addition, there is a growing realization that the existence of fines even in
nominally larger sized powders critically affects their flowability. What makes
dense granular powder flows particularly challenging is the multitude of
interparticle forces that are at work simultaneously and the range of size
scales involved, down to nanoscale particle surface roughness. In this regard,
freely falling streams of powder offer special opportunities to investigate
particle particle as well as particle-gas interactions because they make it
possible to observe very small interparticle forces
directly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. Changes in the free falling
stream profile and, in particular, the break up of the stream into particle
clusters can serve as macroscopic signatures and sensitive diagnostics of
microscopic, grain-scale interactions. The research involves a unique
experimental facility designed to track the evolution of dense granular powder
streams over two meters of free fall, using a high speed video camera falling
alongside the particulate material. The combination of imaging in the co-moving
frame with extensive computer modeling and with characterization of grain
surfaces by atomic force microscopy and scanning electron microscopy is used to
establish a quantitative connection between the overall stream properties and
their dependence on various types of cohesive particle-particle interactions,
including capillary, van der Waals and electrostatic
forces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: In addition to the industrial and
economic value associated with the proper control of particulate matter, the
study of granular materials provides insights into fundamental, crosscutting
scientific issues across a wide range of science and engineering disciplines.
The research will train graduate students in key aspects of particulate matter
and multi phase flow research, and it includes the active participation of a
large and diverse group of undergraduates as well as a close collaboration with
an industrial partner. The research will be integrated with a multi faceted set
of education and outreach activities, including activities with the nearby
Chicago Museum of Science and Industry.