* 0933095
* Advances in Global Dynamic Optimization
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Paul Barton, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 08/31/2013
* USD 310,202.00

Paul Barton 0933095



Intellectual Merit The objective of this research is to develop algorithms for
the global solution of dynamic optimization problems of practical size, with a
particular interest in chemical engineering applications. In such optimization
problems, inputs, parameters and/or initial conditions for a system of
differential equations that optimize a specified performance metric are sought.
This type of optimization problem is ubiquitous in engineering disciplines due
to the widespread use of differential equations to model systems of interest.
For chemical engineering applications, it is widely known that dynamic
optimization problems nearly always exhibit multiple suboptimal local minima.
Most dynamic optimization algorithms can only guarantee convergence to local
minima, which can have serious economic and environmental consequences, and may
also result in unsafe operating conditions, when implemented on real systems. To
date, there are roughly three algorithms capable of solving general dynamic
optimization problems to guaranteed global optimality - all of these are
restricted to problems with fewer than about five degrees of freedom and five
state variables due to excessive computational cost, and therefore cannot be
used to address many practical chemical engineering problems. Thus, the primary
objective of this work is to develop more efficient algorithms for solving
dynamic optimization problems globally.

Under previous NSF support, the PI and coworkers developed a rigorous global
dynamic optimization algorithm, which hinges on a novel theory for generating
convex relaxations for these problems. Though this theory works well in many
cases, there remain large classes of problems for which these relaxations are
too weak. This work involves the theoretical development and efficient numerical
implementation of better techniques for generating convex relaxations. For
general dynamic optimization problems, a new theory has recently been developed
which can provide tighter relaxations in many cases, yet there are many
remaining challenges regarding implementation of this theory to produce a
complete algorithm. These challenges are the topic of one of the tasks that will
be undertaken in this project.

All techniques to relax dynamic optimization problems require the generation of
bounds on the state variables over a range of parameters. The accuracy of these
bounds is directly reflected in the strength of the convex relaxations
generated. Methods for efficiently generating tighter bounds than are currently
available are the subject of the second specific research tasks. It is found
that major improvements can potentially be made for the specific case of
optimization problems involving chemically reacting systems, due to the
availability of independently known physical information. This includes a very
large and important class of chemical engineering applications. However,
exploiting this information to its fullest extent presents several interesting
theoretical and computational questions that remain to be addressed. Finally, a
method for generating tight bounds for general dynamic optimization problems by
augmenting our existing method with simple first-order Taylor models in a novel
manner will be studied.

Broader Impact The ability to solve dynamic optimization problems of practical
size could have a major impact on the chemical process industry. The ability to
simulate large-scale dynamic systems efficiently has caused an increase in the
development of detailed dynamic process models for many chemical processes. Yet
optimizing these systems for design, operation or control can currently only be
done locally, or through the use of inappropriate linear approximations. The
ability to solve globally dynamic optimization problems involving such detailed
dynamic models would allow appropriate treatment of important problems such as
formal safety verification of chemical processes, design of start-up and shut-
down procedures, synthesis of integrated batch processes, and the integration of
design and control. Furthermore, it is believed that generic global dynamic
optimization techniques will find widespread use in nearly all science and
engineering disciplines.