* 0933454
* Electronic Thermal Transport in Nanoscale Conductors
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Li Shi, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 06/30/2013
* USD 389,000.00

0933454&lt;br/&gt;Shi&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Wiedemann-Franz (W-F) law
describing thermal transport by electrons is a hallmark of success of the
Sommerfeld theory. For electrons confined in one- or two-dimensional
nanostructures, however, several intriguing phenomena can lead to the breakdown
of the W-F law. These phenomena include strong correlation effects associated
with increased electron-electron interaction, as well as electron localization.
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. This experimental study addresses a fundamental
question regarding whether the Wiedemann-Franz Law is valid in low dimensional
conductors. The scientific question being addressed is of a very fundamental
nature, and one that will impact multiple disciplines. The experimental study
examines electronic thermal transport in copper nanowires, quasi one-dimensional
polyacetylene nanofibers, and two-dimensional graphene nanoribbons. The thermal
conductivity, electrical conductivity, and Seebeck coefficient of these
nanostructures are measured using nanofabricated suspended measurement devices
at various temperatures. Chemical doping, electrical field effects, and the
thermal Hall effect are employed to tune and determine the electronic thermal
conductivity and isolate the lattice contribution. The validity of the W-F law
is examined by analyzing the measured Lorenz number and its temperature
dependence, and comparing the measurement results with the predictions of
different transport theories. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The nanostructures of
interest are being considered for nanoelectronics, sensors, energy conversion,
and thermal management applications, all of which will benefit from a better
understanding of electronic thermal transport in these nanostructures. The
research provides interdisciplinary education opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate students. New example materials for a graduate and an
undergraduate course in thermal science are being produced, as are new materials
for three K-12 outreach activities designed to attract young girls to
engineering professions, and to expose public school students and teachers in
Texas to engineering principles.