* 0933531
* Whispering Gallery Mode Carousel: A means for Enhanced Detection in Biosensing and Surface-Force Probing
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Stephen Arnold, Polytechnic University of New York
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2013
* USD 399,969.00

0933531 Arnold

Virus particles are a major cause for human disease, and their early detection
and identification is of increasing importance as air travel allows these
infectious agents to spread rapidly to populations across the globe. A fast
detector that is sensitive to a single virus particle by determining its genus
and size would answer the demand for early detection. The present proposal is to
continues the investigation into microsphere whispering gallery mode (WGM)
biosensors for early detection of viruses in human fluids as we utilize a
recently discovered phenomenon of light trapping of nanoparticles within the WGM
evanescent volume. The sensing is based on the extremely narrow photonic
resonances of microspheres that shift their frequencies as a result of an
environmental change. Within the reach of the WGM?s evanescent field (~ 200 nm)
nanoparticles are drawn toward the surface by gradient forces, similar to those
present in optical tweezers. A trapping potential-well is formed by an
attractive evanescent polarization potential, repulsive electrostatic potential,
and van der Waals potential. In the case of a low binding-affinity or a low
density of binding sites, nanoparticles are propelled around in orbit by
radiation pressure. This trapping mechanism (WGM Carousel) along with controlled
binding-affinity adds additional functionality and assures high sensitivity and
specificity to the WGM biosensor. The ultimate goal is to build microfluidic
biosensors that are sensitive to a single viral particle and can differentiate
virions according to their size/mass and affinity to specific antibodies. The
small size of these bio-particles demands micrometer-size sensors3. However
Brownian diffusion of ultra-low concentration analytes crossing the boundary
layer is considered a major hurdle4 for miniature sensors. Preliminary results
show that the WGM Carousel sensor can have significantly enhanced transport
rates (> 50×) of particles to the sensing region, compared to other miniature
sensors. In addition the carousel mechanism provides a means for investigating
forces arising near the surface. Understanding these forces is of great
importance for the design of microfluidic devices and micro-fabrication.
Nanoparticles trapped in a WGM carousel can be used to quantitatively measure
surface interactions from their stochastic radial motion. By proper choice of
the interacting surfaces and the liquid medium it will be possible to screen the
electrostatic repulsion and reveal short range interactions such as van der
Waals. There are challenges for the DLVO (the theory of colloidal stability) to
properly describe the interactions at very short range (<5nm) for various
aqueous solutions, where repulsive solvation forces are observed. WGM Carousel
will help address these challenges.