* 0933335
* Combinatorial Brain Cancer Therapy through Irreversible Electroporation and Carbon Nanotubes
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2014
* Rafael Davalos, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Athanassios Sambanis
* 07/31/2014
* USD 299,998.00

0933335&lt;br/&gt;Davalos&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is
to develop a new cancer therapy that uses non-thermal irreversible
electroporation (N-TIRE) with carbon nanotubes (CNTs). N-TIRE is a new,
minimally invasive focal ablation technique that uses low energy (intense, but
short) electric pulses to treat targeted tissue for approximately 1 minute.
These pulses kill cells within the targeted area without damaging the
surrounding tissue. However, since N-TIRE is a focal ablation technique, it does
not selectively kill infiltrative cells beyond the tumor margin without
affecting surrounding tissue. We hypothesize that incorporating CNTs into N-TIRE
therapy can enable selective therapy of infiltrative cells capable of
metastasis. When exposed to an electric field, CNTs amplify the field at their
CNT tip. Localized amplification of these fields should induce N-TIRE in
adjacent cells from relatively small electric fields, without affecting healthy
surrounding cells. This proposal will investigate the impact of N-TIRE protocols
and CNT properties on the electric field, temperature distribution, and
cellular/tissue response through the following objectives: 1) Determine the
cellular response to N-TIRE in combination with a variety of CNT embodiments 2)
Create a multi-scale, multi-physics computational model of N-TIRE with CNTs to
predict the tissue response to N-TIRE protocols and CNT properties 3) Implement
optimal CNT-mediated N-TIRE protocols and measure the in vivo response of brain
tumors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposed activity
will be the development of a comprehensive understanding of the impact of
varying N-TIRE parameters in combination with different CNT embodiments with
antibody targeting on therapy effectiveness. Defining the relationship between
N-TIRE parameters and CNT properties on cellular injury will provide enormous
insight to guide design of more effective cancer therapies, which enhance tumor
destruction and minimize tumor recurrence. If combinatorial N-TIRE/CNT therapy
proves to be effective, it will possess significant advantages over many current
cancer treatments and this research will provide the necessary data for first
stage development of this therapy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of
the proposed study include the determination of optimal N-TIRE/CNT parameters to
effectively and selectively treat both the primary tumor and the infiltrative
cancer cells, thereby eliminating the likelihood of tumor recurrence and
metastasis. Although this approach could be utilized to treat a number of
cancers including prostate, liver, kidney and pancreatic, brain cancer will
serve as our model. Research contained in this project will provide motivation
for related topics taught within the investigator's courses and permit the
opportunity to augment the course with an interactive laboratory component
focused on the converging fields of electroporation, nanotechnology, and bioheat
transfer. This research will enable opportunities for numerous students to gain
experience in experimental design, engineering, and cell biology at the graduate
and undergraduate level. Scholastically strong undergraduate students from
underrepresented groups will be recruited to perform research during the summer
through two summer programs directed by the investigator. We will also develop a
joint workshop for bioengineering students and medical students to discuss the
synergistic aspects of engineering, experimental biology, and veterinary and
clinical medicine to design new innovative therapies.