* 0933250
* A facile pretreatment strategy for recovering sugars and lignin effectively from a variety of lignocellulosic feedstocks
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2014
* Sasidhar Varanasi, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 07/31/2014
* USD 310,944.00

0933250 Varanasi

Summary Intellectual Merits: Plant biomass can provide a sustainable feedstock
for future "biorefineries" partially replacing conventional petrochemical
refineries. The PI plans to capitalize on the solvation properties of ionic
liquids (ILs) to overcome the recalcitrance of cellulose and biomass to
enzymatic hydrolysis, a core barrier to economical and sustainable biofuels
production. The hydrolyzate can be used as a fermentation feedstock for ethanol
production or as a sugar platform for production of other chemicals. With the
proper selection of enzymes, initial rates of hydrolysis for IL treated pure
cellulose are nearly 2 orders of magnitude greater than those of untreated
cellulose. Conversion of cellulose in biomass is also substantially accelerated
in comparison to alternative pretreatment methods. The proposed research seeks
to systemically assess and optimize the pretreatment process applied to biomass
with the aim of minimizing chemical and energy inputs. To achieve this, a clear
understanding of the structural and chemical changes in biomass with ionic
liquid pretreatment and the effects of those changes on subsequent hydrolysis is
needed. The following specific objectives will be addressed to achieve this
end:(1) Assess fundamental factors which affect kinetics and product yield for
biomass saccharification to optimize pretreatment. (2) Engineer the hydrolyzing
enzyme mixture to optimize hexose and pentose sugar yields from IL-pretreated
biomass. (3) Recover and recycle saccharification enzymes and ionic liquids and
assess unhydrolyzed portions of biomass for lignin recovery.

Broader impacts: Ionic liquids have the potential to convert wood and grasses
into viable feedstocks for fuel and chemical production. Ionic liquids have no
measurable vapor pressure and are considered green due to their negligible
impact on air quality. An essential part of this project is the training and
educating of graduate and undergraduate students, who will obtain considerable
experience in biochemical methods, analytical techniques, ionic liquid
synthesis, characterization, and assessment of chemical and structural changes
in lignocellulosic materials, a very complex system. The interdisciplinary
nature of this project will allow graduate and undergraduate researchers to
acquire a broad-based training. Demonstration modules and background material
will be developed in biofuels for integration into UTube, a site spear-headed by
our collaborator Dr. Jared Anderson. The site will contain links to a series of
video demonstrations performed by the co-investigators and undergraduate
researchers tailored to middle school children. The PI and Co-PI's have served
as high school and undergraduate student research mentors. One has participated
in the NSF Young Scholars program, to introduce economically disadvantaged
students to engineering. The other has been involved in outreach activities as
the faculty advisor to the Society of Woman Engineers and through involvement in
the GEARUP and EXCEL programs sponsored by the US Department of Education to
introduce African American and Latino middle and high school students to hands-
on engineering projects.