* 0933731
* Research Starter Grant: Joint Genetic and Isotopic Assignment Methods to empower studies of Avian Migration
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* John Novembre, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Anne Maglia
* 08/31/2012
* USD 50,000.00

Methods for assigning an individual of unknown origin to a population (i.e.
assignment methods) are a fundamental tool of researchers in ecology,
evolutionary, and conservation biology. While many of these methods employ
genetic markers or stable-isotope abundances, no bioinformatic methods exist for
combining the two sources of data to make a single assignment. Here, motivated
by numerous available data-sets from migratory Neotropical passerine birds, we
propose to develop a novel joint assignment method that will leverage genetic
and stable-isotope data simultaneously to make assignments of individuals to
their migratory origins (i.e. breeding populations). To develop a method that
will get full use of existing and incoming genetic and isotopic data from avian
systems.

The tools developed as part of this ressearch will be made freely available on-
line via user-friendly software and source code. The proposed research promises
to move migration biology forward by providing better tools to understand
patterns of migratory connectivity. In avian systems, understanding migratory
connectivity lies at the heart of numerous important questions, such as the
reasons for population declines in migratory birds, the spatial and temporal
transmission dynamics of avian born diseases (e.g. avian influenza and West Nile
virus), as well as the evolution of migration. The tools developed here will be
useful for exploiting existing data sets and they will enrich the potential of
the 100,000-large feather collection housed at the Center for Tropical Research
at UCLA. Finally, this project will provide training and support for a PhD
biomathematics student at UCLA.