* 0933360
* Equipment Grant for Interfacial Velocimetry and 3D Liquid-Phase Thermometry in Microfluidic Devices
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2009,02/29/2012
* Minami Yoda, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Horst Henning Winter
* 02/29/2012
* USD 99,735.00

0933360 Yoda

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Microfluidic 'Labs on a Chip' have transformed a wide variety of biochemical
assays by shrinking the contents of an analytical chemistry laboratory down to a
few square centimeters. Scaling down even further, ultimately to assays at the
single-molecule level, requires a fundamental understanding of interfacial
transport. At these scales, the entire flow will be well within 1 micron of the
wall, surface (e.g. electrostatic) forces become significant. The PI's group has
led in developing non-intrusive optical techniques to study interfacial
transport, using evanescent wave-based optical techniques such as particle image
velocimetry (PIV) and dual-tracer fluorescence thermometry (DFT) to measure
velocity and temperature fields within 400 nm of the wall. Recently, they have
used multilayer nano-PIV (MnPIV) to measure velocity gradient (i.e., wall shear
stress) and slip length in Poiseuille flows through hydrophilic and
hydrophobically coated microchannels, and shown that the nonuniform distribution
of the colloidal particle tracers used in microscale PIV techniques can
significantly affect estimates of slip length. The PI's group has also developed
a DFT technique that can measure temperature fields in aqueous solutions with
a(n in-plane) spatial resolution as small as a 3 micron with a sensitivity more
than triple that of previous DFT methods. This small equipment grant will extend
the microscale transport diagnostic capabilities of the PI's group by supporting
the acquisition of a 'next generation' electron multiplying CCD camera to image
40 nm (and smaller) tracers for MnPIV over the brief exposures required to
minimize Brownian effects; and a spinning-disk confocal attachment for an
already existing microscope to acquire three-dimensional temperature fields in
'real time' consisting of up to 70 × 512 × 512 samples with a spatial resolution
as small as 1.3 micron. This equipment will support two current research
projects funded by NSF and the Office of Naval Research for velocity and
temperature measurement at sub-micron scales. These research projects will
advance knowledge and understanding of microscale transport by improving the
accuracy and spatial resolution of microscale velocimetry techniques, especially
in the near-wall region, and by developing, for the first time, a thermometry
technique that can obtain 3D liquid-phase temperature fields with a spatial
resolution fine enough for microfluidic devices. Finally, this equipment will
support the education of graduate students and undergraduate researchers at the
largest Mechanical Engineering program in the nation and (based on 2008 data)
one of the leaders in educating African-American and Hispanic engineers.

This award is cofunded with the TTP program in CBET.