* 0933553
* Novel Activated Carbon Nanofiber Biofilm Support for Enhanced Wastewater Treatment
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Baikun Li, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2013
* USD 293,876.00

0933553&lt;br/&gt;McCutcheon&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Increasing aridity
in already water scarce regions in the United States and around the world is
being exacerbated with increased population combined with climate change. With
dwindling freshwater resources in these areas, we are forced to turn to non-
traditional water sources, such as reclaimed wastewater. Current wastewater
reuse strategies involve the use of expensive and energy intensive membrane
technology. These membrane systems, however, are cost prohibitive and require
large amounts of energy thereby leading to carbon dioxide emissions which can
further exacerbate climate change. There may be other, less energy intensive
options that can be used in combination with, or in lieu of, these technologies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to have a profound impact on the
sustainability of wastewater treatment through the incorporation of
nanotechnology. By using a fixed electrogenic biofilm on an electrically
conductive substrate, organic contaminants in wastewater can be anaerobically
degraded. The proposed work considers the use of an activated carbon nanofiber
nonwoven (ACNFN) as a novel biofilm substrate as it will facilitate the transfer
of electrons from the biofilm during anaerobic degradation, increasing treatment
efficiency. A typical platform for evaluating this method of wastewater
treatment is the microbial fuel cell (MFC). This project, however, is not
intended to maximize power production of the MFC system but instead focuses on
elucidating the influence of biofilm substrate architecture, surface area,
conductivity, and surface functionality on wastewater treatment efficiency
during anaerobic biological treatment, here measured as a reduction in chemical
oxygen demand (COD). These novel materials, constructed from thermal treatment
of polymeric nanofiber precursors offer many advantages over existing conductive
biofilm substrates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uniquely combines a novel
nanomaterial into a wastewater treatment platform. Combining materials science,
nanotechnology, biotechnology, and chemical engineering, the collaborative
research team will use a multidisciplinary approach to integrating these
disparate technologies. Carbon-based substrates for MFC treatment systems are
common, but never before has a nanofibrous nonwoven carbon material been
considered as a biofilm substrate. By using this extraordinary material with
excellent electrical properties and an exceptionally high specific surface area,
wastewater treatment efficiency of this emerging technology could vastly
improve. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The societal impacts of energy neutral (or
possibly net energy positive) wastewater treatment would be significant given
the significant energy allocation currently given to the practice (3% of total
energy use in the U.S.). By greatly reducing, or even eliminating this energy
requirement, we would improve the sustainability of wastewater treatment while
simultaneously reducing carbon dioxide emissions which exacerbate climate
change. This technology may also provide a low energy treatment option for the
developing world, where electricity is not always available in remote areas.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For direct potable reuse ever to be accepted, educating
the public about various reuse technologies is essential. Both the PI and co-PI
are full affiliates of the Center for Environmental Sciences and Engineering, a
research center which promotes multidisciplinary research, education, and
outreach in environmental science, engineering, policy, and sustainability.
Through this entity, The PI and co-PI will conduct a series of education
programs, including Engineering 2000 and the da Vinci Project. Both programs
specifically target high school students and teachers, respectively, from the
Greater Hartford Area and give the PI and co-PI an opportunity to disseminate
information about current and emerging water treatment technologies.
Underrepresented groups will be specifically encouraged to take advantage of
sustainable engineering education and research opportunities through university
programs like the Science Engineering &amp; Health Professions Collaborative
Symposium at the University of Connecticut and an Environmental Issues Seminar
at a local community college