* 0933450
* Reaction Directed Polymer Nanostructures through  Self-Assembly and Photopolymerization
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Allan Guymon, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 08/31/2013
* USD 277,527.00

0933450&lt;br/&gt;Guymon&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The use of self-organizing liquid crystals is a
method of enhancing performance of organic polymers through structural and
chemical control on the nanometer scale. Functional nanostructured polymer
materials based on lyotropic (i.e., amphiphilic) liquid crystals (LLCs) have the
ability to self-organize in the presence of water into ordered assemblies with
periodic nanometer-scale porous domains. Both polymerized LLC monomers and
polymers templated by LLCs have recently shown great promise in applications
such as solid-state organic catalysts, size selective membranes, and tissue
engineering scaffolds. The major obstacle in forming nanostructured polymers
using LLC systems is the difficulty in retaining and controlling the self-
assembled structure throughout the polymerization. Typically, thermodynamically
driven phase separation occurs during polymerization, leaving little or no
liquid crystalline order. The PI plans to control both thermodynamic and kinetic
factors to direct specific polymer nanostructures from LLC materials.
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The goal is to utilize the polymerization
reaction to direct organic polymer nanostructures through combination of
photopolymerization and optimal LLC self-assembly. Research will focus on
developing combinations of non-reactive and reactive surfactant systems that
form LLC phases. These systems will then be used to template ordered morphology
onto polymer networks. The photopolymerization of materials spanning a wide
range of LLC phases will be monitored to understand changes in the order that
they occur during polymerization. Factors that may influence polymer morphology
including LLC phase structure and stability, cross-link density, and
polymerization kinetics will be examined. It is assumed that the use of radical
photopolymerization will play a pivotal role in this work. This method provides
the ability to polymerize in fractions of a second at a wide range of
temperatures, thereby allowing kinetic trapping of otherwise thermodynamically
unfavorable polymer nanostructures. Polymer structures formed from both
traditional chain and thiol-ene step growth polymerization mechanisms will be
investigated. With the importance of nanostructure in this project, a number of
powerful characterization tools (polarized light microscopy, X-ray diffraction,
scanning electron microscopy, transmission electron microscopy, solid state NMR,
and swelling behavior) will be used to elucidate polymer structure during and
after polymerization. Critical for success in this research effort is a thorough
understanding of the photopolymerization process, including the unique aspects
induced by a nanostructured environment. Therefore, photopolymerization kinetics
and double bond conversion will be monitored in real-time using photo-
differential scanning calorimetry, infra-red and Raman spectroscopy. The results
obtained will outline the factors, both kinetic and thermodynamic, that can be
used to govern and direct the ultimate polymer nanostructure. &lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact: One of the greatest promises of nanotechnology is the ability to control
properties based on nano-scale architectures in organic polymers. This work will
produce nanostructures reproducibly and consistently based on LLC geometries.
Using the inherent speed of photopolymerization and optimal self-assembly
throughout polymerization, control of polymer properties based on nano-scale
geometries will be afforded. With such control substantial advances in
applications as diverse as separation technology, drug delivery, catalysis,
hydrogels, and tissue engineering could be realized. A prevailing theme in the
project will be student education. Extensive involvement of undergraduate and
graduate researchers in a discovery learning environment will be emphasized. The
PI has a strong record of including minority student researchers at both the
graduate and undergraduate level. At least one minority graduate student will
directly participate in the research, and minority undergraduate researchers
will be recruited as part of the AGEP Summer Research Program at the University
of Iowa. Additionally, the importance of polymers in nanotechnology will be
brought to high school students as part of a module presented yearly by the PI
to chemistry classes at both local and rural high schools.