* 0933017
* Bimetallic Overlayer Catalysts for Sustainable Fuel Production from Lactose
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Tony Rogers, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* George J. Antos
* 08/31/2013
* USD 300,000.00

0933017 &lt;br/&gt;Holles &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this proposal are: 1) demonstrate the
ability to sustainably produce H2 from lactose via aqueous-phase reforming
(APR), 2) to further develop a synthesis technique for producing bimetallic
catalysts with controlled microstructure (pseudomorphic overlayer) that allows
fine tuning of catalytic properties, 3) incorporate concepts of sustainability
and catalysis in a vertically integrated education programs for middle school,
undergraduate and graduate level students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research and
Intellectual Merit: The research will synthesize and characterize bimetallic
catalysts with specifically controlled elemental structure to provide optimum
catalytic activity.&lt;br/&gt;The work will be focused on developing
pseudomorphic overlayer (base@overlayer) bimetallic&lt;br/&gt;catalysts for use
in APR of lactose to produce H2. The specific objectives are:&lt;br/&gt;- Refine
the reload synthesis technique for the application of a bimetallic particle and
monolayer synthesis, apply it towards Ni@Pt and Co@Pt catalysts, and extend it
to new supports. Overlayer catalysts show decreased H2 (and CO) adsorption
strength which are postulated to increase activity since H2 (and CO) inhibits
the reaction. The reload technique has previously produced catalysts with
decreased H2 adsorption strength.&lt;br/&gt;- Characterize the structure and
stability of the catalysts as a function of thermal and&lt;br/&gt;environmental
conditions using TEM, thermogravimetry, chemisorption,
x-ray&lt;br/&gt;absorption spectroscopy, and auger electron spectroscopy. A
preponderance of evidence from multiple techniques will establish that the
desired structure has been synthesized and that the overlayer is stable under
elevated thermal and reactivity conditions.&lt;br/&gt;- Establish the
structure/reactivity relationships for APR of lactose reaction on the model
Ni@Pt and Co@Pt pseudomorphic overlayer catalysts. APR represents an additional
challenge over existing work due to selectivity and product inhibition issues.
This will demonstrate how the synthesized structures affect
reactivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Education: The education goal is to vertically
integrate sustainability and catalysis education and research at multiple
levels, beginning with middle school and continuing through undergraduate and
graduate school. Specific education activities are:&lt;br/&gt;- Develop an
Environmental Protection and Sustainable Energy from Agriculture Waste outreach
program. The lactose example herein will be used to educate middle school
students about protecting the environment from agricultural waste and how this
waste can be converted to sustainable energy. This program will be developed
into a Michigan Environmental Education Curriculum Support (MEECS) Water Quality
unit designed for Grades 6-8 students to ensure statewide distribution.
Activities will be adapted for students and schools located in the rural and
economically disadvantaged western Upper Peninsula of Michigan and will target
the local Native American populations.&lt;br/&gt;- Develop modules involving
sustainability and catalysis for use in two currently existing undergraduate
classes.&lt;br/&gt;- Graduate student participation in Sustainable Futures
Institute activities here at Michigan Tech and earning the Graduate Certificate
in Sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The results of this
work are expected to benefit society, government, industry, and academia in the
following ways:&lt;br/&gt;- Improved catalysts of this design will allow
sustainable production of H2 from lactose in a carbon neutral manner, thereby
improving our environment. Once developed, this technique can then be extended
to other sugar sources.&lt;br/&gt;- Middle schools students who learn the
importance of water quality and sustainable energy production will develop a
greater interest in pursuing science careers.&lt;br/&gt;- Graduate students will
understand the relationship between catalysis and sustainability while
participating in experiments at national laboratories, which will expose them to
a broader array of experts and to new career opportunities.