* 0933964
* URM:   Biology Undergraduate Mentoring Program: BUMP into Research at CMU!
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Cynthia Damer, Central Michigan University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 08/31/2015
* USD 627,150.00

An award has been made to Central Michigan University (CMU) Department of
Biology to establish an Undergraduate Research and Mentoring (URM) program,
titled Biology Undergraduate Mentoring Program (BUMP). A cohort of five students
will be recruited in each of the first three years of the grant. Over a four-
year grant period, a total of 15 students will be trained in the program. BUMP
is designed to develop a community of undergraduates from historically
underrepresented groups and engage these students in high-quality research
projects directly mentored by faculty. Students will begin the program in the
summer after their freshman or sophomore year, and will be supported for two
calendar years. BUMP will form partnerships with urban Michigan high schools and
with the local two-year Saginaw Chippewa Tribal College to recruit students from
primarily two underrepresented minority groups: African-Americans and Native
Americans. Students selected for BUMP will be assigned three mentors: a Faculty
Mentor who will act as their academic advisor, a Peer Mentor, and a Research
Mentor. At least twenty-seven faculty within the Department of Biology have
agreed to serve as potential Research Mentors, and these faculty members are
dedicated to both teaching and research. BUMP students will have a broad array
of biological research areas to choose from and will be encouraged to tailor
their research pursuits to an area that fits their individual interests. Areas
of potential research range from cellular and molecular biology to ecology,
evolution, and conservation biology. In addition to the research experiences,
students will take seminar courses to introduce them to careers in biological
research, to develop skills in experimental design, to develop scientific
communication skills, to prepare for the GRE, and to successfully apply to
graduate school. For more information, contact Dr. Cynthia Damer at
damer1ck@cmich.edu or Dr. Anna Monfils at monfi1ak@cmich.edu, or visit
http://BUMPResearch.bio.cmich.edu.&lt;br/&gt;