* 0933234
* Electrode Arrays for Neurodynamic Studies
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Massood Tabib-Azar, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Ted A. Conway
* 08/31/2012
* USD 298,128.00

0652043&lt;br/&gt;Tabib-Azar&lt;br/&gt;The main objective of this research is to
design and implement an array of sensing and stimulating electrodes with
integrated low-power electronics and telemetry to study dynamics of the nervous
system in intact and behaving animals. A minimally intrusive implantable
electrode array capable of recording and stimulating at multiple sites in the
nervous system will be used. An experimental preparation in which the dynamics
of the nervous system (i.e., the activity in single nerve cells) can be readily
related to its overall behavior will be used. The novelty of the proposed system
is that it will make it possible to record and control neural activity
simultaneously through a remote computer interface. In turn, this will allow
novel studies of neurodynamics, since it will be possible to examine the
response of the nervous system to specific stimuli. For this reason, the
electrode array system will be developed for a biological organism whose neural
control and biomechanics have been very well characterized, the marine mollusk
Aplysia californica. Results of this research will ultimately have broader
applications in human neural prostheses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The design and
fabrication of an 8x8 stimulation and sensing electrode array with different
electrode geometries and coating materials to optimize recording and stimulation
of many Aplysia neurons simultaneously is proposed. In parallel, design and
implementation of a low-power data acquisition and telemetry electronics will
take place. These devices will be tested separately and together, forming the
sense/stimulate telemetry system in vitro and in vivo in isolated ganglia, semi-
intact preparations and in intact and behaving animals. &lt;br/&gt;