* 0933358
* Fluids Inspired Granular Processing: Novel methods of mixing and separation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Joseph McCarthy, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* William Olbricht
* 08/31/2013
* USD 300,000.00

0933358 &lt;br/&gt;McCarthy &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite recent
advances, particle processing still lags significantly behind its counterpart of
fluid processing. The unifying theme of this proposal is the adaption of
concepts from fluid processing in order to develop novel techniques for particle
applications. Specifically, we target the mixing of dissimilar materials in
surface flows of cohesionless (free flowing) materials as well as novel particle
separation techniques. The underlying hypothesis of the first focus area of this
work is that by exploiting flow perturbations a technique with a long history in
fluid processing we can develop, for the first time, a general method for
limiting particle segregation in free flowing systems, perhaps the most common
and well studied of granular flows. The key to this approach lies in recognizing
that it takes a finite time for material to segregate and that there is always a
preferred direction that particles tend to segregate. In order to exploit these
two facts, one needs to perturb the flow at a high frequency and in such a way
that the surface layer is inverted. Particle separations techniques are
typically quite low tech and often are energy intensive (e.g., sieving) or
environmentally unfriendly (e.g., froth floatation) or both. The underlying
hypothesis of the second focus area of this work is that we can develop rate
based separations techniques based on granular temperature driven segregation
and non-equipartition of (granular) energy. Specifically, we aim to build an
analog of a granular chromatograph using a shaking table that imparts a gradient
in vibration energy and hence, a gradient in granular temperature. Additionally,
we plan to explore granular ratchets in analogy to Brownian ratchets from
microfluidic studies because non equipartition of energy will yield the
equivalent of the species dependent diffusion coefficient necessary for
ratcheting to function for separations. These fluids inspired particle
separations devices should not only overcome several of the shortcomings of
traditional particle separations techniques, but also will help to validate
kinetic theory based models in a very practical context. The chief intellectual
merit of this work will be evidenced through advancing knowledge and
understanding across fields of engineering and physics via:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Expanding our preliminary mixing results past the proof
of concept stage and into a general methodology for limiting both single
(density or size) and mixed mode segregation in a variety of surface dominated
flows, including developing a set of validating experimental and simulation
results that demonstrate the utility of flow perturbations for limiting
segregation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Establishing design heuristics for
segregation free operation of a variety of particle processing
devices.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;3. A series of experiments that can be used as a
test bed for variations on kinetic theory expressions.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;4.
Two novel particle separation devices: a granular chromatograph and a granular
ratchet apparatus The primary broader impacts will be related to the economic
impact on the wide variety of industries that deal with particle processing for
whom mixing/segregation and particle separation have dramatic product/revenue
implications. Additional broader impacts of the work lie in integrating teaching
and research. This teaching/research integration will take two forms: training
of two graduate students and several undergraduate researchers (with emphasis on
under represented groups), and the development of a novel handson K-12 teacher
training/partnership program focused on building interest in science in
disadvantaged youths. Coupling a particle technology researchers natural
propensity for hands-on instruction with a desire to have a positive impact on
the the disadvantaged youth in the local community, the PI is proposing to form
a partnership with the Academy Charter School (http://www.theacademysystem.com).
This 8-12 grade school is the only charter school in the US exclusively focused
on educating court ejudicated youth. Hands-on or inquiry based science education
has been shown to not only improve student attitudes toward science, but also to
foster higher overall achievement as well as a more flat response as a function
of demographic background. The proposed partnership will comprise workshop like
sessions between the PI and instructors in the Academy Charter School aimed at
developing and/or adapting inquiry based educational modules suitable for
science/engineering education in this unique learning environment highly
competitive nature of the proposals submitted to the Program and the panel
recommendation, the Program Director recommends that this proposal be awarded.