* 0933812
* HPL-Based Ethics Education for Life Science and Bioengineering Students
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2015
* Ernst Cebert, Alabama A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Tankersley
* 09/30/2015
* USD 399,885.00

Life sciences and bioengineering students encounter challenging learning,
practice, and research environments. Rapid developments in science and
technology make change a constant factor in those environments. In this changing
landscape, graduates entering careers in industry, the professions, or academia
are likely to face ethical issues and challenges. This project is preparing
students to recognize and address ethical issues in these careers and
environments. It is building on the VaNTH Engineering Research Center?s research
education program by employing a "How People Learn" (HPL) approach to develop
didactic materials. The primary strategy being employed is the creation of case-
based educational modules and related materials in life science ethics for use
by graduate students. Materials are being developed largely for an
interdisciplinary audience in bioengineering. The modules emphasize themes that
are aligned to critical components of an effective ethical framework for the
responsible conduct of research (RCR) as defined by HHS Office of Research
Integrity (ORI). The project will assess the effects of these modules on
students? knowledge of ethical standards and regulations, skills in ethical
decision making, and ability to integrate ethical standards and principles in
practice. After they are proven effective, modules will be disseminated for
testing and use with the help of the Biomedical Engineering Society (BMES) and
the Alliance for Engineering and Medicine and Biology (AEMB) student chapters to
universities and professionals through a dedicated section of the Biomedical
Engineering Society?s website, academic networks, and professional meetings.