* 0933067
* Neuroimaging of Motor Imagery for Brain Computer Interface Applications
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Bin He, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Athanassios Sambanis
* 08/31/2013
* USD 300,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law
111-5)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0933067&lt;br/&gt;He&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are
currently over two million people in the United States suffering from various
degrees of paralysis with an additional eleven thousand new cases of spinal cord
injury each year. A means to rehabilitate these individuals would thus have
tremendous economic and social impact. The brain-computer interface has been
developed as a means to 'read' the minds of these individuals and translate
these thoughts into actions performed via a computer, which aims at restoring
function in paralytics by providing the brain with new output
pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal of this project is to develop
a novel non-invasive brain-computer interface system, which can perform complex
tasks reliably and efficiently. The availability of such a system would have a
significant impact in aiding patients with neurological disorders that cause
significant impairment in mobility. The specific objective of the project is to
use functional magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and electroencephalogram (i.e.
brain wave) recordings to provide a solid base of knowledge regarding the
individual signatures associated with motor imagery tasks in order to
significantly improve the design and implementation of motor imagery-based
brain-computer interface systems. The specific aims of the project are to: 1)
Investigate the spatial co-localizations between neural and hemodynamic
responses associated with various motor imagery tasks; 2) Develop ultra-
sensitive spatiotemporal imaging methods suited for imaging 'imagery' brain
activity; 3) Develop and evaluate a novel multi-dimensional brain-computer
interface system based on individual signatures extracted from the space, time
and frequency domains of brain waves. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits: The proposed research tackles a
fundamental scientific challenge in converting 'thoughts' into actions through
noninvasive measurements. A key component of the motor imagery-based brain-
computer interface systems is to extract sensitive signatures in which human
intentions are best encoded. Currently, such signatures are mainly based on
information processing of scalp-recorded brain waves at the sensor space, which
require significant training by the subject to achieve control of a multi-
dimensional environment. Scalp-recorded brain waves lack specificity and the
relationship between neuronal firing associated with 'intentions' and the
recorded brain waves remains ambiguous. The transformative nature of the
proposed research is to map the 'intentions' of individuals directly over the
cortex where neural information processing is physically being performed. This
highly innovative approach will be realized by establishing one-on-one mapping
during imagination of a variety of movement tasks through the use of functional
MRI and brain wave source imaging. The proposed data-driven approach enables
rational fusing of functional MRI signals and brain waves, leading to ultra-
sensitive means imaging the complex patterns of 'thoughts' signals. The
successful completion of the proposed research will greatly expand the
understanding of the neural mechanisms of motor imagery, and lead to the
development of a transformative noninvasive multi-dimensional brain-computer
interface system, which would have significantly enhanced specificity,
efficiency, and reliability. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
The proposed project has the potential for having major broad impacts in several
areas: a) Societal: There are currently over two million people in the United
States suffering from various degrees of paralysis. The proposed research
promises to lead to highly complex noninvasive brain-computer interface systems,
which may significantly aid in the clinical rehabilitation in this group of
patients, benefiting public health and the economy. b) Technical: The proposed
research addresses a significant problem in science - decoding signals related
to 'thoughts' to control devices. The proposed research may make a significant
contribution to neuroscience, rehabilitation engineering, control theory, signal
processing, and imaging science. c) Enhancement of infrastructure for research
and education: The proposed study will help strengthen collaborations among
biomedical engineers, neuroscientists, and imaging scientists, and provide
unique opportunities for interdisciplinary training of graduate students,
postdoctoral fellows, and undergraduate students, including minority and female
students. d) Knowledge dissemination: The findings will be broadly disseminated
to other researchers in the field including scholarly publications and website
dissemination of software codes.