* 0933246
* Acute And Chronic Health Effects From Lead In Drinking Water Of Schools And Day Care Facilities:  Detection, Bio-Availability, And Predicted Impacts On Blood Lead
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2009,03/31/2013
* Marc Edwards, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Debra Reinhart
* 03/31/2013
* USD 375,892.00

0933246 &lt;br/&gt;Edwards&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The United States currently has
a voluntary program to identify, detect and mitigate problems with lead in
drinking water of schools and day care centers. Although the conventional wisdom
is that lead in school water poses little health risk, substantive gaps in
understanding may have caused the magnitude of this problem to be
underestimated. The combination of "worst case" plumbing configurations and
water flow patterns, and susceptible populations of very young children, makes a
detailed evaluation of this issue desirable. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three phases
of research are directed at resolving the most important issues. The first
examines key aspects of lead occurrence in potable water of schools using
intensive sampling events designed to statistically characterize the natural
variability of lead in water. A similar analysis will be conducted for selected
"problem" taps that are known to dispense hazardous waste levels of lead with at
least some frequency. The level of lead in hot water will also be systematically
tested for the first time. Sampling protocols are designed to ensure that none
of the lead in water is "missed", as often occurs when using conventional lead
in water analytical procedures and guidance. The occurrence of high lead in
water will then be forensically linked to specific plumbing sources using an
array of analytical techniques.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The second phase of work
systematically evaluates the bioavailability of the lead. It has been speculated
that the particulate lead in water is not bioavailable and poses little health
risk, but on the other hand several recent cases of lead poisoning for children
were unambiguously tied to the presence of small particles of lead solder in the
water. Samples of particulate lead from water of schools will be exposed to a
range of representative simulated gastric acids, churn conditions, and stomach
retention times. Lead dissolution will be tracked in samples as a function of
particle size and type of lead particle present. Tests will also be conducted to
examine partitioning of particulate lead in water to pasta during cooking, and
the role of trace reducing agents in gastric acid in rendering particulate lead
more or less bioavailable. This fundamental research has not been previously
conducted for lead particulates derived from real drinking waters.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finally, bio-kinetic models will be utilized that
incorporate results of the first two phases of research, in order to evaluate a
range of realistic exposure scenarios by which children might be exposed to lead
in water while in schools. Prior modeling efforts were significantly biased
towards underestimating the elevation in blood lead that might result from
exposure to lead contaminated drinking water. This modeling work will be the
first to: 1) consider acute as well as chronic health risks, 2) evaluate the
potential hazard that arises from use of hot water for instant infant formula,
soups, and tea (it is suspected that there is often much more lead in hot water
than cold water), and 3) determine the possible contribution of lead in foods
cooked in contaminated water. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research work is a
collaborative effort between Virginia Tech, the Children?s National Medical
Center (CNMC), the Alliance for Healthy Homes, Parents for Non-toxic
Alternatives, and a network of concerned parents and high school
students/teachers. Results will be used in considering the protectiveness of
existing approaches that are used to control and mitigate lead hazards in
potable water of schools and homes. Our unfunded preliminary efforts have
already had a significant effect, as evidenced by tougher standards in the State
of Washington and in Canada, and through a re-evaluation of effects of high lead
in water on blood lead of children in Washington D.C. from 2001-2007. These
initial successes, interdisciplinary approach, and clear public health
implications support the need for the research.