* 0933141
* Novel Catalyst Supports for Water Electrolysis: Experimental and Theoretical Studies
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2012
* Prashant Kumta, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Ram Gupta
* 12/31/2012
* USD 325,000.00

0933141&lt;br/&gt;Kumta&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nano-structured noble metals and
noble metal oxides are used in proton exchange membrane (PEM) fuel cells and
water electrolyzers for their electro-catalytic activity. The combined
generation of acidic protons and the high electrochemical potentials require
that the catalysts remain stable under these extremely corrosive environments.
The cost of noble metals thus provides the impetus to search for stable catalyst
supports to minimize the loading while also enhancing the electrocatalytic
activity. Very few materials are known to exhibit the desired electrical
conductivity and electrochemical stability at 1.8-2.0V. Group IV oxide
particularly, SnO2 is known to exhibit the desired electrochemical stability as
well as moderate electronic conductivity. There is a need to further improve its
electronic conductivity to enhance the efficiency of the electro-catalytic
activity and minimize the catalyst loading. This project will conduct a
fundamental experimental and theoretical study to identify a new class of
different SnO2 based materials that likely exhibit improved electrochemical and
electronic properties for electrolysis of water. The approach will be to use
first principles ab initio techniques to determine thermodynamically stable
mixed metal oxides while also using the Gaussian methodology to identify the
electrochemical stability of the parent and doped tin oxide at the desired
electrochemical potentials. Novel chemical approaches will be used to generate
high surface area Ir1-xRuxO2 catalyst structures on these stable catalyst
supports. The role of bulk and surface microstructure and composition on the
electrochemical stability and the electrocatalytic response will be studied by
correlating high resolution microscopy results with logical electrochemical
potentiometric, and electronic conductivity
tests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merits: A new class of nano-crystalline
mixed metal oxide catalyst supports exhibiting desirable electronic conductivity
and electrochemical properties will be developed, and a better understanding of
the underlying electrochemical processes and the influence of nano-scale
materials structure and microstructure on the electrochemical stability and
activity will be generated; 3) The combination of theory and experiments will
lay the foundation for the design and development of novel catalyst supports for
the generation of carbon free hydrogen using electrolysis of water. Broader
impacts: The proposed research will advance the science and technology of mixed
metal oxides for electrocatalysis for use in PEM fuel cells and water
electrolysis. The proposed studies will offer an excellent opportunity for
minority women and individuals from underrepresented groups to participate in
the research activity. The on-going existing collaboration with North Carolina
Agriculture and Technical University (NCAT) through the recently funded NSF-
Engineering Research Center (ERC) will further help to recruit minority
individuals into the graduate program. Moreover, web-based audio-visual
electrochemistry tools will be developed for local high school students who will
be allowed to participate in projects in the PI's laboratory and present their
work in a competitive workshop.