* 0933230
* Fate and Transport of Biocolloids in Beach Sand
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2014
* Jin Li, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 07/31/2014
* USD 506,694.00

0933230&lt;br/&gt;Li&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Elevated level of bacteria associated
with fecal contamination from a myriad of point and non-point sources is the
major factor leading to beach closings and health advisories. Bathing water and
beach sand contaminated with human and animal wastes pose a serious health risk
to swimmers and beachgoers. While local public authorities routinely monitor the
level of fecal indicators in bathing water to assess the health threat for
swimmers, the risk of pathogen exposure for those who come into direct contact
with sand has been largely neglected. Currently, no water quality criterion
exists for testing beach sand and its pore water, even though studies have
revealed that indicator organisms and pathogens can occur in high numbers and
persist in subsurface sediment collected near freshwater
shorelines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thus, the overall goal of the proposed research
is to improve the basic understanding of mechanisms governing the fate and
transport of biocolloids, e.g., viruses, bacteria and protozoa, in the swash
zone on sandy beaches. The specific objectives include: &lt;br/&gt;(1) Develop
mathematical models that characterize biocolloids transport and retention in
porous media under flow conditions relevant to the swash
zone.&lt;br/&gt;(2)Study the transport mechanisms and survival characteristics
of colloidal particles in well-controlled laboratory scale columns and a
laboratory model sandy beach; determine the deposition rate under various flow
conditions. (3)Extend the results from modeling studies and laboratory
experiments to real-world situations and verify the transport model through
field investigations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding of the fundamental
mechanisms governing the transport of indicator organisms and pathogens into
sand and factors contribute to their subsequent survival opens a new paradigm in
beach pollution monitoring and mitigation. The systematic integration of
mathematical modeling, laboratory scale experiments and field investigation is
an innovative aspect of this research. For the past a few years the PI has been
investigating the fate and transport of bacteria in porous media, developing
models for stormwater management for the Greater Milwaukee Watershed and
studying microbial ecology of biofilms. The Co-PI has been developing a
versatile in-situ Underwater Miniature PIV System (UWMPIV) system to investigate
small-scale turbulence structures near water-sediment and water-air interfaces
in Rivers, Lakes and Oceans. This project is built upon both PI?s expertise in
environmental microbiology and hydrodynamics as documented in their recent
publications and projects. It is expected that results from this research will
advance the current knowledge in both fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this project will provide a firm foundation for teaching,
training and learning. A new inquiry based laboratory course that brings
together undergraduate and graduate students from a diverse background
including, biology, chemistry and geoscience, will be developed. The research
results from this project will be added as ?hot topics? modules to the new
course. Previous and current graduate students will have the opportunity to
serve as mentors for undergraduate students recruited across the campus. By
introducing environmental engineering issues to students majoring in science, it
is possible to attract more women and minority undergraduate students to the
engineering graduate program. The research results will be disseminated to
policy makers, water quality managers, public health and environmental groups,
researchers, and the public, through participation in local, national and
international conferences and publication in peer-reviewed journals. An
international workshop will be organized to provide a forum for researchers in
the US and Asia to discuss the challenges in beach water monitoring and
management. The PIs will also work with the EWB student chapter at UWM to
provide safe drinking water and recreational water to villagers in Guatemala and
Kenya.