* 0933392
* GOALI: Infrastructure Investment and Operation Decisions for Biobased Production Networks
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Matthew Realff, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 08/31/2012
* USD 297,441.00

0933392&lt;br/&gt;Lee&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this GOALI project
is to develop an optimization model that supports the multi-stage decision-
making of infrastructure investment and operation of bio-refineries. These
decisions include the selection of fuel conversion technologies, design and
expansion of processing network, and the logistics of transportation. In
collaboration with Weyerhaeuser NR, the PIs recently developed a preliminary
version of such an optimization model. Testing of the model with preliminary
data provided by the company yielded some useful insights into the relationship
between design structure and various cost elements. However, the current model
is able to use only very basic information (e.g., transportation cost, capital
cost, operating cost, etc.), is limited in the scope of technologies it
considers, and does not consider synergies with existing wood processing
infrastructure. In addition, it does not account for uncertainties in
performance and costs of major system components and does not support dynamic
decision-making needed to address various temporal aspects of the problem. All
of these are inherent features of the problem. In this project, the PIs will
develop a richer, broader model that considers opportunities for integration
with existing forest product processing facilities, uncertainties associated
with various silvicultural, technical and economic parameters of the problem,
and temporal aspects such as active planning of biomass supplies through
forestry management and multi-period expansion of the processing capacities.
They will test the models on company-representative data and analyze the results
in terms of profits and other measures of system performance, such as the
percentage carbon in the forestry resource that is captured in the product, the
ton miles travelled, and the percentage utilization of capacity for different
market shares of new chemicals and fuels. This information will be integrated
into a life cycle inventory of the system to support life cycle assessments for
renewable fuel standards. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Extension of
the current model to remove these limitations requires meeting several
intellectual challenges: (1) Synergistic integration with existing wood
processing infrastructure requires decisions regarding mass and heat integration
schemes with the existing operations to be combined with process and location
choices. The industrial collaborator can provide specific facility data for this
purpose. (2) To address uncertainties, such as those in the biomass
availability, process performance, and final product demand / price, multi-stage
stochastic decision problems will be formulated and solved. The industrial
collaborator is in a position to provide reasonable structures and estimates of
these uncertainties. The multi-stage formulation is also needed to support
dynamic decision making. The solution of multi-stage stochastic decision
problems can be computationally challenging, and will require development of a
tailored solution algorithm. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: A systems
model of bio-refinery investment optimization can help maximize return on
investments, existing and new, made to convert forestry resources into a broader
product portfolio. With one of the leading forestry product companies
participating in the project, the research outcome is expected to make an
immediate impact in the forest product industries. The model can serve as a tool
to inform policy makers and other stakeholders what types of policies incentives
for investment are needed to spur the economic development based on fuels and
chemicals from forestry resources. It will promote a more quantitative,
engineering-based, approach to evaluating investments in bio-based fuels and
chemicals. The PIs also expect to advance the state of the art of ADP by
applying it to an important problem of a scale never tried before. The success
of ADP on a problem of major national interest could spur greater interest in
this problem solving technique within the process systems community. On the
education side, there is a paper science and technology option that could absorb
many of the results on the detailed process simulation and integration and a
graduate data driven modeling course, which uses a case study approach. In
addition, the company will educate its executives of the need for systematic
evaluation of bio-refinery options and general capabilities of advanced
computational systems.