* 0933493
* Thermal Characterization Equipment for Diverse Particulate Materials Research and Education
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Keisha Walters, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
*  Ashok S. Sangani
* 08/31/2010
* USD 100,000.00

0933493 Hill

The objective of this equipment proposal is to acquire a suite of thermal
characterization instrumentation including a modulated differential scanning
calorimeter (MDSC), a simultaneous thermal analyzer (STA) that includes DSC and
thermogravimetric analysis (TGA), and a TGA-IR interface accessory. The combined
features of these instruments will allow for high sensitivity, high resolution,
differentiation of complex thermal events, and resolution of weak and close
transitions in lipid polymorphs, polymeric nanoparticles, and cellular membrane
materials. Materials research at Mississippi State University (MSU) is limited
by current thermal analysis equipment because: 1) existing DSCs do not have
cooling to allow for operation at sub-ambient temperatures, 2) existing DSCs
cannot operate in a modulated temperature mode and therefore cannot detect
subtle phase transitions, 3) no STA is present and so simultaneous DCS and TGA
of a sample cannot be performed, and 4) existing DSCs and TGAs are fully
utilized. The requested MDSC/STA/TGA-IR suite will provide much needed
capabilities to allow for innovative research, such as that proposed in lipid
crystals and nanocrystals, thermally responsive nanoparticles, renewal polymers,
and membrane chemistry.

Intellectual Merit: Acquisition of these instruments will provide the
infrastructure necessary to make substantial progress in three important fields
of particulate materials research: crystallization, polymers, and biomembrane
chemistry. While diverse, the PIs proposed work in each of these fields is based
on materials characterization and requires access to research grade thermal
analysis instrumentation. The PIs prior efforts have been significantly hampered
by the lack of low or no cost access to adequate thermal analysis equipment. The
MDSC, STA, and TGA-IR interface will allow for both new and expanded research.
For lipids, thermal analysis will determine polymorphic form and the presence of
hydrates or solvates, which will allow optimization of crystallization
conditions; high resolution measurements will enable novel research in the area
of solid lipid nanoparticles (NPs) as well as with nanostructured lipid
carriers. Stimuli responsive polymers will be grafted from NPs using surface
confined living radical polymerization techniques that allow for control over
molecular weights and grafting densities. A series of thermally responsive core-
shell NPs will be produced and the thermal analysis suite requested will allow
for detection of weak and strong phase transitions, differentiation between
volatile loss, thermal decomposition, and phase transitions, and evolved gas
identification. For biological membrane research, thermal characterization will
help assess antigen inclusion into liposomal membranes (model cells) for
comparison with the physiologically relevant red blood cell system. Next,
nanoparticle-conjugated ABO antigens in both the liposomes and red blood cells
will be examined and will help determine the altered ABO antigens impact on red
blood cell responses in dielectrophoretic microdevices.

Broader Impacts: This instrumentation will improve the materials
characterization infrastructure of the department, college, and university.
These characterization tools will be utilized by the PIs in their course
instruction. Long term outcomes include innovative particulates research and
enhanced student education and training. The PIs are committed to actively
recruiting undergraduate and graduate students from underrepresented groups to
participate in their research activities. Education will be integrated with
research via instrument usage in graduate student research, and by incorporating
concepts and research data into four elective courses for engineering and
science students. The instruments will provide students with access to cutting
edge thermal characterization techniques; and the elective courses will provide
concrete connections between theory and application, and interdisciplinary
study. This enhanced training will provide a long term benefit to society via
student contributions in their respective disciplines. Hill's lipid research has
multiple applications in foods, personal care products, and pharmaceuticals.
Walters research on thermally responsive NPs can lead to the development of new
drug delivery methods, data storage technologies, and selective separations.
Minerick's biomedical microdevice research has the potential to impact blood
cell diagnostic microdevices and contributes to sustainability by decreasing
resource utilization for chemical analysis. The equipment requested will
transform research capabilities for each of the PIs research efforts at
Mississippi State.