* 0933348
* Probing and optimizing quantum dot confined states for next generation intermediate band solar cells
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Rachel Goldman, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Ram Gupta
* 07/31/2013
* USD 381,559.00

0933348&lt;br/&gt;Johnson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tech
nical Merit: Intermediate-band (IB) solar cells have the potential to convert
sunlight to electricity with record efficiency. Perhaps the most promising
approach to IB semiconductors is quantum dot (QD) arrays. In principle, these QD
arrays would replace the intrinsic region in state-of-the-art p-i-n solar cells.
Although this concept was originally proposed in the 1990s, the anticipated
efficiency records have yet to be achieved. The performance to date has been
limited by a lack of fundamental design rules for energy conversion processes in
the context of QD confined states and minibands. In particular, an understanding
of the influence of QD shapes, sizes, strain states, and QD/matrix interface
uniformity on the formation of and interaction between QD confined states and
minibands is needed. Furthermore, novel miniband architectures which enable
optimum sunlight to electricity conversion efficiencies must be developed. The
proposed approach involves a unique combination of state-of-the-art
nanofabrication methods, measurements with unprecedented spatial resolution, and
multi-scale simulations. The long-term objective of the work is to provide a set
of design rules to optimize sunlight-to-electricity conversion in a wide variety
of nanostructured materials. Several fundamental questions critical to the
development of optimum sunlight-to-electricity conversion design rules will be
addressed, including: what is the critical length scale at which the electronic
states associated with a collection of point defects appear similar to those of
a small QD? How do QD shapes and sizes influence the QD electronic states? How
do interfacial disorder and strain influence the coupling of QD electronic
states, as well as the formation of electronic mini-bands in two-dimensional and
three-dimensional QD arrays? Which miniband architectures are needed to optimize
the sunlight to electricity conversion efficiency? Using the unique combined
expertise of the co-PIs in state-of-the-art nanofabrication, measurements with
unprecedented spatial resolution, and multi-scale simulations, a set of design
rules to optimize sunlight-to-electricity conversion in nanostructured
intermediate band solar cells will be developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact: This research is expected to have a substantial impact on energy and
sustainability. The PIs will also develop an outreach program in energy and
sustainability. The outreach program will build partnerships in the local public
high schools. This approach will lay the groundwork for a more ambitious
outreach program developed by the co-PI in Ann Arbor, which has brought more
than 30 local high school students to the UM campus for summer research
internships. The PIs will develop a module, 'Materials for Solar Cells", to be
incorporated into existing high school physics and chemistry courses. They will
present this interactive and hands-on module to students from various
backgrounds within several school systems. The module will draw on the
excitement surrounding major new initiatives at UIUC and UM in sustainable
energy research, and will serve to generate interest in engineering research.