* 0933647
* Space-time Loadings on Wind Turbine Blades driven by Atmospheric Boundary Layer Turbulence: Coupling LES and DES
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* James Brasseur, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 07/31/2013
* USD 337,466.00

0933647&lt;br/&gt;Brasseur&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wind turbine downtime has been consistently higher
than anticipated because of a lack of quantitative knowledge of the true space-
time loadings along the span of the rotor blades that arise from the
interactions between the rotor and the fluctuating wind field. The atmospheric
surface layer (ASL) contains strongly inhomogeneous coherent turbulence
structure that generates high variability in space-time wind vector orientation
and magnitude relative to the rapidly rotating blades, creating non-steady
spatially-dependent loadings. The non-steady forces and moments along the rotor
blades underlie the vibrations, bending, and twisting of the blades, span-
dependent non-steady boundary layer separations and dynamic stall, noise,
trailing vortex formation, and blade pitch control. These loadings integrate to
produce fluctuating forces on the drive shaft that are transferred to the
gearbox, a hot point for failure. While field data cannot provide the needed
wind data in full space-time, simulations have been limited by resolution,
accuracy, and the lack of true space-time atmospheric wind
inputs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This project shall develop a
sophisticated computational capability, well resolved in space-time that
accurately predicts the details of rotor aerodynamics and loadings in response
to true ASL turbulence structure over a wide range of atmospheric states. The
computational facility will be applied to analyze the detailed dynamics
underlying wind turbine loadings and fluctuating forces on the shaft and will
also form the basis of a computational test-bed facility for validation of
lower-order design models, for design and testing of control systems, and for
studies of important related issues such as noise, downwind interactions,
gearbox design, etc. The facility will be developed within the massively
parallel framework of the NSF tera-grid by coupling two classes of simulation
and code: (1) pseudo-spectral large-eddy simulation (LES) of the atmospheric
boundary layer (ABL) over a wide range of atmospheric states, and (2) body-
fitted aerodynamic simulations over individual rotor blades using a "detached
eddy simulation" (DES) strategy. Broader Impacts: This research program could
broadly impact wind turbine design by providing a high level resource within
which low-order design tools can be developed and validated. It will initiate a
long-term effort that we plan to grow to include a broad range of wind turbine
design issues. The PIs shall contribute to the outreach efforts of the Penn
State Institutes of Energy and the Environment (PSIEE) and Center for
Sustainability (CfS) which works directly with undergraduate students through
green energy projects. They will develop short lectures for undergraduate
students involved in SfS projects and elsewhere. The focus will be "the need for
high-level science and technology research related to wind power." They also
plan to work with the Penn State Public Broadcasting Service (WPSU) to develop a
web-based "digital learning object" directed at high school and undergraduate
that shows the excitement of doing high-level scientific research in wind
energy.