* 0933571
* Fiberoptic Microneedle Device for Combined Light and Nanomedicine Delivery: Mimicking Nature's Design of a Mosquito
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Yong Xu, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Kaiming Ye
* 07/31/2012
* USD 300,000.00

0933571&lt;br/&gt;Rylander&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A fiberoptic microneedle device,
FMD, has been invented that can significantly enhance light penetration in
tissue to enable a new regime of minimally-invasive and more selective
photothermal therapy combining light and nanomedicine delivery. The device is
comprised of one or more optically transparent glass fibers (~40 microns in
diameter) which are guided into a patient's tissue by a novel support ferrule.
For dermatological applications, the device may be placed against a patient's
skin, and mechanical compression causes the fiber needles to slide through the
ferrule and painlessly penetrate the skin, similar to the dynamics of a mosquito
bite. The fiber tips may be positioned at desirable target positions
(potentially &gt;2mm deep) within tissue. Some fibers may be hollow, enabling
delivery of drugs (chemotherapeutic agents, nanomaterials etc.) to specific
tissue regions for targeted treatment. Subsequent application of laser energy
into the solid fibers will be transmitted efficiently to the target tissue
containing the light-absorbing nanomaterials, thereby inducing selective
photothermal or photochemical damage. To achieve clinical translation of this
device for cancer treatment a fundamental understanding of its optical,
mechanical, and therapeutic capability must be performed. To demonstrate the
potential of this technology the research team has organized the research goals
in the following three objectives:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Mechanical
Penetration: Design and fabricate a fiberoptic microneedle device (FMD) and
evaluate its performance in penetrating ex vivo porcine skin using white light
photographic imaging and load-cell testing&lt;br/&gt;2) Optical/Fluid Delivery:
Design and fabricate individual fiberoptic microneedles with solid cores to
deliver light and hollow cores to deliver fluids containing nanoparticles, and
evaluate their light/fluid delivery performance using brightfield and
fluorescence imaging&lt;br/&gt;3) Thermal/Therapeutic: Evaluate photothermal
damage specificity of FMD light delivery alone or in combination with
nanoparticles using thermal imaging and cell viability
assays&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All objectives will involve experimentation using
cell-based tissue representative phantoms and ex vivo porcine skin. Each
objective has associated milestones to be completed during each of the three
years of this project. Completion of this work will provide preliminary results
necessary to move forward with animal and eventually human clinical trials for
cancer treatment using the FMD. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will
greatly advance development of FMD-mediated laser cancer therapies by providing
an understanding of the optical, mechanical, and therapeutic capabilities of
this technology. Using the FMD, nanoparticles and light may be delivered to
specific target sites several millimeters beneath an epithelial surface via
minimally-invasive fiberoptic microneedles. Due to selective absorption of
optical radiation by the nanoparticles in the target tissue, the optical dose
can be more precisely delivered, reducing unwanted collateral tissue damage and
associated pain, and promoting faster wound healing. This project involves
interdisciplinary experimentation and modeling of tissue mechanics (needle
penetration), tissue optics (light transport), transport of nanomaterials, heat
generation and transport, and cellular injury. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Long-range
societal impact of this work will be improved quality of life for cancer
patients. The FMD is an enabling technology for minimally-invasive detection and
treatment of early stage, small epithelial cancers located a few millimeters
under the tissue surface, such as melanoma, uterine, and esophageal cancer.
Early stage detection and treatment of cancer is the key to enhanced survival
and diminished morbidity. The FMD device is appropriately scaled for minimally
invasive selective detection and treatment of early stage tumors. Furthermore,
the FMD is well suited to deliver photosensitizing drugs or nanomaterials to
increase the selective tumor destruction while maintaining the viability of the
surrounding healthy tissue. The interdisciplinary nature of this project will
provide opportunities for students from different scientific fields to gain
experience in experimental design, engineering, imaging, and computational
modeling. The PI is devoted to increasing the number of females and minorities
within the engineering field through active participation in programs such as
Multicultural Academic Opportunities Program (MAOP), and Center for the
Enhancement of Engineering Diversity (CEED) at Virginia Tech. Funding from this
proposal will allow recruitment of additional female and minority students to
study in his biotransport and optics laboratory.