* 0933059
* Advanced Biophotonic Structured Illumination Imaging System Design
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Joseph Izatt, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2013
* USD 316,497.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-
5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0933059&lt;br/&gt;Izatt&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Structure
d illumination (SI) is one of a new generation of techniques which have recently
been demonstrated to break the diffraction limit in microscopy. The SI approach
to superresolution involves illuminating the object with a spatial frequency
carrier which down-shifts the object's high-frequency features to within the
optical transfer function of the imaging system. For objects which respond
linearly to the incident illumination, a resolution increase of 2x is possible,
whereas for objects which respond nonlinearly (such as saturation of
fluorescence or of stimulated emission), the resolution improvement is
theoretically unlimited (although it trades off with sensitivity). Applying this
methodology as a modification to standard tabletop microscopes, super-resolution
imaging with &lt;50nm resolution has been reported. Previous implementations of
SI imaging have utilized straightforward sinusoidal illumination patterns, and
relied upon deterministic phase shifting and multiple exposures at different
angular orientations to acquire the full complex k-space data required for
superresolved image reconstruction. These approaches are practical in stable and
well-characterized microscopes under laboratory conditions, for which these
parameters are controllable. The principles of SI imaging represent a
fundamental advance in imaging science, and carry the potential of resolution
improvement in a variety of biophotonic imaging applications, including human
clinical diagnostics. The advantages of SI imaging are particularly compelling
in situations where specific features of either the object to be imaged or of
the imaging device itself limit the numerical aperture and therefore the
achievable resolution. An example of the former is in imaging of the human
retina, where the anatomical iris and the optical quality of the ornea outside
of the central zone limit the usable numerical aperture. An example of the
latter is in endoscopic or catheter imaging, where the physical size of the
optics in combination with the desired working distance conspire to severely
limit numerical aperture. The proposed project will initiate a research program
to investigate how SI imaging technology can be extended to meet the
requirements of robustness and speed required of clinical optical
instrumentation. The project will focus on the goal of super-resolved imaging of
the human retina in the living human eye, where the investigators have
considerable previous experience in the development of optical coherence
tomography technology. Under the rubric of developing a structured illumination
ophthalmoscope for clinical use, it is first proposed to implement and test a
prototype structured illumination line-scanning laser ophthalmolscope design.
Then, research will be conducted on the development of three specific advances
in SI technology motivated by anticipated difficulties in transitioning from
laboratory to clinical superresolution imaging.