* 0933734
* The Design of Multifunctional Colloidal Nanostructures for Environmental Remediation of Chlorinated Hydrocarbons
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Gary McPherson, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Eddie Chang
* 07/31/2012
* USD 180,000.00

0933734&lt;br/&gt;John&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is directed towards the design
of multifunctional particles that are effective in the remediation of
chlorinated hydrocarbons such as trichloroethylene (TCE). These hydrocarbons
form a class of dense non-aqueous phase liquid (DNAPL) contaminants in
groundwater and soil that are difficult to remediate. They have a density
greater than water and settle deep into the sediment from which they gradually
leach out into aquifers causing long term environmental
pollution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research will be conducted to understand the
fundamental science and technology behind the development of composite particles
based on attaching zerovalent iron nanoparticles (NZVI) to highly uniform carbon
microspheres. The carbon serves as an adsorbent to sequester TCE and bring the
contaminant to the site of reaction, while the NZVI is the reactive site.
Colloidal stability is enhanced by adsorbing a corona of a biodegradable
polyelectrolyte, carboxymethyl cellulose. The novelty of the research is the
coupling of reaction, adsorption, transport and stability through the use of a
simple and inexpensive system that is potentially environmentally benign. The
work is distinct from earlier work in that all aspects of remediation are
concurrently considered through the use of these systems. If successful, it
would lead to a fundamental understanding of chlorinated hydrocarbon
remediation, and would transform the field since the materials used can be tuned
for optimal reactivity and transport. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt; From a scientific and technical perspective, the broader
impacts of the research clearly lie in the application to an environmental
problem of significant importance. Chlorinated hydrocarbons are pervasive
pollutants in groundwater and sediments and the fact that they migrate downwards
in aquifers makes them extremely difficult to remediate through traditional pump
and treat or sediment excavation techniques. The problem is intrinsic to the
global grand challenge problem of providing adequate safe drinking water to the
worlds population. The research has the potential to be truly transformative as
it addresses a unique methodology to develop multifunctional nanoscale materials
for environmental remediation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From an educational and
outreach perspective, the project will tie in to providing research
opportunities for undergraduates from underrepresented minorities, through the
Louisiana Alliance for Minority Participation in Research program. Additionally,
we will tie in to a unique program connecting Tulane, Xavier and Nunez College
whereby educational enhancement in the chemical sciences is brought about
through collaboration, with the objective of addressing the recruitment and
retention of a skilled workforce in the region.