* 0933153
* Calcium Phosphate Aquagels: Novel Gene Delivery Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2012
* Prashant Kumta, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Athanassios Sambanis
* 12/31/2012
* USD 300,000.00

0933153&lt;br/&gt;Kumta&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gene delivery using non-
viral (plasmid) techniques are very desirable due to their economic,
convenience, ease of manufacturing, cost-effectiveness, and safe
characteristics. The techniques are currently limited by low transfection
efficiencies due to lack of a suitable carrier. A number of cationic synthetic
polymers have been studied as non-viral gene delivery agents. Calcium phosphate
(CaP) commercial kits have also been known as standard non viral gene delivery
vectors although there have been limited studies reported to ascertain their
efficacy as non viral gene delivery agents. Nano-sized CaPs called "NanoCaPs"
developed by the PI are novel delivery agents for plasmid DNA (pDNA)
transfection. However, successful transfection is dependent on maintaining the
complex size of 30-50 nm. It is hence critical to identify methods to stabilize
the NanoCaPs. Novel CaP aquagels have been developed by the PI that display
polymeric hydrogel characteristics. These CaP aquagels can be used directly as
gene delivery agents or can serve as a matrix for embedding the synthesized
p-DNA-NanoCaPs complex. The composite CaP aquagels can also provide controlled
release of pDNA. These aquagels have the potential to provide nucleic-acid based
therapeutics that closely resembles traditional pharmaceuticals and gene
delivery for tissue engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective is
to engineer a safe and versatile plasmid gene delivery system for tissue
engineering. The goal is to demonstrate that CaP aquagels will enhance the in
vitro transfection efficiency of pDNA by increasing the uptake and expression of
marker genes (Luciferase and/or GFP). This will be achieved using quantitative
digital imaging methods. The synthesized CaP aquagels are biocompatible and the
in vitro data is in excellent agreement with the objective to design and develop
an efficient plasmid gene therapy for gene replacement therapy and tissue
engineering. The present study will provide the foundation for conducting
further research related to plasmid gene therapy. The specific objectives of the
research have been formulated to provide solutions to fundamental questions
related to in vitro pDNA transfection efficiency and the application of the
aquagels in bone tissue engineering thus providing key information currently not
available. The proposed research will enable the generation of novel CaP based
aquagel carriers for plasmid gene delivery, the benefits of which will be seen
in tissue engineering applications. The CaP aquagels comprising various Ca/P
ratios and CaP phases provide the unique ability to not only serve as
biocompatible scaffolds but also matrices for binding plasmid DNA. In addition,
these novel gels can be synthesized to contain nano-structured carriers of pDNA
thus serving the multiple roles of biocompatible, bioresorbable, safe scaffolds
and non-viral gene delivery systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merits of the proposed study are the following. A new class of biocompatible CaP
based composite aquagels will be synthesized exhibiting efficient non-viral gene
transfection. The studies will transform the current status of CaP based non-
viral gene delivery by obtaining a good understanding of the underlying
molecular processes involved in synthesizing the composite gels. The proposed
studies will also provide fundamental insight into the influence of nanoscale
interaction of the binding, condensation and release of pDNA. The proposed
studies will help tailor safe and effective non viral gene delivery agents
matching efficiencies of polymeric counterparts. The broader impacts of the
proposed activity are the following. The proposed research will advance the
science and technology of CaP aquagel systems for non viral gene delivery. The
studies will also pave the way for the identification and fabrication of new
biocompatible CaP based aquagels that will exhibit characteristics similar to
organic hydrogels. The existing North Carolina Agriculture and Technical
University (NCA&amp;T) collaboration through the newly funded Engineering
Research Center (ERC) will offer an excellent opportunity for minority women and
individuals from underrepresented groups to participate in the research
activity. Moreover, local high school students will engage in hands on
laboratory courses and a summer symposia. The PI has continuously integrated
women and individuals of underrepresented minority groups into past NSF research
programs and will continue to do so. Minority students from the Society for
Women Engineers (SWE) will also be activity recruited to participate in the
research program. Students will participate in summer symposia and the best
paper presenters will be given the opportunity to participate and attend
national society meetings. Results of the proposed research study will be
published in leading peer reviewed scientific journals and will also be
periodically presented at national and international conferences. Thus
significant benefits to society can be envisaged since the proposed research
could offer a feasible solution to the development of efficient non-viral gene
delivery agents.