* 0933029
* Mechanically-Induced Spontaneous Arrhythmias in Acute Regional Ischemia
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2012
* Natalia Trayanova, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Kaiming Ye
* 12/31/2012
* USD 300,000.00

0933029 Trayanova

The overall objective of this research is to investigate the genesis of
stretch-induced ventricular ectopy and the mechanisms by which it degrades into
reentrant arrhythmias in the ischemic heart. The overarching hypothesis is that
the origin of ectopic activations in acute regional ischemia arises from
mechanical stretch of the ischemic region during systole. Specifically, it is
hypothesized that: 1) Depolarization of the ischemic region caused by end-
systolic stretch and subsequent opening of mechano-sensitive channels leads to
ventricular premature beats originating at the ischemic border, and 2) The
incidence of ventricular premature beats increases as ischemia progresses due to
the higher level of strain developed as a result of increased end-diastolic
pressure and tissue compliance. The hypothesis regarding the mechanism of
degeneration of ventricular premature beats into reentrant arrhythmias posits
that this degeneration stems from reduced excitability and dispersion in
refractoriness and conduction velocity resulting from combined
electrophysiological and mechanical changes in the ischemic region.

To test these hypotheses, the project will develop a three-dimensional
anatomically-accurate bidomain electromechanical model of the rabbit ventricles
with acute regional ischemia. The model will be able to represent the mechanical
and electrophysiological characteristics and behavior of ischemic tissue,
including mechano-electric feedback mechanisms. This novel powerful model will
be used to provide new mechanistic insight into the origins of ectopic activity
and an understanding of how stretch-induced electrophysiological changes can
exacerbate the existing pro-arrhythmic ischemic substrate and thus facilitate
the degradation of ventricular ectopy into reentrant arrhythmias. The new
insights into the role of mechano-electric feedback in arrhythmogenesis could
ultimately lead to rational rather than empirical advancements in anti-
arrhythmia therapies in patients with ischemic cardiac disease.

In addition to the benefits to human health as outlined above, broader impacts
resulting from the proposed activity include 1) advancement in the integration
of research and education, 2) broadening the participation of underrepresented
groups, and 3) fostering the development and dissemination of the next-
generation engineering methods and technologies. The proposed research will
provide an integrated array of simulation tools for electromechanical modeling
of cardiac arrhythmogenesis in the diseased heart that will be made available to
the broader community. Undergraduate and graduate students participating in the
project will be trained in interdisciplinary approaches to clinically-relevant
problems in biomedical engineering. Particular emphasis will be placed on the
involvement of women and under-represented minority students in the project,
consistent with the PI's long-term research activities.