* 0933635
* EAGER: Transforming Attitudes via Best Practices CS1
* CSE,CNS
* 04/15/2009,03/31/2014
* Elizabeth Simon, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 03/31/2014
* USD 299,953.00

EAGER: Transforming Attitudes via Best Practices CS1&lt;br/&gt;Beth Simon,
Computer Science and Engineering&lt;br/&gt;UC San Diego&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For
several years, the computing community has been concerned about dropping
enrollments in computing majors and courses while the national need for well
trained students in computing is increasing. To understand this crisis, many
factors have been examined including the image of computing and the pedagogy and
materials used in introductory classes. Over time, many instructors have
experimented with classes that teach fundamental computing constructs and skills
through more attractive applications and environments. There is some anecdotal
evidence that this approach is effective and some studies that have been carried
out with non-majors. This project presents a unique and timely opportunity to
test this approach; in the past, finding viable and significantly large
comparison groups to support the hypothesis has been a
challenge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: This EAGER project takes
advantage of two existing comparison groups in introductory classes that are
being taught the same two semesters at the University of California San Diego,
one traditional and one using media computing. Students are surveyed to support
the hypothesis that teaching computing through a more attractive domain such as
media computing will result in better attitudes toward computing among both
majors and students who take computing courses to complement their majors. The
existence of two viable and significantly large comparison groups is fortunate
and provides results of interest to the computer science education research
community. This first round of data, expected to support the hypothesis that
motivating context will improve attitudes toward engagement in computing classes
and immediate intent of students to continue in computing classes and major,
enables future projects that examine effects on more enduring
retention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: This lays out a comparative
study showing key data that will assist other computing departments in making
decisions about curricular change to improve recruitment and retention.
Specifically, the attitudes of students taking CS1 with media computation is
analyzed and compared to students who are taking a traditional CS1 class absent
the hypothesized motivating context. These results are informative to
departments that seek an increased number of students applying to their
departments, greater numbers of students succeeding in their programs, and
overall a student body that is more engaged and positively inclined towards the
value of computing in their career and in society.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;