* 0933090
* Collaborative Research: Probing the hydrodynamic resistance and traffic of confined droplets in microfluidic networks for the rational design of two-phase fluidic processors
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Harris Wong, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Horst Henning Winter
* 08/31/2011
* USD 82,215.00

0932796/0933090 &lt;br/&gt;Vanapalli/Wong &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The notion of
using tiny nanoliter-scale water droplets in an oil phase as reaction vessels
for applications in chemical and life sciences is turning into a reality due to
rapid progress in the science and engineering of microfluidics. Despite such
progress, fundamental challenges remain to transform current droplet-based
devices to next generation fluidic processors capable of characterizing large-
scale biological complexity. Two scientific challenges exist in the realization
of such an integrated two-phase fluidic processor. First, the transport of a
large number of confined droplets in microchannels leads to prohibitively excess
pressure drop. Second, due to collective hydrodynamic resistive effects, it is
difficult to control the position and timing of droplets for reactions on a
device. To address these challenges requires a thorough understanding of
hydrodynamic resistance introduced by the motion of confined droplets. The PIs
will combine experiments and modeling to quantify the hydrodynamic resistance
due to a confined droplet and its dependence on system parameters. Novel aspects
of the work include the use of a sensitive microfluidic comparator technique to
measure hydrodynamic resistance at the level of individual droplets.
Experimental methods and models will be developed to quantify the currently
unknown contribution of end-cap, thin film and corner flows to the hydrodynamic
resistance of a droplet in rectangular microchannels, with the ultimate goal of
achieving predictive capability of pressure drop for enhanced device
performance. This study will enable rational design of two-phase fluidic
processors that could be potentially autonomous and passively driven. This work
will also impact other engineering areas that rely on fundamental understanding
of multiphase flows in confined media such as tertiary oil recovery and fuel
cells. Educational component of the project includes drawing minority graduate
and undergraduate students to the visually striking research on microfluidics
and providing state-of-the-art training in microfluidics, microfabrication,
microscopy and numerical modeling. The PIs will pursue outreach activities at
their respective institutions such as developing a weeklong hands-on-activities
and lectures on the theme "Bubbles on Chips".