* 0933521
* Conversion of Heavy Organic Aqueous Mixtures by Film Boiling
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Wing Tsang, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 08/31/2013
* USD 325,000.00

0933521&lt;br/&gt;Avedisian&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A new reactor technology will be investigated that
can potentially convert lower cost organic compounds into fuels, or other highly
valued products. Specifically, the feasibility converting glycerine (a byproduct
of biodiesel production) or ethylene glycol into a useful fuel such as syngas,
will be determined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. The intellectual
merit of the research and the reactor concept is derived from the unique
combination of heat transfer, mass transport, multiphase processes and chemical
change. The principal technical challenge involves the study of high boiling
point organic (e.g., glycerine) and water mixtures. An experimental approach
will be taken to measure product yields associated with film boiling on a
horizontal tube and to determine the influence of process variables such as wall
temperature, tube diameter, subcooling and mixture composition. The results will
guide development of a model to optimize and exploit the process.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The emerging biofuels industry produces
large quantities of low value byproducts. In the production of biodiesel, the
byproduct glycerine might be converted to syngas with the proposed method.
Hence, net fuel production could be increased while problems associated with
disposal of excess glycerine could be ameliorated. The educational plan includes
development of a minicamp that will bring students from five local schools in
Washington, DC to Cornell. Simple experiments illustrating nucleate boiling and
burnout phenomena will be developed allowing students a hands-on laboratory
experience. In addition to the minicamp, an undergraduate student will be
selected for participation in the NIST Summer Undergraduate Research (SURF)
Program.