* 0933931
* Automated Vision Tracking of Project Related Entities
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/30/2008,08/31/2011
* Ioannis Brilakis, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Konstantinos Triantis
* 08/31/2011
* USD 214,921.00

This research aims to investigate the feasibility of a novel automated vision
tracking methodology that reports the 4D location (spatial coordinates and time)
of distinctly shaped, project related entities, such as construction equipment,
personnel, and materials of standard sizes and shapes. Under this methodology,
two or more self-calibrated, outdoor wireless video cameras are initially placed
at a project site and collect video-streams. Using the construction materials
and shapes visual recognition methods that the investigator has previously
developed, each project related entity on the cameras' field of view is
identified as an "interesting" pattern to track. The pixel area that it occupies
in each camera is marked. Based on each entity's area centroid and epipolar
geometry, the corresponding entities on each camera's view are matched, to
determine the 4D position of each entity. Established tracking techniques are
then used in each subsequent frame of the video stream to track the movement of
the identified "interesting" entity while it operates within the cameras'
viewing spectrum. Tracking of project related entities, such as materials,
equipment and personnel, has been a significant topic of research for the last
decade. Trackers, and especially automated trackers, are useful in progress
monitoring and inventory control applications for construction sites, materials
management, collision/accident prevention tools and security applications.
Tracking records can also be used in activity sequence analysis for optimal path
determination and processes redesign. Existing vision-based tracking
technologies can be divided in model-based and user-driven approaches. The major
advantage of model-based techniques is that they are highly efficient and
precise in following the modeled targets. The limitation is their need for
fairly elaborate entity models. Correspondingly, the major advantage of user-
driven approaches is their wide-range applicability while their limitation is
the lack of prior knowledge of the tracked entities' characteristics and the
need for a user to select the "interesting" entities manually. Therefore, in a
construction site where large numbers of different material types, personnel and
equipment are involved, one would need to create elaborate models for each type
of entity that needs to be tracked, or manually select each entity to be tracked
every time that entity would enter a camera's view. These are the limitations
that the proposed research addresses by automatically recognizing the related
entities and directing a generic tracker to follow them accordingly.

If successfu, this research is expected to substantially increase the efficiency
and quality of the information technology processes involved in civil
infrastructure construction and in manufacturing. This in turn will result in
cost and time savings, will improve the competitiveness of the U.S. construction
industry, and will reduce life cycle costs of civil infrastructure.