* 0933506
* IDF: Controlled Network Disruption and Spatiotemporal Sampling of Microperfused 3-D Neural Cultures
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Ari Glezer, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Athanassios Sambanis
* 08/31/2013
* USD 300,000.00

0933506&lt;br/&gt;LaPlaca&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to grow and
manipulate cells in culture is crucial to understanding basic mechanisms of both
normal and disease processes. Three-dimensional thick neural cultures, in
particular, mimic brain tissue, but are limited by the lack of a blood supply to
deliver nutrients and remove waste. There is a critical need to develop new
technology to address this need and produce valid brain tissue models. The
intellectual merit of this interdisciplinary research lies in the engineering of
a new culture model that includes the major cell types in the brain: neurons,
astrocytes, and microglia, together with a highly controllable microfluidic
system that perfuses nutrients throughout the culture and permits waste removal
and sampling of the cell culture media during periods of both normal conditions
and cell injury. Several new innovative elements will be incorporated: 1)
include inflammatory cells (microglia) to create a more realistic cell model; 2)
introduce a unique, ultrasound-based injury model to produce local injury within
the culture; and 3) incorporate microfluidics for perfusion and sampling. Thus,
the overall objective is to create a robust and complex neural tissue equivalent
that will faithfully represent brain and to investigate the role of microglia
following inflammatory triggers. In Task 1, the most appropriate building blocks
are chosen to create a novel, complex 3-D neural system for studying
inflammation. In addition, microfluidics will be integrated to include perfusion
and sampling capabilities. Furthermore, a new traumatic injury model will be
developed, providing a means for detailed study of injury mechanisms using
highly controllable and tunable methodology. In Task 2, the role of the
microglia in the injury response will be tested, as cytokines released from
injured microglia are hypothesized to increase cell death. This research is
highly significant, as robust culture tools that incorporate multiple cell types
and microfluidic perfusion and sampling offer unprecedented levels of spatial
and temporal control for determining mechanisms of both normal and injured
cells. The broader impact of this research direction will be the development of
extremely novel neural tissue equivalents that can be used for numerous
applications. It is expected that the next generation of culture systems
realized by this approach will revolutionize the way neural cell culturing is
done, as the complex interactions among cell types are considered and
microcirculation is mimicked through microperfusion. Three-dimensional tissue
models with these capabilities will push forward the translation of basic
science discoveries for industry, government, and medical breakthroughs. The
technical findings will be shared with university, government, and industry
researchers with emphasis on collaboration and ultimately having an impact on
those affected with traumatic injury or other neurological
disorders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;