* 0933415
* Collaborative Research: IDR-Engineering of a Novel Nanostructure for Biomedical Sensing and Imaging
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Alexander Govorov, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Rajakkannu Mutharasan
* 08/31/2014
* USD 195,798.00

0933782/0933415/0933384 Motamedi/Govorov/Kotov

Immunosenescence is the complex process of immune disregulation associated with
advancing age. In humans, the compromised immunity with aging is realized in an
increased susceptibility to viral and bacterial infections, reactivation of
latent viruses, and decreased responses to vaccines. It is well known that the
adaptive immune system such as T and B-cell progressively deteriorate with
advancing age. Cytokines are secreted regulatory proteins and play vital roles
in controlling cell survival, growth differentiation and function.

The multi-disciplinary and tri-institutional "Linked Collaborative Research-
Interdisciplinary Proposal" brings together several research groups with broad
expertise and research interest to conduct experimental and theoretical studies
aimed at engineering of novel nanostructures for sensing and high resolution
imaging of cytokines. The group at the University of Michigan lead by Dr. Kotov
will carry out the materials and nanotechnology aspect of this project, while
the investigation at the University of Texas Medical Branch lead by Dr. Motamedi
will concentrate on imaging and proteomics of this work. The experimental
efforts of these groups will be complemented by the theoretical and modeling
efforts of Dr. Govorov at Ohio University who will be developing models capable
of predicting the response of the sensors. Specifically, they propose a novel
sensing nanotechnology to image cytokines gradient of macrophages for the
immunosenescence study of innate immune system. Successful demonstration of the
versatile NW superstructure with cytokine-dependent frequency shift during the
next three years allocated for this proposal will establish a concept and
protocol for sensing and imaging of various cytokines while providing a unique
opportunity to characterize the secretion of various cytokines from different
age groups of macrophages, and developing the fundamental foundation for
engineering of a new class of optical sensor for detection and imaging of
various proteins.

Broader Impact

The proposed work is inherently multidisciplinary. The project combines
expertise in new materials, imaging, bioengineering, biophysics and modeling as
well as proteomics. From educational point of view, PIs, and graduate students
will be immersed into a highly diverse environment, learning to interact and
communicate effectively with professionals in several different fields of
science and engineering. Special attention will be given to providing research
opportunities to undergraduates and minority. The goals and scope of the
interdisciplinary research (IDR) program at NSF appear to be an exact match for
the proposed research. The joint efforts of the proposed multi-disciplinary team
will create a powerful tool for the fundamental understanding of cell biology,
characterization of proteomics of many diseases, clinical diagnosis of cell-
secretion related diseases and the potential for rational control of cell
differentiation in tissue engineering using novel optical sensors to detect and
monitor the spatial and temporal distribution of small molecules such cytokines
using high resolution imaging techniques. The proposed research combines the
synergistic activities of a chemist and engineer with expertise in material
sciences, nanotechnology, nanophotonics and sensing (Dr. Kotov, U of M), a
bioengineering team specializing in cellular and biomedical imaging working with
internationally known expert in the area of proteomics and inflammatory
responses (Dr. Motamedi and his collaborators at UTMB) and a biophysicist and
modeler with expertise in modeling of complex nanostructure and their behavior.
The proposed joint efforts will significantly advance fundamental knowledge in
multiple engineering and life science areas, including sensing, imaging and
proteomics and if successful could have enormous long-term impact on health care
and our national needs.