* 0933276
* PEET:  Monographic revision of taxa of marine pulmonates (Mollusca, Gastropoda)
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Benoit Dayrat, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Ranker
* 08/31/2012
* USD 135,000.00

This project will involve examinations of the biodiversity and evolutionary
relationships of siphonariid gastropods, limpet-like snails that are found on
sea shores worldwide. These snails are unusual in that they are pulmonate snails
that breathe with a 'lung', rather than the gills typical of most marine snails,
making them difficult to place in an evolutionary framework. The project will
rely heavily on specimens present in museum collections and will also involve an
expedition to Singapore to collect new material and train students in field
techniques. The determination and description of species and the higher level
relationships among these species will be made using morphology and DNA sequence
data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This group of snails has never been thoroughly
examined and a taxonomic revision is the only way to learn about the group's
true diversity. This project will enhance our understanding of pulmonate snail
relationships and address questions about the evolutionary transitions between
aquatic and terrestrial habitats (pulmonates successfully live on land, in
freshwater and in the sea). This work will serve as a case study for the
discussion of conceptual issues of general interest in taxonomy and biodiversity
research. Education and research will be integrated through a series of field,
laboratory and outreach activities, and special efforts will be made to include
members of groups underrepresented in science. Results will be published as
articles and monographs and computer-based activities are integrated within the
project.