* 0933574
* Microscale Heat Transfer Enhancement through Fluid Structure Interaction in the Slip Flow Regime
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Timothy Ameel, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 06/30/2013
* USD 296,215.00

0933574&lt;br/&gt;Ameel&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A novel heat transfer enhancement
technology is proposed for gas convection electronic cooling applications. Use
of heat sinks with surface arrays of microscale flexible pin fins, oscillating
at their fundamental frequency in response to unsteady flow, is expected to
significantly increase heat dissipation rates. The small size of the proposed
flexible pin fins will result in slip flow occurring on the fin surface. Non-
continuum effects of slip flow and temperature jump at the surface, coupled with
fluid structure interaction (FSI), produces a unique and challenging
computational problem that has not been investigated before. An existing
methodology that combines a computational fluid dynamics algorithm (ICE) with
the material point method (MPM) for solids modeling will be modified to account
for the momentum and energy exchange between a rarified gas and a deformable
surface. The resulting FSI algorithm will be validated using four representative
cases of slip flow for which analytical and/or numerical data are available. The
proposed work will naturally lead to other slip flow FSI studies, such as
associated with atomic force microscope probes, microscale diaphragm pumps and
valves, and micro air vehicle wings and control flaps. &lt;br/&gt;Following the
implementation and validation of slip flow and temperature jump conditions into
the MPM-ICE methodology, a systematic study will be conducted to gain physical
understanding into the FSI behavior and heat transfer enhancement of microscale
flexible pin fins, individually, in pairs, and in arrays. Single microscale
flexible pin fin studies will a) confirm the existence of unsteady flow at
Reynolds numbers Re &gt; 47 in the continuum regime and b) produce data for the
flow and heat transfer characteristics in the slip flow regime as functions of
Re, Knudsen number Kn, fin aspect ratio, and material properties. The thermal
fluid interaction of two microscale flexible pin fins, aligned with the
principal flow direction, will be examined to determine optimal spacing. An
array of microscale flexible pin fins will be studied to ascertain optimal
configurations for maximum overall heat transfer rates, taking into account the
previously mentioned parameters. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
Computational modeling of fluid structure interaction in the slip flow regime
has not been reported in the literature. Thus, the proposed project is expected
to be transformative, resulting in an enabling technology for the design and
analysis of a number of novel micro- and nano-fluidic systems, including the
proposed microscale flexible pin fin concept for enhancement of air-side heat
transfer. Data from continuum flow rigid pin fins and microscale flexible pin
fin studies will increase the understanding of mechanisms related to drag and
heat transfer enhancement in this complex FSI system. In addition, for the first
time, data will also be produced for a system with FSI in the slip flow regime
with concurrent momentum and thermal transport.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The algorithm will enable modeling of systems in which fluid structure
interaction takes place in the slip flow regime. Many other microscale systems,
such as particulate flows, two-phase flows, and microactuators could be modeled
with the modified MPM-ICE methodology. The optimized design of microscale
flexible pin fin arrays could be extensively applied to a wide variety of
electronic packages to enhance heat dissipation in applications limited to air
cooling. Local impact will occur through the introduction of project results
into two existing undergraduate/graduate course within the College of
Engineering. Project results will be conveyed to the scientific community
through refereed archival journal publications and by presentations at
multidisciplinary meetings, providing opportunities for cross-fertilization of
ideas. Graduate students involved in the project will be actively recruited from
underrepresented groups in engineering. Research outcomes will be converted into
engaging video presentations for outreach and recruitment activities.
Underrepresented groups in engineering will be the focus of outreach, utilizing
existing College of Engineering activities. Examples of these programs include
Utah's Engineers: A Statewide Initiative for Growth, an NSF-funded initiative to
increase engineering graduation rates, and Hi-GEAR Girls Summer Camp which is a
residence summer program for high school females.