* 0933069
* Fundamental Investigation of Pulsed Laser Irradiation on Metal Oxide Gas Sensor Performance
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2014
* Ahalapitiya Jayatissa, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Massimo Ruzzene
* 12/31/2014
* USD 260,000.00

Metal oxide semiconductor films have found extensive applications in gas sensors
in the last few decades. However, rapidly growing need for comprehensive
monitoring of the environmental impact of industrial emissions demands
detection, at the few parts per million levels, of pollutant or industrial
gases. This significant challenge has to be met by synthesis of new sensor
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research project is to
investigate the fundamental phenomena of laser irradiation on metal oxide-based
thin films relevant to gas sensor performance by employing experimental as well
as computational approaches. The investigation will be conducted using tungsten
trioxide (WO3) and tin oxide (SnO2) as the model materials. The carrier mobility
and conductivity of sensor films will be measured as functions of the power
level, the number of pulses of the laser and selective doping. The surface and
microstructure will be examined to understand the effect of laser irradiation on
these films. After optimizing for laser power, number of pulses and film growth
parameters micro gas sensors will be fabricated. A coordinated experimental and
computational study for the heat transfer mechanism from the laser to the film
and its effect on microstructure and hence on electronic properties relevant to
sensor performance will be undertaken. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research is expected to provide greater fundamental understanding of the
phenomena associated with the interaction of pulsed lasers and metal oxide
sensor film. It is envisioned that the proposed method will create faster and
more sensitive gas sensors because the carrier mobility and active surface area
of sensor film are increased by laser irradiation. The research may also result
in a better sensor response at lower temperatures. This processing technique is
transferable to a manufacturing process of an industrial scale. A synergistic
theoretical and computational investigation of the laser induced heating and
crystallization of the metal oxide film will be carried out. This joint endeavor
will speed the optimization of process parameters. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposed research advances a novel method to significantly enhance the
performance of metal oxide-based gas sensors. Scientifically, it will lead to
insights into the underlying mechanism of interaction of laser beams and metal
oxides. Educationally it will involve regional high school students in leading
edge research, and educate and inspire them and pique their interest to pursue
careers in science and engineering. Expansion of opportunities for undergraduate
research experience and under-represented students will be
emphasized.&lt;br/&gt;