* 0933288
* The Role of Extracellular Polymeri Substances of Biofilm on Pathogen Disinfection in Water Distribution Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Cyndee Gruden, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2013
* USD 275,787.00

0933288 Seo

Immobilized microbial cells grow and produce extracelluar polymeric substance
(EPS), which create structured communities of microorganisms. Together,
immobilized cells and EPS form a biofilm. Reports from many water utilities in
the US have shown that biofilm survives in water distribution systems despite
the continuing presence of disinfectants and causes significant health threats
to the public. Currently, the persistence of biofilm in water distribution
systems is believed to be strongly related to EPS. The principal objective of
this proposal is to understand the mechanisms of the persistence of biofilm in
water distribution systems. Emphasis will be placed on understanding the role of
biofilm EPS, using microelectrodes techniques and fluorescently labeled probes
for in-situ biofilm monitoring.

The proposed studies with microelectrodes techniques and biofilm analysis tools
will broaden our understanding of pathogenic biofilm formation and its control
with disinfectants. Specifically, this research will enable quantitative
evaluation of the role of EPS and biofilm structure on the transport and
reaction of disinfectants. This will result in the development of modeling
parameters obtained with microelectrodes and biofilm analysis. In addition, we
will identify the role of EPS on pathogen attachment, detachment and
redistribution. Finally, this research will result in combined assessments of
the effects of multiple distribution parameters (water age, reactive pipe
material, phosphorous corrosion inhibitor) on multi-species biofilm growth. This
research has new key approaches which can be differentiated from previous
studies. First, the unanswered transport and reaction kinetics of secondary
disinfectants in biofilm will be determined with newly developed microelectrodes
and in-situ biofilm analysis. Second, a systematic approach will be used to
observe the role of EPS on the detachment and redistribution of biofilm,
monitoring physiological states of detached clusters which couldn't be
understood with particle size analyzers.

Beyond enlarging our understanding of biofilm control in academic society, the
proposed research has direct and broad impacts on water utilities, industries,
and public health. The information gleaned from this research will enable local
water utilities to incorporate biofilm control strategies and enhance our
current understanding of biofilm control mechanism in many other industries
including medical and chemical industries. The outcomes will contribute to
protecting public health by improving the prevention of biofilm related pathogen
infection via drinking water and providing a fundamental understanding of the
role of EPS against antimicrobial agents. In addition, the proposed project will
result in the training and education of two Ph.D students, summer research
opportunities for undergraduate and high school students, and implementation of
research findings into PIs three undergraduate courses.