* 0934142
* Coalition for Research and Education Enhancement in Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2016
* Dennis Hess, Clark Atlanta University
* Continuing Grant
* jose caro
* 08/31/2016
* USD 2,787,500.00

The Partnership for Research and Education in Materials (PREM) between three
Atlanta University Center (AUC) schools and the Materials Research Science and
Engineering Center (MRSEC) at Georgia Institute of Technology (GT) integrates
research, education, and student-mentoring in order to increase the number of
underrepresented students pursuing graduate degrees and to increase their
overall participation in the field of materials science and engineering. The
three AUC schools are Clark Atlanta University (CAU), Morehouse College (MC),
and Spelman College (SC). The partner MRSEC is ?The Georgia Tech Laboratory for
New Electronic Materials? in which fundamental materials properties and
synthesis of epitaxial graphene are being investigated.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graphene is a new electronic material that is poised to be
the successor to silicon. Bringing epitaxial graphene to the level of a
technologically relevant material depends upon fundamental research, innovation
and improved methodologies to understand and control the structure and
properties of this novel material. Key features of the partnership include: (1)
establishing research collaboration between AUC and GT faculty, postdoctoral
associates, and graduate students; (2) strengthening the research and education
infrastructure of AUC; (3) providing research opportunities for AUC
undergraduates during the academic year; (4) providing summer research
experiences for AUC students at GT through the collaborative research program;
and (5) developing and hosting summer research institutes for high school
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research effort involves both experimental
characterizations of epitaxially grown graphene and simulation studies of the
electronic structures of graphene-related nanodevices. The broader impact of
this program will be a significant enhancement of the infrastructure of AUC for
materials research, education, and technology transfer; equally significant is
the likely, long-term, sustainable, synergistic impact on the GT diversity
programs in science and engineering. The high school students program is
designed to better-prepare and motivate high school students from metro Atlanta
to major in science or engineering upon entering college. Since the student
population of AUC is predominantly African American, the undergraduate student
activities will establish a pipeline of well-prepared and motivated
undergraduate African American students who will pursue graduate studies in
materials science and engineering at GT or other research
universities.&lt;br/&gt;