* 0934306
* Improvements of storage facilities and communications at the Kessler Farm Field Laboratories
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Phillip Chilson, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 09/30/2012
* USD 53,556.00

The University of Oklahoma is awarded a grant for the construction of a 30 x 60
storage facility at the Kessler Farm Field Laboratory (KFFL) as well as for the
repair of roads and parking areas and to construct a wi-fi communications
network at this site, a heavily-used grassland field station. The structure
would allow researchers and teachers to store their materials safely as well as
improve wireless communication with field plots and educational tools. This will
also improve the web presence of a number of research projects at KFFL and
enhance their educational potentials. KFFL is a unique field station with its
strong interdisciplinary foci, ongoing interactions occurring amongst
biologists, ecologists, meteorologists, geographers, geomorphologists, and
climate change experts. Located only 25 minutes from the main campus of OU, this
350-acre facility is a great resource for research on grassland structure and
function and how these may be affected by various climate and weather drivers.
In addition, KFFL hosts two long-term global climate change experiments, and
several federal atmospheric measurement facilities including an Atmospheric
Radiation Measurement site, National Atmospheric Deposition Program site, and
NOAA Profiler Network site. Additional programs hosted by KFFL include a site in
a continental scale magnetometer study (McMaC), a boundary layer radar, one of
two remaining super-sites in the Oklahoma Mesonet, the KFFL Piconet, wind
profilers and video disdrometers, and long-term small mammal exclosures.
Further, numerous studies have been conducted on the grasslands, creeks and
ponds located at KFFL. Literally hundreds of papers have been written using data
collected at KFFL. With new projects being proposed, more high-profile research
is expected in the future in a number of different fields. Unfunded research
efforts continue to increase as well. All of these efforts would benefit from
the presence of a safe, secure and sanitary storage facility, repaired roads and
parking areas and wi-fi communication capabilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
number of K-12 groups in the local school districts around have expressed
interest in using KFFL. By virtue of their location, many of these programs
comprise significant numbers of students from underrepresented groups. Improved
infrastructure at KFFL will increase our ability to network with these local
school districts and to include more students and more under represented groups
in field work. Wi-fi communication capabilities will enable scientists and
educators using KFFL to involve students via the web and would help attract
additional students from across Oklahoma to participate in field research. To
aid in wider dissemination of information about activities occurring at the
facility, KFFL now has a new web portal (http://kffl.ou.edu) that is being used
to advertise events at the farm as well as post and distribute information to
researchers or school groups interested in using the farm. In addition, all KFFL
users are now required to register their metadata with the KNB knowledge base
(http://knb.ecoinformatics.org).