* 0934408
* Photooxidation of Biogenically Produced Alkenes:  Impacts on HOx, NOx, and Aerosol
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Paul Wennberg, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Pszenny
* 08/31/2011
* USD 352,530.00

This project will employ state-of-the-art instrumentation to investigate the
photo-oxidation of biogenic alkenes and their oxidation products as part of a
multi-investigator field program in the forested environment of California's
Sierra Nevada, a chemical regime where organic peroxy radicals react with
hydrogen peroxide under conditions with relatively low levels of nitrogen oxides
(NOx). This regime is currently poorly characterized; previous field
observations have suggested that the mechanisms currently used in photochemical
models are inconsistent with observed levels of NOX. A triple quadrupole mass
spectrometer will be coupled to a custom, selected-ion chemical ionization inlet
for real-time analysis of many short-lived, reactive compounds including the
organic peroxides that have, to date, been poorly quantified. During the field
campaign, a second chemical ionization mass spectrometer will be used to
measure, via eddy covariance, the fluxes of hydrogen cyanide, hydrogen peroxide
and nitric acid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results will improve constraints on
the mechanisms responsible for 1) production and loss of ozone, 2) the
production and fate of organic nitrates, and 3) formation of secondary organic
aerosol in Earth's atmosphere, thus providing substantially improved
understanding of the nature of the organic chemistry that controls the burden of
ozone and aerosol in many regions of the world. The work will involve
collaborations with a broad spectrum of scientists, including other atmospheric
chemists, meteorologists, and ecologists studying the biochemistry leading to
the formation and release of biogenic alkenes from trees. These collaborations
will expose graduate students and post-doctoral scholars involved in the work to
the breadth of earth science.