* 0934218
* Oxide and Metal Nanoparticles-The Interface between Life Sciences and Physical Sciences
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Dhiraj Sardar, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Continuing Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 08/31/2015
* USD 2,787,500.00

Oxide and Metal Nanoparticles: The Interface between Life Sciences and Physical
Sciences &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Texas at San Antonio (UTSA)
studies interfacial relationships between nanomaterials and the life sciences
through its Partnership for Research and Education in Materials (PREM) with the
Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) at Northwestern
University (NU) and the University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio
(UTHSCSA). The PREM creates a permanent relationship between these institutions
to broaden and foster collaborative research and education in materials science.
The research entails three principal components: 1) collaborative research in
nanomaterials and their applications in various fields, 2) education and
training for undergraduate and graduate students, especially, women and other
underrepresented minority students, and 3) outreach program for K-12 students
and teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research participants are focused in six
thrust areas: 1) Rare Earth-based Dual Purpose Biosensor, 2) Medical
Applications of Nanoparticles, 3) Novel Nanomaterials and their Applications in
Biology, 4) Using Metal Nanoparticles in Neuroscience, 5) Terahertz
Characterization of Nanomaterials for Biological Imaging Applications, and 6)
Functionalization of Fibers Employing Low Temperature Pulsed Laser Deposition
and Atomic Layer Deposition. This PREM establishes a unique and highly cohesive
team enabled to investigate fundamental science questions in these specific
thrust areas. The NU-MRSEC plays a critical role in establishing and guiding the
PREM program at UTSA, as the NU Materials Research laboratories provide
infrastructure and support staff currently not available to UTSA undergraduate
and graduate students engaged in these types of research areas.