* 0934555
* Urban Educators:   Robert Noyce Scholarship for Math &amp; Science Teachers - Phase II
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2009,09/30/2015
* Kathleen Marrs, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 09/30/2015
* USD 599,963.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Noyce Scholars at Indiana
University Purdue University Indianapolis (IUPUI) are enrolled in the Transition
to Teaching (T2T) program that allows both STEM graduates and STEM professionals
to complete the requirements and field experiences for teacher preparation in
the sciences and mathematics at the secondary level (grades 6-12) over the
course of one calendar year. The T2T program builds on the established
partnership between School of Education and high-need school districts in Marion
County, including the Indianapolis Public Schools (IPS) system. The current
Robert Noyce Program (DUE-0531598) has successfully prepared 26 highly qualified
science and math teachers for the urban high-need classrooms in
Indiana.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Noyce Phase II has three objectives. It plans
to continue to increase the number of secondary science and mathematics teachers
- 10 teachers each year, with an emphasis on the recruitment of individuals from
ethnic minorities. It will also enhance retention of novice teachers by
providing on-going mentoring for the new teachers while simultaneously
initiating a longitudinal research plan to assess the effectiveness of the
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit reflects on its focus on
recruitment of diverse scholars who possess developed skills in inquiry-base
teaching, the additional emphasis on new teacher retention by creating an in-
service teachers' mentoring program, sophisticated mechanisms for measuring the
impact of the project and the effectiveness of the program. The broader impact
of this project may be recognized by the enhanced diversity of math and science
teachers who are committed to increasing the quantity, quality, and diversity of
students in urban schools who will enter STEM fields in the coming decades.