* 0934472
* Acoustical Monitoring and Analysis of Lightning
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2014
* William Rison, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Edward L. Bensman
* 02/28/2014
* USD 350,652.00

In the continuing effort to understand the behavior of lightning, arrays of
radio receivers currently in use enable us to see the progression of negative
leaders. Positive leaders, however, remain largely invisible outside clouds
because they do not emit sufficiently strong radio pulses. To remedy this
deficiency, this project will revive and improve the use of acoustic methods for
locating positive (and negative) lightning leaders and apply these methods at
Langmuir Laboratory in central New Mexico, where a Lightning Mapping Array and
other instruments and facilities are already in place to provide the necessary
complementary information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One major goal of the study is
to characterize positive leaders and positive cloud-to-ground lightning. A
second major goal is to determine which of the acoustic lightning emissions come
from the gas dynamic expansion of portions of the rapidly heated lightning
channel and which from electrostatic field changes. A third major goal is to
test the hypothesis that infrasonic signals are associated with and precede
lightning initiation, and a fourth major goal is to image positive leaders and
other events during triggered lightning experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
networked array of acoustic transducers will be installed in the Magdalena
Mountains of Central New Mexico, where Langmuir Laboratory already has a wide
range of instruments to monitor thunderstorms and lightning. A recent pilot
study in this area has shown co-incident infrasound acoustic sources and
electromagnetic radiation sources. The present work will expand the pilot
acoustic network so that more varied and extensive sources can be imaged in
three dimensions plus time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Lightning
has been investigated with different techniques, but an integrated approach
involving simultaneous use of multiple techniques will yield new insights and
better results. New technology has enabled distributed deployments of GPS-based
acoustic networks that will provide complementary information to the already
existing instrumentation systems from Langmuir
Laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project has immediate
impact on scientific problems directly related to lightning hazards, as well as
basic science of lightning dynamics. Undergraduate and graduate students will be
involved in the scientific and applied aspects of the project. The work will
enable integration and cross-disciplinary interaction between engineers,
atmospheric, and earth scientists.