* 0934022
* URM:   Recruitment and Training of Underrepresented Minorities in the Biological Sciences at Humboldt State University
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Bruce O'Gara, Humboldt State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 08/31/2015
* USD 892,353.00

An award has been made to Humboldt State University (HSU) to establish an
Undergraduate Research and Mentoring (URM) program to engage under-represented
minority students in a research and mentoring program to prepare them for
graduate study in the biological sciences. A cohort consisting of six students
will be trained, except the first cohort in which only five students will be
involved. NSF funds will be used to support each undergraduate participant for a
total of two calendar years while in the program. Over the 5-year period of the
grant, a total of twenty three (23) students will be trained in the program. The
program will primarily recruit Native American and Latino/a students with the
goals of increasing the number of students from these groups who graduate from
HSU in the biologically-related sciences and facilitating their transition into
graduate programs. Students will enter the program during the summer after their
freshman year, and will engage in a series of three rotations to explore various
research projects and meet potential research mentors. During their first Fall
semester, the students will enroll in a Research Methods Course that will cover
topics in scientific method, study design, proposal preparation, scientific
writing and presentation. During the course, each student will develop a
detailed research proposal for a project that they will pursue for the remainder
of the program. Student research will be individually mentored by one of at
least sixteen faculty coming from seven departments in HSU's College of Natural
Resources and Sciences. The research areas of the faculty are grouped into three
themes: 1) Ecology and Evolution, 2) Physiology, Cell and Molecular Biology, and
3) Natural Resource Management. The HSU URM program will offer students a
variety of courses, seminars, workshops, presentations, and other activities
that will provide them the foundation and structure to succeed. More information
is available by contacting the Program Director, Dr. Bruce A. O'Gara, at
bao3@humboldt.edu, or by visiting the program website at
http://www.humboldt.edu/urm/.