* 0934261
* CAREER:  Development and Applications of Catalytically Generated Activated Carboxylates
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2008,12/31/2010
* Jeffrey Bode, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 12/31/2010
* USD 145,755.00

Intramolecular redox reactions of a-functionalized aldehydes mediated by
N-heterocyclic carbenes (or heterocyclic ylides) lead to the catalytic
generation of activated carboxylates, suitable for the synthesis of esters,
amides, and other carboxylic acid derivatives under economical and
environmentally friendly reaction conditions. The discovery of this novel
reactivity, mediated by an organic catalyst, of a-heteroatomic and
a,b-unsaturated aldehydes opens a broad range of mechanistically unique pathways
for the synthesis of chiral carboxylic acid derivatives, including anti-b-
hydroxyesters and b-amino peptides. The design and application of chiral
heterocyclic salts for catalyzing this novel process will provide an
enantioselective method for directly controlling the absolute stereochemistry
concomitant with esterifications and peptide couplings, and has the potential to
supplant traditional multi-step chiral auxiliary based methodologies. By
developing means of effecting the direct, enantioselective synthesis of amides
from a,b-didehydroamino aldehydes, a waste-free, atom-economical approach to the
synthesis of poly-a-amino-peptides from achiral precursors will emerge. The
unique reactivities of unsaturated aldehydes under these catalytic conditions
will enable novel carbon-carbon bond forming processes, including new annulation
reactions affording lactones, lactams, and cyclopentanones, thereby providing a
long-sought method for the direct, intermolecular synthesis of hetero- and
carbocycles from stable, readily available starting materials. Applications of
these new reactions include the synthesis of (1) short, biologically active a-
and b-peptides, (2) the kalafungin class of naturally occurring antibiotics, and
(3) the antibiotic moiramide B, which is active against drug resistant bacterial
strains.

With the support of this CAREER award from the Organic and Macromolecular
Chemistry Program, Professor Jeffrey W. Bode, of the Department of Chemistry and
Biochemistry at the University of California, Santa Barbara, is developing new
reactions catalyzed by simple organic molecules rather than by metals. This
reaction chemistry not only offers promise of great chemical selectivity, but
also represents an economical, environmentally friendly ("green") approach to
organic synthesis, eliminating the use of potentially hazardous metals and
greatly reducing waste generation. Professor Bode will exploit the newly
discovered reaction chemistry for the synthesis of a variety of products,
including biologically active polypeptides and antibiotics, demonstrating the
potentially broad applicability of this chemistry in the synthesis of important
products. He will also engage undergraduate students, both at UCSB and from
local community colleges, in an alternative sophomore level organic laboratory
course aimed at exposing them to hands-on training in the realities of inquiry
and research based organic chemistry.