* 0934651
* Collaborative Research:  A Submarine Eruption on the North East Lau Spreading Center, a RAPID Response Effort
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2010
* William Lange, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 04/30/2010
* USD 58,603.00

This research is a time critical (RAPID) response cruise by a coalition of
investigators to investigate a newly discovered explosively erupting undersea
volcano in the Northern Lau Basin in the Western Pacific Ocean. The discovery of
actively erupting undersea volcanoes is a rarity and data that addresses many
fundamental geological, hydrothermal, volcanic, and biological issues will be
collected. The volcano being investigated is one in which there is an unusual
high-intensity hydrothermal plume and explosively erupted volcanic material.
Goals of this work are to document the fauna that colonize the initial stages of
back arc volcanism, as well as to sample early stage hydrothermal fluids. The
intensity of fluid flow from the vents will also be examined. It is likely that
novel and previously unknown microbiological life forms associated with these
fluids will be discovered. Work is complementary to data being gathered to the
south in an area of intense NSF-funded work (the Ridge 2000 Program). Broader
impacts of the work include graduate student and postdoctoral training, support
of a PI whose gender is under-represented in the sciences, use of a novel ROV
for undersea exploration, and public outreach through media outlets. An
additional impact is the cross agency nature of the project between NSF and
NOAA.