* 0934236
* Buffalo-Case-Cornell-Syracuse Cosmology Workshop at SUNY, Buffalo Fall of 2010.
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2011
* William Kinney, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Marc Sher
* 09/30/2011
* USD 7,350.00

This award provides support for the Buffalo-Case-Cornell-Syracuse Workshop on
Cosmology in Fall 2010. This is the latest in a series of highly successful
regional conferences covering aspects of physics at the interface between modern
high-energy physics and cosmology. This is a particularly ripe time for research
at the boundary between particle physics and astrophysics and cosmology. This is
due, in large part, to the fact that data is soon expected to emerge from a
plethora of experiments in both particle physics and astrophysics. These include
the Large Hadron Collider (LHC), experiments seeking the direct and indirect
detection of Dark Matter, and Cosmic Microwave Background probes such as Planck.
Indeed, in many instances these different experiments are complementary to each
other, each providing a different window into the as-yet-unexplored physics
beyond the Standard Model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF support of this conference
will enable young researchers (graduate students and postdoctoral fellows) to
attend this conference at reduced expense. Participation by students and
postdocs will enhance their education and promote their research. It will permit
face-to-face interactions between physicists at different stages in their
careers, allow all to network in an informal setting, enable them to share ideas
and establish personal contacts, and provide younger researchers the opportunity
to lively exhibit their own expertise through presentations of their research.