* 0934318
* FSML:  Addition of a medium-sized conference room to the University of Wisconsin Trout Lake Station
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2014
* James Kitchell, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 03/31/2014
* USD 374,500.00

The University of Wisconsin Trout Lake Station is awarded a grant to add a new
conference room facility onto the existing main laboratory building. The 1500
square-foot wing will contain a 1050 sq. ft. multipurpose assembly room,
restroom facilities, a kitchenette, and a multiple use basement. The assembly
room will have a rated capacity of 70 people (chairs and tables) or 150 people
(chairs only). This addition will allow the Trout Lake Station to host meetings,
workshops, outreach events, and classes. Researchers at Trout Lake have been
leaders in various regional, national, and international research groups
including GLEON, NEON, and LTER. The new facility at Trout Lake will benefit
these programs by providing adequate on site meeting space. The new addition
will similarly enhance the Station's ability to conduct outreach activities for
K-12 and the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Trout Lake Station
benefits science and society by 1) creating new knowledge, including policy-
relevant research such as that on long-term dynamics of lakes, impacts and
removal of aquatic invasive species, and human-lake interactions, 2) providing
opportunity and training for students, including more than 100 undergraduates
spending significant time at the station (e.g., publication of 21 graduate
student theses, and direct contact with more than 1250 elementary school
students - including more than 200 Native Americans - since 2004) and 3)
providing outreach to the general public, including community participation in
developing scenarios of the future of the Northern Highland Lake District,
presentations to community groups, and a strong presence in the local, state,
and national print, radio, and television media. The addition of this new
facility will allow the Station to continue to serve as a national and
international resource for research and outreach on aquatic resources and their
interactions with terrestrial systems and society.