* 0934736
* CMG Research: Analysis and Application of XFEM to dynamic rupture processes in Earthquake physics
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Marc Spiegelman, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 09/30/2012
* USD 317,000.00

This project will provide both analysis and functioning open-source software to
evaluate the utility and applicability of the Extended Finite Element Method
(XFEM) to the problem of dynamic Earthquake rupture on complex non-planar
faults. While standard finite element methods are applicable to many earthquake
physics problems, the requirement that the mesh be conformal to a complex, non-
volume forming network of faults is a fundamental difficulty, particularly in
3-dimensions. The XFEM, provides a potentially powerful alternative by encoding
discontinuous basis functions into the approximation space without requiring
faults to coincide with mesh edges, an approach that naturally fits the
earthquake rupture problem.

Preliminary work, however, demonstrates several complications that arise in this
application. Standard techniques for frictional failure do not work with the
XFEM, so new weak formulations of failure must be developed. In addition,
discrete singularities, which are effectively removed in quasi-static
engineering rupture problems, become crucial in dynamic repeated rupture. These
discrete problems can fundamentally affect event statistics, and must be
avoided.

The investigators will address these complications via analysis, computation,
and physical intuition. Specifically, they propose two possibilities for weak
failure criteria, and plan to test them with a series of benchmark problems.
Additionally, they propose analysis of numerical accuracy of the weak frictional
criteria, with the goal of better understanding error in rupture propagation in
these discrete systems. In a second component, they plan to derive bounds for
the existence of mesh-fault interaction artifacts. Using these bounds, they will
either determine enrichment schemes that eliminate the artifacts or develop
meshing schemes to avoid them. Finally, the above work will culminate in a proof
of concept for the XFEM in repeated rupture problems, and they will work to
better understand event complexity in complex fault systems. These problems
provide an excellent opportunity for collaboration between computational and
applied mathematicians and earthquake physicists.

Broader Significance: Understanding the dynamics and probability of Earthquakes
on realistically complex fault networks is a fundamental science and engineering
problem that has direct consequences for improved estimates of Earthquake
hazards. Advanced computational models, combined with observations, provide an
important tool for exploring and understanding these systems. A critical
component of such models, however is the geometric description and accurate
modeling of failure on non-planar faults which poses significant challenges for
traditional finite-element methods. This project will investigate an alternative
method that allows the description of the fault network to be only loosely
coupled to the computational mesh. If this method is successful, it promises to
significantly increase the ease of describing and composing these problems and
is better suited to exploring the dynamics of fault networks, particularly under
the uncertainty of fault location. The proposed research will also contribute to
the computational infrastructure for modeling the dynamics of brittle systems
and earthquake genesis. The resulting open source software will be distributed
through the Computational Infrastructure for Geodynamics (CIG:
www.geodynamics.org), and be accessible to a broad community of researchers with
impact beyond the immediate realm of Earthquake physics.