* 0934630
* CMG Collaborative Research: Imaging Magnetization Distributions in Geological Samples
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Edward Saff, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 08/31/2015
* USD 218,000.00

High-resolution scanning magnetic microscopy maps of natural remanent magnetic
fields have the potential to extend standard paleomagnetic techniques like fold
and conglomerate tests, paleointensity analyses, and magnetic mineralogy studies
to submillimeter scales. However, unlike bulk moment magnetometry, there is no
suitable method for directly measuring magnetization at such scales. Rather,
inversion techniques must be developed to retrieve magnetization from the
magnetic field data. In this research project, we will develop mathematical
techniques and algorithms to constrain the magnetization distribution within the
sample from magnetic field maps of geological thin sections. We will also
establish the limitations of magnetic data under these experimental conditions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rocks record invaluable information about past
magnetic fields present at the time they formed. Analysis of these data has
revealed important information regarding the evolution of the Earth and solar
system. Scanning magnetic microscopy is a new technique that maps remanent
magnetic fields of rocks with high spatial resolution and high sensitivity.
However, the field maps obtained are only indirectly related to the recorded
ancient field, and a set of techniques and algorithms is necessary to extract
the pertinent information from the measurements. In this research project, we
will develop mathematical methods to analyze high-resolution magnetic data from
geological samples. These techniques will be ultimately be used to understand
the history of Earth's magnetic field, the past positions of continents, and the
evolution of the Earth's core and interior