* 0934078
* IRES: U.S.-Japan Collaborative Research and Education on Carbon based BioMEMS
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Chunlei Wang, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* R.  Clive Woods
* 08/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to provide
American student participants with a global perspective and opportunities for
professional growth through international cooperative research training,
networking and mentoring in the BioMEMS research field. This project will
provide high quality educational and research experiences for 12 graduate and
undergraduate students at Florida International University through active
research participation in collaboration with the Kawarada research team at
Waseda University in Japan. Each student will spend three months in summer to
work with the Kawarada research group. Typical research topics include
functionalization of carbon-based surfaces, diamond-based DNA sensors, and
carbon-based bio-fuel cells. The knowledge that will result from this project is
critically needed for breakthroughs required for the development of carbon based
BioMEMS for energy and biological applications. This project will foster
interdisciplinary interactions with investigators and students at all levels.
Research results obtained from this project will be presented at various
conferences and published in various journals. This project will broaden the
participation and impact the recruitment of underrepresented groups, especially
women and Hispanic students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;