* 0934107
* Relative hyperbolicity and asymptotic invariants of groups
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2008,05/31/2010
* Denis Osin, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 05/31/2010
* USD 10,350.00

&lt;br/&gt;This project is devoted to the study of relatively
hyperbolic&lt;br/&gt;groups and their applications in low--
dimensional&lt;br/&gt;topology. It consists of three main parts. First part
deals with&lt;br/&gt;small cancellation theory over relatively hyperbolic
groups.&lt;br/&gt;Namely we intend to use methods elaborated by the PI to
construct&lt;br/&gt;new groups with 'exotic' properties that solve some long--
standing&lt;br/&gt;problems in the classical theory of groups. The second part
is&lt;br/&gt;motivated by the Virtual Haken Conjecture and is based on
a&lt;br/&gt;generalization of Thurston's hyperbolic Dehn surgery theory in
the&lt;br/&gt;context of relatively hyperbolic groups. The third part
concerns&lt;br/&gt;new results about group embeddings. The ultimate goal here is
to&lt;br/&gt;obtain a relatively hyperbolic version of the Higman
embedding&lt;br/&gt;theorem. Our approach to these problems is based on a new
methods&lt;br/&gt;related to asymptotic and combinatorial analysis of van
Kampen&lt;br/&gt;diagrams.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The notion of a relatively
hyperbolic group was first proposed by&lt;br/&gt;Gromov in 1987 to generalize
many examples of algebraic and&lt;br/&gt;geometric nature. Since then the theory
has been elaborated from&lt;br/&gt;different points of views and now it is one
of the most prominent&lt;br/&gt;parts of the group theory. The class of
relatively hyperbolic&lt;br/&gt;groups encompasses many examples of interest
such as fundamental&lt;br/&gt;groups of finite volume hyperbolic manifolds,
geometrically finite&lt;br/&gt;convergence groups, mapping class groups, fully
residually free&lt;br/&gt;groups, etc. Rather than just generalizing the theory
of&lt;br/&gt;hyperbolic groups to the relative case, this project is aimed
at&lt;br/&gt;the study of new and sometimes unexpected phenomena which
are&lt;br/&gt;invisible in the context of ordinary hyperbolicity. The
close&lt;br/&gt;interaction between the theory of relatively hyperbolic groups
and&lt;br/&gt;geometry, low-dimensional topology, the theory of
dynamical&lt;br/&gt;systems, provides a rich source of problems and motivations
for&lt;br/&gt;our project.&lt;br/&gt;