* 0934843
* FSML:   Building a biosafety level II pathogen laboratory at Horn Point Laboratory
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Patricia Glibert, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2013
* USD 340,217.00

The University of Maryland Horn Point Laboratory is awarded a grant to renovate
several rooms in a secure chemical storage building at the University of
Maryland Center for Environmental Science Horn Point Laboratory (HPL) to create
a Biosafety Level II Laboratory for research involving harmful algal species and
a range of human and animal pathogens. This site was selected because it is a
secure building set apart from the other laboratories and the oyster and finfish
aquaculture facilities of the campus. The latter is particularly important
because contamination of the hatcheries with harmful algal species or pathogens
could compromise their operations. Thus, the overall purpose is to provide Horn
Point researchers with a secure facility for continued research on pathogens and
harmful algae without risk of accidental infection of the aquaculture facility
or other laboratories and individuals on campus. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is
much to be learned about the ecology, distribution and persistence of
environmental pathogens. HPL scientists are currently studying these organisms
in select locations of the Chesapeake Bay region where human contact is likely,
in order to describe the distribution of these pathogens, determine the
prevalence of bacterial antimicrobial resistance, identify the likely routes of
transmission to humans, and quantify the magnitude of human exposure and
infection. A new, secure Biosafety Level II Laboratory will allow HPL scientists
to (1) isolate and grow pathogen isolates for genomic analysis, (2) perform
antimicrobial susceptibility testing on pathogenic isolates, and (3) concentrate
and detect pathogenic viruses from seawater samples. HPL scientists are also
actively studying many aspects of the ecophysiology of harmful algal bloom
species. Keeping these organisms in a secure Biosafety Level II Laboratory will
allow HPL scientists to expand these projects, and work with additional
potentially toxic organisms in an isolated environment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new pathogen
laboratory at HPL will provide a service to the wider Chesapeake Bay region. In
particular the expanded research allowed with such a facility will provide
valuable information to ecosystem and fisheries managers. The HPL is committed
to education at all levels and it has a strong outreach program. While the
pathogen facility itself will not be shown to the public (for obvious reasons),
the research it fosters certainly will be featured prominently in outreach
communications. The PI's plan to use the new laboratory to implement a winter
graduate course in aquatic pathogens. No doubt students will use the facility
either in course work, or in their thesis research. Of course such uses demand
stringent adherence to safety protocols.&lt;br/&gt;