* 0934836
* Noyce Teaching Fellows at Trinity University
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2009,09/30/2015
* David Ribble, Trinity University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 09/30/2015
* USD 1,487,725.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The Noyce Teaching Fellows at Trinity University is a partnership among Trinity
University; eight San Antonio area school districts; the non-profit Zachry
Foundation; the Howard Hughes Medical Institute; and Educational Service Center-
Region 20 to support two cohorts of STEM professionals in becoming high quality
teachers. Partnering independent school districts committed to employing and
supporting the ten Noyce Teaching Fellows through their four induction years
include: San Antonio, Alamo Heights, Boerne, East Central, Judson, North East,
Northside, and Randolph Field.

This Noyce Teaching Fellows program allows the partnership to bring STEM
professionals into the strong and growing mathematics and science education
program at Trinity University. The need for in-field science and mathematics
teachers in the partner high-need school districts is acute, and there is a
ready pool of STEM professionals who may be drawn to the teaching profession
through financial incentives and the educational support of the Noyce Teaching
Fellows program. As the nation's seventh largest city, San Antonio houses the
national headquarters for several Fortune 500 companies and is also home to over
89,000 individuals employed in the defense industry -- the majority sharing an
affiliation with one of San Antonio's five permanent military bases and a
growing military medical center. Among these corporations and the military are
potential career changers who have STEM degrees and much to offer to elementary,
middle and high school classrooms.

Four STEM professionals comprise the first year cohort of Noyce Teaching Fellows
and six join in the second year. Fellows receive the full cost-of-attendance
scholarship in the first year as they earn their Masters of Arts in Teaching
(M.A.T.) degree and a $15,000 salary supplement (later adjusted for inflation)
for each of the first four years of teaching in a high-need elementary, middle
and/or high school in the partner districts.

Project outcomes include: better STEM instruction for high-need K-12 school
districts with up to 90% Hispanic enrollment; a reduced rate of out-of-field
teaching in STEM disciplines (estimated to be as high as 40% in schools with
high-poverty populations); an improved retention rate for beginning teachers;
and an increase in the number of talented scientists and mathematicians who opt
for careers in teaching.

Noyce Teaching Fellows take advantage of Trinity's nationally recognized M.A.T.
program and benefit from a research-based apprenticeship in professional
development schools, creation of a personal portfolio with evidence of meeting
Trinity's Standards for Professional Practice, induction support with in-class
coaching, and summer professional development opportunities. Each Noyce Teaching
Fellow has two university advisors, one in their STEM teaching content area and
one who is a pedagogical content specialist.