* 0934396
* Collaborative Research: A Multi-University I/UCRC Center on Intelligent Storage
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2016
* Yongdae Kim, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Dmitri Perkins
* 07/31/2016
* USD 401,000.00

Full Center Proposal for an I/UCRC for Intelligent Storage&lt;br/&gt;0934396
University of Minnsota; David Lilja &lt;br/&gt;0934401 University of California-
Santa Cruz; Ethan Miller&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this proposal is
to start a new I/UCRC "Intelligent Storage" to conduct research on new storage
architectures and storage system designs, new data models and new ways to access
and deliver data. The lead of the proposed Center will be the University of
Minnesota, with site location at the University of University of California-
Santa Cruz. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goals of the proposed Center are to
develop innovative storage systems and new storage architectures, solve the
long-term data preservation issues, develop efficient benchmarking, tracing,
performance management and tuning tools for I/O and input systems, propose
solutions that ensure data/information privacy and security, and to explore ways
to save energy in data center. The proposed Center will build on the respective
University's research talent and technology transfer skills to attract
industrial partners who will subsequently play a significant role in planning,
selecting, and implementing the output of the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact of the potential research outcomes includes fostering the
advancement of science and technology, making the society more efficient and
secure, providing better health-care delivery, and better ways of preserving
information. The industry participation will enhance the students' educational
experience by providing a pipeline for talented engineers and scientists to
industry. The proposed Center is committed to enhancing the education process by
bringing input from industry, developing new courses at both undergraduate and
graduate levels, and emphasizing the diversity of the student population. The
Center also has plans to recruit more female and under-represented minority
students and faculty into its research group. Research results will be
disseminated to general public via journal publications and conference
presentations. &lt;br/&gt;