* 0934841
* Syracuse University Noyce Scholars Program for Science and Mathematics Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2009,09/30/2015
* Joanna Masingila, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 09/30/2015
* USD 900,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Syracuse University Noyce Scholars
Program for Science and Mathematics Teachers (SUNoyce) is a multi-faceted
collaborative project involving the Syracuse University School of Education,
College of Arts &amp; Sciences, the Graduate School and partners including the
Upstate Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (LSAMP), the Syracuse
City School District, the Upstate High-Needs Rural Schools Consortium, Onondaga
Community College, Monroe Community College and a network of informal STEM
education centers from across central New York hosting summer internships for
undergraduates with the goal of increasing the number of highly-qualified
science and mathematics teachers teaching in high-need school districts,
including several rural districts. The SU-Noyce project is preparing 36
additional highly-qualified mathematics and science (Biology, Chemistry, Physics
and Earth Science) teachers over a five-year period, resulting in a 41% increase
over the current capacity. The project supports two-year scholarships for
undergraduate junior and senior STEM majors in a four-year teacher education
program, three-year scholarships for STEM majors enrolled in a five-year BA/MS
degree program leading to teacher certification, and one-year stipends for STEM
professionals and recent STEM graduates pursuing teacher certification through a
master's degree in mathematics or science education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SU-
Noyce Scholars participate in a robust and sustained mentoring and professional
development program during their first three years of teaching in a high-needs
school district to reduce the rate of attrition during the challenging induction
period and encourage these scholars to remain in high-needs schools beyond the
period of their service obligation. Research associated with the project is
providing evidence of (a) the effectiveness of the use of the Central Tasks of
Learning to Teach (Feiman-Nemser, 2001) framework with candidates at all stages
of the professional learning continuum of preparing, inducting and supporting
teachers, and (b) the supports that are most helpful to teachers as they
transition from novices to competent professionals.