* 0934356
* Collaborative Research: Planning Grant: I/UCRC for Metamaterials
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Michael Fiddy, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 07/31/2011
* USD 9,999.00

Planning Grant for an I/UCRC for Metamaterials

0934369 CUNY City College; David Crouse 0934365 Clarkson University; S. V. Babu
0934356 University of North Carolina at Charlotte; Michael Fiddy 0934353 Western
Carolina University; Kenneth Burbank

CUNY City College, Clarkson University (CU), University of North Carolina at
Charlotte (UNCC), and Western Carolina University (WCU) are collaborating to
establish the Center for Metamaterials, with CUNY as the lead institution. This
proposal is based around a planning strategy to develop an I/UCRC program where
the R&D effort will be focused around metamaterials. The program involves four
institutions with various strengths that can supplement theoretical
understanding, device manufacturing, and characterization of a variety of
metamaterial concepts. The Center for Metamaterials will essentially provide a
one-stop shop for design, fabrication and test of wide range of metamaterials
for use anywhere from the microwave to optical part of the electromagnetic
spectrum. The proposed Center will also address the many fabrication challenges
associated with exploiting these novel properties when small degrees of disorder
are known to modulate properties and performance. The planning grant will enable
a forum to be established whereupon strategic research programs will be matched
to potential industrial members of a fully-formed I/UCRC.

Metamaterials will greatly extend the design tool-kit for all electromagnetic
devices and systems; and will advance the technological capabilities in all
areas of wireless and photonics products. The proposed Center will include
universities serving a diverse student body that includes under-represented
minority groups, and plans to develop extensive metamaterials education and
internship programs for undergraduate, graduate and continuing-education
students, as well as web-based distance learning courses. The proposed Center
could have a significant impact on the nation because the novel materials have
the potential to create new technologies that could have huge economic outcomes.