* 0934804
* WKU Science and Mathematics Alliance for Recruitment and Retention of Teachers (WKU SMARRT)
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2009,09/30/2015
* Hope Marchionda, Western Kentucky University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* John Haddock
* 09/30/2015
* USD 898,781.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of
2009&lt;br/&gt;(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Western Kentucky
University (WKU) Science and Mathematics Alliance for Recruitment and Retention
of Teachers (WKU SMARRT) is designed to help alleviate the shortage of highly
qualified STEM educators by increasing the number of mathematics and science
majors who choose teaching as a career and by providing mentoring before and
after graduation, leading to higher retention rates for new teachers. A key
element of the program's comprehensive recruiting program is the WKU SMARRT
Summer Internship Program. The program offers ten internships each summer to
help steer undergraduate STEM students' career interests in the direction of
teaching by exposing them to enthusiastic role models in education and provides
scholarships to 39 STEM majors enrolled in WKU's SkyTeach preservice program.
STEM majors are selected as WKU SMARRT Scholars, based, in part, on their
successful accumulation of educational service hours by engaging in science or
mathematics educational outreach activities in the community. The required
educational service gives STEM majors a chance to experience real-life math and
science education and allow them to verify whether being a teacher is the right
career choice for them. The program provides a financial incentive for
undergraduate STEM students to pursue teacher certification by awarding Noyce
Scholarships in the amount of $10,000 to qualified juniors and seniors who
commit to teaching in partnering high need school districts in Kentucky,
including Bowling Green Independent School District, Edmonson County, Metcalfe
County, Monroe County, and Owensboro School Districts. The preservice students
participate in cyber-mentoring, cyber-networking, and "sneak-peaks" into the
teaching profession through membership in professional organizations. To further
support Noyce Scholars, the leadership team provides formal and informal
opportunities for post-graduation mentoring by continuing the cyber component
and holding meetings at state or local professional meetings. A partnership with
WKU's Minority Teacher Recruitment Center and the Office of Disability Services
is assisting with the recruitment and retention of students from
underrepresented groups.