* 0934262
* Teach/Here Teacher Residency Initiative
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2010
* Stuart Elston, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Deborah E. Allen
* 05/31/2010
* USD 74,996.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The Teach/Here Teacher Residency Initiative (TRI), a partnership between the
University of Tennessee Knoxville, the Public Education Foundation, and Hamilton
and Knox County Schools, is developing a teacher residency model as an
innovative alternative pathway to attract, prepare and retain high potential
math and science teachers for high need, urban public schools. The alternative
pathway is being designed to incorporate components identified in the research
literature as being critically important guiding criteria for successful teacher
residency programs, including 1) direct pairing of the program with school
system needs, 2) seamless flow between teacher preparation and induction into
in-service teaching, 3) preparation for the challenges found in schools serving
high poverty communities, 4) year-long residency as a part of the preparation,
5) mentoring provided by teacher leaders, and 5) access to community-based non-
profit institutions that can reduce bureaucratic processes. Activities taking
place during the planning process for submission of a full proposal to the
Teaching Fellows/Master Teaching Fellows track, include 1) defining and refining
the conceptual framework for the program, 2) determining the target number of
recruits and developing marketing and recruitment plans, 3) developing program
and curriculum components that incorporate the training and professional
development content for mentor teachers, 4) identifying host school sites and
mentor teachers where the residency apprenticeship classrooms will be located,
5) initiating professional development with mentor teachers, and 6) developing
local partnerships with business and community groups to create necessary
support structures for the Teacher Residents. The project team is also planning
ways to document the efficacy of the initial Urban Teacher Residency programs in
Hamilton and Knox County Schools, so that if the program model is effective, it
can be disseminated as a resource for other programs seeking to implement
alternative teacher preparation programs for mathematics and science educators
who are capable of succeeding in hard-to-staff schools.