* 0934055
* Increasing the Participation and Success of Community College Faculty in NSF Grant Programs
* EDU,DUE
* 02/12/2009,09/30/2010
* Steven Budd, River Valley Community College
* Standard Grant
* Gerhard L. Salinger
* 09/30/2010
* USD 35,257.00

This project is delivering a series of professional development workshops
designed to assist community college science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) faculty in preparing successful proposals to the National
Science Foundation (NSF) programs. The project represents collaboration between
the Council for Resource Development (CRD), an affiliate council of the American
Association of Community Colleges (AACC), and the National Center for
Telecommunications Technology (NCTT). NCTT brings its expertise in the delivery
of online and web-based professional development programs to support expanded
faculty outreach via special content webinars.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The activities continue a highly
successful model of faculty professional development focusing on NSF grant
programs and the production of high quality grant applications by community
college faculty. CRD is using its regional structure to leverage the
identification of host colleges while ensuring the participation of large
numbers of STEM faculty. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The selection of
sites and the scheduling of workshops are national in scope. Particular
attention is being given to those states whose community colleges are
underrepresented among NSF awardees. A key goal is to increase the submission
rates of faculty as well as increase the likelihood of success. An evaluation is
assessing the longitudinal impact of the project. A research study is designed
to assess factors that promote faculty success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;