* 0934683
* CMG COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Mathematics and Electromagnetics for Monitoring Transport Processes in Sea Ice
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2014
* Hajo Eicken, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 09/30/2014
* USD 308,728.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Eicken 0934683&lt;br/&gt;University of
Alaska Fairbanks&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funds are provided to develop methods of
electromagnetically monitoring the internal state of sea ice, the thermal
evolution of its microstructure, and the transport processes it controls. The
PIs will conduct fundamental mathematical studies, as well as field experiments
in the Arctic and Antarctic, directed at recovering microstructual profiles and
their evolution at critical phases in the seasonal cycle of the ice pack. They
will develop in situ tomographic methods to obtain the complex permittivity
profile o sea ice at low frequency, and mathematical techniques to use this data
to reconstruct the evolution of the spectral measure of the composite
microstructure, which contains detailed information about brine geometry and
connectedness. They will investigate the critical behavior of this measure near
the percolation threshold, where fluid flow turns on or off. Our work will yield
novel spectral representations for fluid and thermal transport coefficients, and
characterizations of the spectral measure as a free energy minimizer, as in
statistical mechanics. They will analyze the thermal evolution of the
distribution of eigenvalue spacings for the spectral measure as a powerful way
of characterizing the order/disorder transition in the brine microstructure of
sea ice, as motivated by the theory of random matrices. They will also develop
multiscale numerical models of the complex permittivity and other transport
properties from random graph representations of the microstructure to aid
reconstruction calculations. Their results will yield valuable information on
snow-ice formation, melt processes, and flood-freeze cycling, and provide
insights on parameterizing these processes in climate and biogeochemical models.
Key features of the proposed work include:&lt;br/&gt;? Development of cross-
borehole tomography and direct measurement techniques on cores. Initial testing,
validation and refinement in the lab and the Arctic near Barrow, with Antarctic
measurements.&lt;br/&gt;? Development of cross-property relations connecting EM,
thermal, and fluid transport via the spectral measure, and related methods for
EM imaging of transport processes in sea ice.&lt;br/&gt;