* 0934777
* SUNY Cortland Noyce Project
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2015
* Mary Gfeller, SUNY College at Cortland
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 05/31/2015
* USD 899,969.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The State University of New York-
Cortland is providing Noyce scholarships, 32 to undergraduates majoring in
science, technology or mathematics and 18 to (science, technology, engineering
or mathematics) STEM career changers seeking graduate degrees to prepare them to
teach. This will result in 50 new science or mathematics secondary teachers,
well prepared in both subject matter and teaching approaches, to serve in high
needs school districts in central New York State and the five major city areas
of the state, including New York City. Cooperating school districts include:
Cinncinnatus Central School District, The Cortland City School District, Dryden
Central School District, Homer Central School District, Marathon Central School
District, and South Seneca Central School District, and the New York City
Department of Education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The
intellectual merit of the project resides in the rigorous course of study
required of the Scholars; one that involves a course of study akin to a major in
a specific STEM discipline and that includes strong preparation in and
experience with teaching in inner city and other needy schools. To prepare them
to work in these high needs schools the Noyce Scholars are being enrolled in a
comprehensive program in urban education and are being offered specialized
course work and field experiences in these schools. During at least the first
two years of their teaching career (early induction years) they will receive
specialized mentoring through both electronic and in-person means.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: In addition to the positive effect the
Scholars will have on the schools and students with whom they interact, the
project is designed to help the teachers it prepares become leaders in STEM
education. In addition to their scholarships the Scholars are receiving funds to
cover membership in appropriate professional societies and to attend regional
and national meetings of these societies so they become members of and
contribute to the national STEM education community. The project is also
preparing to create a Robert Noyce Facebook group to enable Noyce Scholars from
across the whole community of Robert Noyce Scholarship projects post materials
and ideas and exchange information on meeting common
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;