* 0934032
* Living Radical Polymerization in Inverse Miniemulsions
* ENG,CBET
* 02/20/2009,02/28/2010
* F. Joseph Schork, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 02/28/2010
* USD 61,539.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Joseph F. Schork and Christopher
Jones&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Georgia Tech&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
0553516&lt;br/&gt;Title: Living Radical Polymerization in Inverse
Miniemulsions&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over
50% of all plastics are produced via free radical methods, with half of these
processes involving aqueous media. Most commercial aqueous polymerizations are
emulsion or miniemulsion polymerizations, producing surfactant stabilized
hydrophobic polymer particles in water. These latexes are extensively used for
thin films, coatings, paints, etc. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All of these
polymerizations are made with little or no control over the polymer structure.
The advent of living radical polymerization (LRP) in the late 90s now allows for
excellent control over polymer structure in radical polymerizations, and well-
defined structures such as block copolymers can now be made. Recently, the PIs
reported the first miniemulsion LRP in continuous reactors, paving a path for
LRP to move closer to large-scale technical feasibility.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Water-soluble polymers (acrylic acid, acrylamides, etc.)
can also be prepared in a controlled manner using LRP techniques. However, there
are no reports of aqueous LRP in heterogeneous media (insoluble organic and
aqueous phases). The PIs plan to develop the science and technology of LRP in
inverse miniemulsions. Water-soluble monomers will be stabilized by surfactants
in organic media and reversible fragmentation chain transfer (RAFT)
methodologies will be used to polymerize the monomers in a controlled/living
manner. Homopolymer of several important water-soluble monomers will be
prepared.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impact of reaction components (monomer,
surfactant, initiator, RAFT agent etc.) and reaction conditions (pH,
temperature, monomer droplet size, etc.) on the ability to produce welldefined
polymer in oil latexes via LRP will be elucidated. Subsequently, block
copolymers that include two water-soluble blocks or one water soluble and one
water-insoluble block will be synthesized. The use of monomers that are
responsive to external stimuli (pH or temperature) will be utilized to give
diblock copolymers with triggerable solution behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
new polymers (homopolymer, statistical copolymer and diblock copolymer oil-based
latexes) could find applications as associative thickeners, as nuclei for
nanoencapsulation, or as vesicles and micelles for drug
delivery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
multidisciplinary project will broadly educate both graduate students and
undergraduates students in several key technology areas including colloid and
interface science, reaction engineering, polymer science and synthetic
chemistry. The PIs will actively recruit underrepresented students to take part
in this research. These efforts will include participation in the Dow Minority
Mentoring Program and the SURE program, which focus on involvement of
underrepresented minority students in research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finally,
the results of this work will be broadly disseminated to both the Georgia Tech
student body and the greater polymer reaction engineering community. &lt;br/&gt;