* 0934509
* HCC: Assessing Cognitive Function from Interactive Agent Behavior
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,09/30/2011
* Deniz Erdogmus, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 09/30/2011
* USD 383,225.00

This is a project to develop new methods for scientifically studying and
assessing human cognitive function. It will employ sophisticated statistical
multimodal data analysis techniques that will fuse contextual, behavioral, and
neural information simultaneously obtained from human beings in the process of
completing complex batteries of cognitive tasks. The tasks will be presented in
the form of customized computer games that are designed to exhibit the crucial
aspects of established cognitive assessment tests and at the same time provide a
motivating and engaging environment for the subject's interactions with the game
and computer agents. The tasks will involve exploiting our existing capabilities
of monitoring and controlling certain enjoyable and challenging computer games
that involve various combinations of cognitive tasks ranging from working memory
and attention to executive functions. Multimodal information fusion will be
accomplished by utilizing Bayesian inference techniques and information
theoretic data analysis and dimensionality reduction methods. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The work to be carried out under this grant aims to develop
sophisticated pattern analysis techniques for the purpose of analyzing the fine-
grain behaviors of elderly when they are engaged in complex cognitive tasks in
the form of computer games. Expected significant scientific findings from the
proposed research are two-fold: (1) improved statistical signal processing and
pattern recognition algorithms for EEG processing, (2) an enhanced understanding
of the interplay of multiple cognitive processes and their neural signatures in
EEG during the execution of complex tasks. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The approach
is innovative in terms of three aspects: (1) an advanced adaptive interaction
protocol that modifies the task parameters to maintain maximal sensitivity to
cognitive state changes will be employed, (2) novel information theoretic
techniques will be developed and utilized for the extraction of maximally
discriminative features from EEG measurements for cognitive state estimation and
neural activity visualization, (3) the developed closed-loop system will be
utilized to study the human-agent interaction in complex cognitive tasks
resulting in mathematical models of micro-behavior in realistic evolving
environments as opposed to traditional stationary repetitive experimental
paradigms. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The successful completion of the work will
open the way to further collaborative activities in brain interface design,
closed-loop collaborative augmented cognition human-agent interfaces for
improved performance, and early diagnosis of cognitive decline in elderly. An
interdisciplinary research environment will engage the participating graduate
students in a multidisciplinary educational setting and will help them develop
skills to perform collaborative interdisciplinary research.&lt;br/&gt;