* 0934223
* Undergraduate Mathematics and Science Education Initiative (UMSEI)
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2009,12/31/2014
* Jeffrey Remmel, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 12/31/2014
* USD 892,049.00

Education Studies (EDS) and the Physical Sciences Division (PSD) at the
University of California, San Diego (UCSD) are collaborating on an initiative to
significantly increase the number of undergraduate STEM majors who pursue a
career in public school teaching. The UCSD Undergraduate Mathematics and Science
Education Initiative (UMSEI) is part of the University of California Systemwide
California Teach Program. EDS and PSD implemented two undergraduate minors in
mathematics education and science education in 2006-07. These minors engage
lower-division STEM students in early field experiences and upper-division
students in education foundation coursework, discipline-specific pedagogy and
intensive apprenticeship experiences to prepare students to enter the UCSD
graduate intern credential program. The focus of the minor is to support the
development of content specific pedagogy, powerful teaching practices coupled
with deep content knowledge, within perspective K-12 mathematics and science
teachers. The work around the California Teach project has also supported deep
and consistent collaboration between Education Studies and the Physical Science
Division about teacher knowledge and preparation. Noyce Scholarship funding is
utilized to recruit 65 mathematics, chemistry, physics, geoscience and
engineering majors into the undergraduate minors and graduate intern credential
program. The UCSD EDS teacher credential program and the UMSEI program have
partnerships with local community colleges, including San Diego Community
College, Grossmont Community College, Palomar Community College, and Mira Mesa
Community college, to recruit their transfer students to the program as well as
partnerships with San Diego Unified School District, Grossmont Union High School
District, Sweetwater Union High School District, Gompers Charter School, High
Tech High Charter, the Preuss School Charter, and Guajome Park Academy Charter
to support the extensive experiences of undergraduate STEM majors.