* 0934964
* Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program II
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Mariappan Jawaharlal, Cal Poly Pomona Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Nicole Bennett
* 06/30/2014
* USD 597,520.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of
2009&lt;br/&gt;(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the
California Polytechnic University, Pomona (Cal Poly Pomona or CPP) Phase II
Noyce project is to increase the number of highly qualified elementary, middle,
and secondary mathematics and science teachers in two partner districts (Pomona
Unified School District and Hacienda-La Puente School District) by providing
Noyce scholarships to 20 STEM majors supported for up to two years, including
the postbaccaluareate credentialing year. Given the urban, high-need, and highly
diverse nature of these districts, the overall recruiting strategy focuses on
finding candidates from underrepresented groups who exhibit a passion for
teaching and a commitment to working in high need schools. This project expands
the pool of Noyce Scholarship recipients to recruit STEM majors into elementary
teaching as well as secondary teaching and to recruit engineering majors into
teaching. Freshmen and sophomores receive internships to participate in summer
enrichment programs including migrant programs focused on robotics, the Biotrek
experiences, Project Lead the Way Institutes, and the San Gabriel Valley Math
Project. The freshmen and sophomore mathematics, science, or engineering majors
work with faculty on collaborative projects targeted at school-age students. The
intent is to provide them with a glimpse into the teaching of science,
technology, engineering, and math (STEM) content in an informal setting. In
addition, the proposed program leverages the Phase I program scholar support
activities by creating a range of enhanced collaborative support mechanisms for
Noyce Scholars. There is coordinated support for intern teachers prior to their
receipt of the full credential and increased emphasis is placed on the
coordination of partner district and CPP support during the induction period.
Project activities include building a professional learning community with
scholarship awardees to support their success in content preparation and in the
professional education program. &lt;br/&gt;