* 0934904
* Creating STEM Teachers for Arkansas' Future
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2009,09/30/2015
* Robert Engelken, Arkansas State University Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Katherine J. Denniston
* 09/30/2015
* USD 899,988.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)

Creating STEM Teachers for Arkansas' Future (C-STAF) is an educational
opportunity attracting Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM)
majors into the teaching profession. Through a collaboration of Arkansas State
University's (ASU) Colleges of Science and Mathematics, Engineering, and
Education, C-STAF is providing full scholarships for one to three years to ASU
juniors and seniors majoring in STEM fields. Scholarship recipients are
completing both their STEM degrees and teacher licensure and are providing 25
new STEM teachers for high-need schools. In addition, C-STAF is attracting to
the teaching profession ASU students committed to STEM fields by offering credit
for a new "Try-out the Classroom" course, and a summer training program. The
C-STAF program has two primary impacts. First, ASU students dedicated to STEM
fields are being encouraged to consider teaching as a viable and rewarding
career choice, thus increasing the number of highly trained STEM teachers for
the future of Arkansas, a historically educationally disadvantaged state,
particularly in the Mississippi River delta and Ozark foothill regions served by
ASU. Second, by taking the approach of placing specifically trained
scientists/mathematicians/engineers into Arkansas classrooms, a deeper knowledge
of these fields are available to future Arkansas students, thus increasing
future STEM practitioners and the depth of their knowledge in and enthusiasm for
their STEM-related fields. In addition, the experience and data obtained in the
project are valuable additions to the knowledge base of STEM education, and
benefit related future programs.