* 0934052
* Conference Proposal: Statistical Modeling and Data Analysis for Neural Coding
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Lucien J. Bienenstock, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 06/30/2010
* USD 5,000.00

Understanding the nature of the neural code is of intrinsic scientific interest
since it brings us closer to understanding the computational basis of
intelligence. In addition, technical advances have made it possible to monitor
the activity of populations of neurons in human subjects. The volume of data
generated by multiple-neuron recordings poses significant challenges for data
analysis. The development of new statistical techniques is necessary to provide
a meaningful basis for testing hypotheses about the nature of neural coding. One
concrete example is in the area of neuronal synchrony. The coordination on a
short time scale of neuronal populations has been suggested as the basis for
multiple neural processes such as attention and feature binding. However, the
co-variation in firing rates among neurons, especially on a short time scale,
poses significant practical challenges to specifying appropriate data analysis
and statistical methods.

This award provides support for an international symposium on the topic of
Statistical Modeling and Data Analysis for Neural Coding to be held in
conjunction with the International Statistics Institute's biennial meeting at
Durban, South Africa, August 2009. This symposium will bring together several
statistical experts on neural coding to discuss a range of approaches to this
problem. These approaches include both the generation of surrogate data sets and
new statistical methods. These statistical methods may also have value for other
scientific areas where multiple elements show short time scale temporal co-
variation. The symposium is part of a large meeting of statistical experts. In
addition to bringing together the symposium speakers to address this issue, the
symposium will expose the larger statistical community to these questions and to
the new statistical approaches. As the meeting will be happening on the African
continent, the meeting provides an opportunity for education and outreach to
African university and graduate students.

