* 0934951
* Cal Teach at Berkeley: Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2009,09/30/2015
* Xiaoxia Newton, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 09/30/2015
* USD 900,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The Cal Teach at Berkeley Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program is supporting
undergraduate students in mathematics, science and engineering toward their
disciplinary degrees and K-12 teaching credentials, with a focus on teaching in
urban schools. The program is engaging 12 lower division students per year in
math and science teaching through summer internships with local research,
professional development, and outreach partners, and is providing scholarships
to 10 upper division students per year who are engaged in the new Cal Teach
program. The scholarship awards are highly visible within the STEM disciplines,
and are identified as awards reflecting student accomplishment and prestige. The
Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship program is building on the growing program that
Cal Teach has created to encourage STEM undergraduates at Berkeley to pursue
careers in math and science teaching, particularly in urban schools, and on
strong existing partnerships with local school districts (Berkeley, Emery, and
Oakland Unified) and with local research and outreach institutions (Lawrence
Hall of Science and the Chabot Space and Science Center). Cal Teach is an
integrated program, with early and frequent field placements; this allows
aspiring teachers to develop both deep subject matter understanding and
exemplary pedagogical skills as they engage in both theory and practice. To
accomplish this, Cal Teach engages faculty from the STEM content areas as well
as from the Graduate School of Education through an interdisciplinary approach
to teacher preparation that has been shown to be critical in the context of
training secondary math and science teachers for urban schools, where high
quality teachers are severely lacking. Cal Teach is committed to equity in
education for every student, promoting social justice through mathematics and
science learning. The Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program brings
outstanding students who share this commitment into Cal Teach, with the goal of
simultaneous disciplinary degrees in STEM majors and a teaching credential in
math or science.