* 0934079
* NJ Partnership for Excellence in Middle School Mathematics
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Joan Bennett, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Lee Zia
* 08/31/2015
* USD 5,000,000.00

The New Jersey Partnership for Excellence in Middle School Mathematics (NJ-
PEMSM) is a partnership between Rutgers University and seven school districts in
the state of New Jersey. The partnership is developing the expertise of teachers
in mathematics, pedagogy, and leadership to enhance the mathematical achievement
of their students and to share their expertise further as lead teachers,
mathematics coaches, and district resources. NJ-PEMSM includes school districts
facing a cross-section of the most serious educational challenges for American
public schools: economic stresses in the home and community environments, a
diversity of socio-cultural contexts, and partial student proficiency on
statewide mathematics assessments. The NJ-PEMSM Institute, with summer and
academic year components, is enrolling 100 active middle school mathematics
teachers, in four cohorts over five years, as Partnership Fellows. Fellows
undertake a program that develops deep mathematical content knowledge and
research-based pedagogical strategies to engage students in learning. The
mathematical domains include numbers and operations, algebra, geometry,
probability, and discrete mathematics. Teaching strategies include attention to
children's mathematical reasoning processes, affect and motivation. The
Institute is developing leadership skills that empower participants to
communicate their expertise to colleagues, and to positively influence their
school districts. Fellows can earn a Master's of Education in Mathematics
Education, and/or advanced licensures. Ongoing support structures are designed
to sustain a community of expert practice. A rigorous research effort is
documenting the outcomes of the project for dissemination to the broader
community. A special focus is being placed on the mathematical achievement of
special-needs students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NJ-PEMSM expects the following
outcomes:&lt;br/&gt;1) To develop a cadre of middle school math teachers who
have strong mathematical content, pedagogy and leadership skills and knowledge.
&lt;br/&gt;2) To provide middle school mathematics teachers with a deeper and
more flexible mathematical content knowledge so that they can effectively teach
conceptually challenging mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;3) To transform middle school
mathematics education by better engaging and motivating students from
economically disadvantaged, and racially, ethnically, and culturally diverse
populations so that they choose to pursue more advanced mathematics courses.
&lt;br/&gt;4) To answer specific research questions regarding middle school
teachers' acquisition of mathematical knowledge and pedagogical development,
consequences for students' learning, including special education students, and
the impact of teacher leadership development on participating school districts.