* 0934392
* Facility Improvements for the Seward Marine Center
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2009,03/31/2012
* Daniel Oliver, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 03/31/2012
* USD 51,452.00

The University of Alaska - Fairbanks requests funding for upgrades to the
seawater system. The seawater system would be upgraded to a dual line system to
provide redundancy, and a straining system would be installed to control line
clogs due to debris and marine organisms. An improved seawater system would
provide a guaranteed uninterrupted flow to the Hood lab and the mooring shop.
The Hood lab supports a variety of biological research which requires a constant
flow of seawater to sustain live organisms .It is home to the Alliance for
Coastal Technology (ACT) which uses the system to test underwater equipment. The
endocrinology lab would also benefit from an upgraded seawater system as future
studies with fish and invertebrates are being pursued. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
recent years, the wet lab has housed studies on a variety of live animals
including halibut, zooplankton, blue and red king crab, Tanner and snow crab,
sablefish, abalone, decorated warbonnet, searcher, and eulachon. These studies
have increased our knowledge of the basic biology and habits of these organisms,
as well as tested materials and techniques to further their study in the open
ocean. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The lab has
a consistent history of supporting graduate student research, with numerous
students from around the country residing here and carrying out research in the
labs served by the seawater system. In this regard the SMC operates as a
national center of sorts, particularly as the home port for the Alaska regional
research vessel, and is unique in both its location and service to the
oceanographic community. Research and training productivity of the facility is
solid, with the SMC serving as the home base for both students and faculty, and
as a staging base for visiting scientists. The SMC also provides a unique
outreach to native populations, despite being in a small and remote area. It has
done an excellent job in fostering the NOSB competition by involving several
high schools, and by hosting the national competition in 2008. It has met the
challenge of its remote location (it is 500 miles from the main campus at
Fairbanks) through the use of video conferencing classes. The SMC hosts visitors
to the neighboring Alaska Sea Life Center and they also host the Alaska region
National Ocean Science Bowl (a marine-oriented quiz competition for high school
students). They recently hosted the national Ocean Science Bowl competition.