* 0934347
* FSML: Improvements to Living Facilities, Data Communications, and Electrical Generation Capacity at the Bowdoin Scientific Station
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2013
* Damon Gannon, Bowdoin College
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 03/31/2013
* USD 167,526.00

Bowdoin Scientific Station (BSS), Bowdoin College's biological research station
on the Bay of Fundy, has been awarded a grant to improve its dormitory
facilities. BSS is unusual in many respects, it: is operated by an undergraduate
liberal arts institution; provides access to a wide variety of terrestrial and
marine habitats; has remarkable ecological characteristics (large tides, extreme
philopatry among migratory animals, self-compatible plants, boreal plant
communities despite temperate location, and geographically isolated plant and
animal populations); and possesses several valuable long-term ecological
databases, some of which span more than 70 years. But what makes BSS truly
extraordinary is its scientific productivity. Considering its small size (20
person maximum capacity, including staff), seasonal usage, and undergraduate
focus, the Station has an unusually high publication rate (187 peer-reviewed
papers since its founding in 1936; 68 of which were authored or co-authored by
undergraduate students). Twenty-five papers have been published in the past 5
years. Infrastructure audits of BSS conducted in July 2008 identified 4 areas of
need: (1) long-term structural integrity of the main dormitory, (2) personnel
capacity, (3) electrical generation capacity, and (4) internet communication
capabilities. This project will address items 1 and 2 by renovating the
Station's main dormitory. Renovations will preserve the main living facility at
the Station and double the number of personnel that this building can house,
ensuring continued growth of scientific productivity and educational
opportunities.

BSS is an exceptionally valuable research and teaching asset, which has trained
and inspired thousands of students by giving them the opportunity to work in
close collaboration with professional biologists in the field. This experience
has a profound and lasting effect on these students, a disproportionate number
of whom go on to careers in science and environmental management. By preserving
the structural integrity of the main dormitory and increasing the personnel
accommodations, this project will enhance the quality and quantity of research
projects that the Station is capable of supporting. In addition, these upgrades
will make it possible for more classes to take advantage of the Station's
facilities. Clearly, these upgrades will benefit Bowdoin's students and faculty.
But since approximately 1/3 of the Station's users traditionally come from other
institutions (including undergraduate students, graduate students, and faculty),
the impact of this infrastructure project will reach far beyond the Bowdoin
community. These improvements in infrastructure at BSS will allow the Station to
continue fulfilling its mission as a facility for ecological research, student
training, and environmental stewardship.