* 0934647
* CMG Research: Multiscale nonlinear domain decomposition method for modeling the impact of climate change on groundwater resources
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Congming Li, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 09/30/2013
* USD 579,965.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

CMG Research: Multiscale Nonlinear Domain Decomposition Method for Modeling the
Impact of Climate Change on Groundwater Resources

S. Ge, Department of Geological Sciences, University of Colorado X. Cai,
Department of Computer Science, University of Colorado C. Li, Department of
Applied Mathematics, University of Colorado M. Williams, Department of
Geography, University of Colorado

Continuing climate change poses uncertainties on future water resources. The
water cycle encompasses fundamental processes that link various elements of
climate and water resources. Holding approximately 30% of Earth's fresh water,
groundwater?s enormous storing capacity can be an effective buffer in regulating
more drastic hydrologic events on the surface, therefore, plays an important but
often overlooked role in long-term sustainability of water resources. High
altitude mountainous regions are vital source areas for water. Hydrologic
processes in high-altitude regions are particularly sensitive to climate change
because of the presence of snow, glaciers, and permafrost. Yet, basic questions
remain regarding how groundwater is replenished at its source by mountain
recharge, the size of groundwater reservoirs, as well as how permafrost
influences groundwater. Modeling the groundwater flow processes involving
mountain recharge and permafrost faces mathematical challenges due to
nonlinearity of the governing equations and multiscale nature of the spatial and
temporal domains.

The objective of the research is to develop a more accurate mathematical model
and a new robust computational algorithm and high performance software to study
the impact of climate change on groundwater resources in mountain watersheds,
with a focus on quantifying mountain recharge and permafrost hydrology. The
research plan is to first develop a mathematical model that will be capable of
handling coupled fluid flow and heat transport in complex geologic systems in
multiscale spatial and temporal domains. Second, field hydrogeologic study at
two sites will be conducted to gather data for testing the mathematical model.
The final stage is to conduct numerical simulations to assess the response of
groundwater storage and flow in mountain watersheds to future climate change
scenarios.

First, this study will contribute to our scientific knowledge on water cycle
processes at multi spatial and temporal scales. In particular, this study will
make a unique contribution to strengthening the subsurface element of the water
cycle, increasing knowledge on mountain recharge, and integrating little known
permafrost hydrology into a water resource study. Second, highly parallel and
robust numerical algorithms and software will be developed for the coupled
multi-physics system describing the water cycle processes. Third, the proposed
mathematical model development will be a substantial contribution to
hydrogeologic sciences. Dealing with multiscale fluid flow problems in
heterogeneous geologic media has been a long standing challenging. Development
of a robust computational algorithm allows efficiently modeling of hydrogeologic
systems at such a comprehensive and integrated level that would be difficult to
achieve by either mathematicians or geoscientists alone.

Water resource sustainability and climate change are pressing issues of global
and local concern. This study will benefit long term planning of water resources
and increase general public?s knowledge on the linkage between climate and water
resources, by dissimilating results through local media and public lectures. The
new computational algorithm implemented by a robust and versatile software will
be transferable to other areas of application and available to other
researchers. The cross-discipline nature of this project will afford students in
mathematics and geosciences a unique opportunity to interact with each other in
intellectual and physical settings that differ from those they are used to. This
will be achieved by requiring students to take classes outside their home
departments, math students to participate in field work, geoscience students to
be trained in computational mathematics. Finally a joint math-geosciences
seminar will be established to involve all project personnel. By encouraging
broad participation, this seminar will foster more and sustained future
collaborations between mathematics and geosciences.