* 0934653
* CMG Research: Making inferences about planktonic ecosystems with models and observations: use of emulators to make complex multidimensional applications tractable
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Andrew Solow, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 09/30/2013
* USD 660,035.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Emulators are computationally
inexpensive representations of complex model output as a function of uncertain
inputs. They provide drastic computational savings, and may thus greatly expand
the possibilities for statistical inference using state-of-the-art, spatially-
explicit plankton ecosystem models - yet they have never previously been
utilized in this context. The multidimensional nature of plankton models
requires significant extension of current emulator methods. Research in this
area will therefore be entirely novel and require a close collaboration between
plankton ecologists and mathematicians.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research focuses on three specific applications, all of which are beyond the
scope of modern computational resources without the use emulators or alternative
fast approximations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;First, emulators will be used to test
simple plankton ecosystem models in terms of their ability to fit the Bermuda
Atlantic Time Series (BATS) observations in a one-dimensional spatial setting.
This problem provides an ideal testbed for developing emulator methods for
multidimensional output. This will begin with an application in which the
forcing is assumed to be known. In this context, the dynamical model is
relatively inexpensive, allowing the inferences drawn using the emulator to be
compared with those drawn using the dynamical model. The computational advantage
of the emulators will then be exploited in the context of forcing that is not
perfectly known, facilitating joint inference of biological processes and
uncertainty in physical forcing. This will allow the investigators to address a
long-standing question in plankton ecosystem modeling: How much physical and
biological complexity is necessary to explain the BATS
data?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second application aims to develop an emulator
for a 3D plankton model of the entire North Atlantic, and use it to infer model
parameter values from satellite data under the assumption of known physical
forcing. This will permit inference of basin-wide seasonal variability in
plankton abundance, primary production, and carbon
export.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Third, emulation methods will be used together with
the basin-wide model to assess uncertainty in forecasts of ecosystem response
for various climate change scenarios. The intellectual merit of this effort
stems from an interdisciplinary approach to problems at the interface between
oceanography and statistics. Conjoining of models with observations using
advanced statistical and data assimilative methodologies will result in new
insights into plankton ecology on local to basin scales, providing information
relevant to oceanic ecosystems and global carbon cycling. In so doing, the
proposed research will advance both disciplines as well as their
interface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this activity include
training of graduate and undergraduate students as well as a postdoctoral
fellow. Curricular development will include enhancement of an existing course on
linking models and observations in planktonic ecosystems. The PIs also plan to
produce a short text that will promote broad dissemination of this material.