* 0934091
* University of Hawaii Partnership with the NSF I/U CRC for Telecommunication Circuits and Systems at Arizona State University
* ENG,EEC
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2016
* Sungkyun Lim, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2016
* USD 1,210,805.00

Center for Telecommunication Circuits and Systems (Connection One) IIP-0934091
University of Hawaii Iskander

This is a proposal to renew the University of Hawaii's participation in the
Connection One (C1) center, an I/UCRC center that was created in 2002. The lead
institution is Arizona State University, and at present includes five
universities. The main research mission of the C1 is to develop technologies and
solutions for emerging wireless communication systems, ranging from circuit
designs and smart antennas to wireless network architectures and protocols. The
scope of C1 extends to the integration of wireless and broadband wire-line
technologies (optical communications).

The primary focus of the proposed site over the next five years will be to
continue providing the capabilities, expertise, and research facilities for
conducting research that complements and supports the overall research focus in
the Connection One Center. The University of Hawaii (UH) brings in significant
research strength in areas such as channel modeling, advanced antenna system
designs, and digital signal processing for smart antennas and effective
detection and classification of buried objects. UH has been a member of C1 since
2004, and during this period has attracted 17 funded projects from seven
corporate sponsors.

The projects listed in this proposal will have significant impact in various
industries like communication systems, radar systems, RF device design,
fabrication and testing, smart antennas, and various applications such as IED
and UXO detection using electromagnetic. The educational highlight of the
activities of the UH site is the RET program that trains a large number of
teachers throughout the state as well as significantly contributes to the STEM
education in Hawaii. There is mention of participation of underrepresented
minorities in the center from native Hawaiians, and faculty of this site appear
to continuously augment their infrastructure needs by seeking NSF and other
funding dedicated to enhancing research infrastructure, for example through MRI
funding.