* 0934835
* Robert Noyce Scholarships at Trinity University
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Nancy Mills, Trinity University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 08/31/2014
* USD 595,643.00

Trinity University has a nationally recognized M.A.T. program that uses an
apprenticeship model for teacher preparation that is firmly grounded in
research. The program produces high-quality teachers and then nurtures them by
partnering closely with area schools. The Noyce scholarship program is bringing
a necessary financial aid component to this strong and growing program in math
and science education at Trinity. With prior Noyce support, Trinity University's
M.A.T. program doubled the number of STEM majors graduating with a combined
BS/MAT and teacher certification. With support from this Phase 2 Noyce award,
the M.A.T. program is awarding scholarships of $15,000 to 5-8 students per year,
resulting in certification of 20 additional STEM teachers. The program is also
awarding 4 summer internships per year to rising sophomores and juniors majoring
in STEM and with an expressed interest in education. Internship options include
helping faculty to develop materials for outreach activities in local San
Antonio schools, tutoring in an Upward Bound program, and research
apprenticeships with STEM faculty. Recruitment of students via web and print
communication, recruitment events at the university and local colleges, and a
new education course in "Policy and Practice in Urban Education" is bolstered by
ongoing education of STEM advisors, career counselors and financial aid staff
about the Noyce program. After submitting an application, letters of reference
and undergoing several interviews, Noyce Scholars are selected based on GPA,
intellectual and pedagogical potential as evidenced by references and
interviews, and the candidate's ability to be an effective role model for
students in San Antonio area schools. All Noyce Scholars are assigned both STEM
faculty and Education faculty mentors. During the first three years of teaching,
their STEM and Education faculty mentors continue to provide support,
particularly through support groups and summer workshops for new teachers. A new
induction support program also provides in-class coaching to science and math
teachers. Expanded and extended evaluation efforts are focusing on such critical
aspects of program implementation as recruitment, analysis of teacher quality
and student achievement, and factors that affect Noyce scholars' retention as
teachers, particularly in high needs schools. San Antonio's K-12 students
already benefit intellectually from the quality and stability of Trinity's well-
prepared teachers; the Robert Noyce program is expanding these benefits
significantly in the area of the STEM disciplines. By increasing both the
quantity and quality of math and science teachers in the San Antonio area, the
Robert Noyce program at Trinity is having the following impacts: better STEM
instruction for urban high-need K-12 schools with high (up to 90%) Hispanic
enrollment; a reduced rate of out-of-field teaching in STEM disciplines
(currently estimated to be as high as 40% in high-poverty schools); an improved
retention rate for beginning science and math teachers; and an increase in the
number of talented scientists and mathematicians who opt for careers in
teaching. The need for the kind of high-quality teacher-leaders that Trinity
produces is acute in San Antonio's high-need schools.