* 0934450
* SOLAR: High-Efficiency Solar Generation of Hydrogen Fuel from Novel "Tuned" Electrocatalytic Nanostructures
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Irene Gamba, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Lin He
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,402,645.00

This award on solar energy research is co-funded by the Divisions of Chemistry,
Materials Research, and Mathematical Sciences of the Directorate for
Mathematical and Physical Sciences. The team of three scientists from the
University of Texas at Austin is focused on the design, development,
fabrication, testing, and understanding, (through mathematical modeling) of
performance characteristics of nanostructured, semiconducting photocatalysts for
high efficiency photoelectrochemical (PEC) devices. These devices will be used
for the direct conversion of solar photons into hydrogen fuel via water
electrolysis. The key to the discovery of these new photocatalysts is finding
new compositions and structures at the nanometer scale. A combination of
computational mathematics and rapid synthesis and screening tools are used to
reveal structure/function relationships. Although the modeling of PEC systems
has been performed at the macroscale, the behavior changes significantly at the
nanoscale and these systems have not been simulated previously. The research
group prepares nanostructured PEC thin films of promising materials compositions
as identified by the rapid screening techniques and refines these structures via
mathematical modeling and photoelectrochemical experiments. The nanostructured
films are grown using a technique referred to as reactive ballistic deposition
(RBD). This technique enables the tuning of photocatalytic and optical
properties for high visible-light activity. In addition to the researchers'
efforts to develop alternative energy sources from water and sunlight, the group
is creating streaming animated videos on energy for high school students in both
English and Spanish. High school student researchers and faculty from four-year
undergraduate institutions assist in the research efforts during the summer
months, designing and constructing experimental apparatus and collaborating with
scientists at the national laboratories and at other universities.