* 0934918
* A Plan to Prepare In-service STEM Teachers for Certification and Leadership
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2012
* Annie Wells, Alabama A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 05/31/2012
* USD 74,999.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical
University (AAMU), a major Historically Black University, is implementing a
planning project with the goal of establishing a vigorous partnership among key
stakeholders in northern Alabama and the development of a competitive proposal
to (a) support Teaching Fellows (TF) to complete a master's degree in STEM
education areas and obtain teacher certification in mathematics and science
disciplines; and support Master Teaching Fellows (MTF) to obtain deep content
knowledge and to acquire leadership skills, and to (b) develop long-term,
evidence-based, and effective strategies to provide mentorship and continuous
professional development for TF/MTF. This year of planning focuses on the
following objectives: (1) expand and strengthen the existing partnership with
the Alabama State Department of Education; (2) establish partnerships with all
school districts in eleven counties in northern Alabama; (3) establish close
collaborations with supporting partners drawn from non-profit organizations,
industries, and other regional professional societies; (4) sponsor outreach
activities to inform potential partners, as well as prospective TF/MTF
candidates of the proposed program; (5) secure matching funds required for cost
share for the five-year scholarship grant application; and, (6) develop and
submit a proposal to NSF's Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Activities to obtain these planning objectives
include:&lt;br/&gt;1. Conducting inclusive and thorough research on the quantity
and quality of STEM in-service teachers with baccalaureate and masters degrees
in the school districts in the eleven counties that comprise northern
Alabama.&lt;br/&gt;2. Assessing the needs of each of the these northern Alabama
school districts, as well as determining which districts are characterized as
high-need districts.&lt;br/&gt;3. Implementing a feasibility study to determine
the scope of a five-year project to develop STEM Teaching Fellows and Master
Teaching Fellows, including the pool of STEM professionals and the possibility
of going beyond the eleven counties in northern Alabama. &lt;br/&gt;4. Engaging
state policy makers at the State Department of Education, including teacher
education and certification, as well as regional in-service centers, and
superintendents to explore common needs relative to the enhancement of STEM
education in the state and to garner support for a full TF/MTF
proposal.&lt;br/&gt;5. Interacting with local industry and non-profit
organizations to involve them in the goals and opportunities afforded through
the TF/MTF and to obtain commitments of matching funds in support of a full
proposal.&lt;br/&gt;6. Holding joint meetings among the University's STEM
faculty in the Schools of Arts and Sciences, Engineering and Technology,
Agriculture and Environmental Sciences with faculty from the School of Education
to explore collaborative design of courses and delivery systems, including
cyber-resources.