* 0934820
* Puerto Rico Master Math Teacher Program
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2009,09/30/2015
* Edwin Morera, University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 09/30/2015
* USD 1,500,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The University of Puerto Rico in Rio Piedras (UPRRP), in collaboration with the
University of Puerto Rico in Cayey, the Puerto Rico Department of Education
(PRDE) and the Puerto Rico Community Foundation, a non-profit organization, is
certifying ten 7-12th grade mathematics teachers, teaching in high-need school
districts, as Master Math Teachers (MMT). The Master Math Teachers are being
trained to offer professional development to math teachers at the Professional
Math and Science Resource Centers (PMSRC) that have been established throughout
the Island by the Puerto Rico Math and Science Partnership (PRMSP). The MMTs
serve as role models of exemplary mathematics teaching practices, experts in
content knowledge, and leaders among their peers to promote improvements in
student academic achievement. The PRMMTP consists of two phases: an intensive
certification program followed by a period during which the MMTs serve as
professional developers completing a total of five years of service. The MMT
Certification focuses on the enhancement of mastery of math content and
pedagogical skills through an approach that integrates depth of conceptual
understanding with content-specific teaching strategies, and mentoring and
leadership skills. Disciplinary content focuses on inductive and deductive
reasoning, and mathematical models (linear, quadratic and exponential) within a
problem solving framework. Learning experiences are modeled in which
participants explore, formulate conjectures, deduce, justify and put arguments
to the test. A math action research course prepares the teachers to carry out a
math action research at the grade level they teach. MMTs must present a
portfolio as evidence of their performance based on a set of criteria of
teaching effectiveness through student learning outcomes. In the second phase of
the PRMMTP the certified MMTs assume leadership roles within high need school
districts. Activities include serving as mentors, participating in curriculum
development projects, participating in pre-service teacher education, and
assisting in the development and implementation of professional development for
other teachers, particularly in the PMSRCs. MMTs also participate as Cooperating
Teachers during the practicum of 7-12th grade pre-service math teachers and as
mentors for beginning teachers. Each participating teacher receives a $10,000
annual salary supplement during the five years of participation in the program
teaching in a high-need school district.