* 0934618
* Urban Teaching Fellowships for STEM Professionals
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2015
* Dennis DeTurck, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* John Haddock
* 06/30/2015
* USD 1,392,318.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Urban Teaching Fellowship program
for STEM professionals is supporting two cohorts of 10 NSF Teaching Fellows per
year to participate in the Philadelphia Teacher Residency (PTR) program. Each
Fellow is being supported for a total of five years: one year as a master's
student, and four years as a full-time classroom teacher in a high-poverty
school. The PTR program is a teacher preparation and induction program for STEM
professionals that is designed and implemented collaboratively by the Graduate
School of Education of the University of Pennsylvania, the Philadelphia
Education Fund, the School District of Philadelphia, and the Philadelphia
Federation of Teachers. The goal of the PTR is to increase the number of
teachers certified to teach math and science in grades 6-12 in high-need schools
in the District, and to support those teachers to remain in the classroom
through the provision of at least three years of professional development. NSF
Teaching Fellows, a select group of promising teachers, receive a fourth year of
support. The PTR program builds on the knowledge and expertise of these multiple
constituencies to offer an innovative way to attract and prepare STEM teachers
for urban centers. It includes a cohesive and intellectually rigorous curriculum
and a comprehensive support system that reflect the challenges of teaching in
urban public schools. Each aspect of the curriculum and professional development
programs is closely aligned with the particular needs of the individual schools,
the local district, and the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania standards, while
incorporating the latest research on mathematics and science pedagogy. As the
program is being implemented, the partners are developing expertise in using a
residency approach to prepare and support urban teachers and in fostering
partnerships among stakeholders in urban districts that is being disseminated
nationally to partner residency programs in other cities, as well as to teacher
education programs seeking to build partnerships with urban districts.