* 0934345
* EAGER:  Mixing Ratio and Flux Measurements of Volatile Organic Compounds During BEARPEX 2009 Using a Portable, Self-sufficient REA-GC-FID System
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Gunnar Schade, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Pszenny
* 08/31/2010
* USD 85,697.00

This exploratory project involves the first field test of a new, Relaxed Eddy
Accumulation instrument for measuring concentrations and fluxes of Volatile
Organic Compounds (VOCs) in a long-term, unattended operational mode under
limited infrastructure conditions. During this deployment at Blodgett Forest in
California in summer 2009, the instrument will measure emissions of biogenic
VOCs as part of a multi-investigator study focusing on biogenic emissions and
their effects on atmospheric chemistry within and above forest canopies.
Scientific objectives related to biogenic VOC fluxes and chemistry will be
addressed, such as comparing and contrasting results to those of earlier studies
at the same site, but under changed plant physiological conditions. Minor
modifications to the instrument, mostly prior to the field campaign, will be
evaluated as part of a process to improve its suitability for an envisioned long
term deployment to a remote rain forest location to observe tropical biosphere-
atmosphere VOC exchange interannually.

This project will allow a unique field research and networking experience for a
talented graduate student at Texas A&M University. It will also allow the
student to add an important thesis chapter on biogenic VOC fluxes and complete
graduate studies latest in spring 2010. Results from this field study will be
disseminated in the peer-reviewed literature and incorporated into the Principal
Investigator's (PI) atmospheric chemistry graduate class at Texas A&M
University. In addition, the PI will be given the opportunity to develop both
old and new collaborative ties through this research, which will result in
publication co-authorship. This award is funded under the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).