* 0934295
* Expansion of the Seawater System of the Center for Marine Science
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Richard Satterlie, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2012
* USD 109,920.00

The PI's request funding to expand and enhance seawater facilities by increasing
wet laboratory space through expansion into an adjacent field equipment storage
room on one side of the existing wet lab room, and into the former
shipping/receiving room on the other side of the current wet lab room. These
rooms were made available upon completion of the new wing of the CMS building.
The original building included a wet laboratory and seawater facility for which
demand has increased greatly due to new faculty hires and growth of research and
education programs. The wet laboratory is supplied with seawater drawn from the
ICW at the end of a pier. The CMS wet laboratory provides about 1,500 ft2 of
space with 9 seawater access points to meet the needs of 68 UNCW faculty, their
graduate and undergraduate students, and visiting investigators. With rapid
development of marine research programs since 2000, demand for wet laboratory
space has exceeded current availability. chambers to be available for specific
project use (rather than dedication to a single project). Use priority of one of
the chambers will go to graduate students working on dissertation or thesis
research. Intellectual merit: Expansion of wet laboratory space would greatly
increase the options for research and education available to UNCW faculty,
visiting scientists and students at CMS. Expanded laboratory space would
accommodate the growing demand for culture facilities for many research
programs, the science cannot begin until organisms can be reliably and
dependably maintained.

Broader Impacts:

The site is very active in education and research-training of undergraduate and
graduate students. The additions will enhance capacity for student research and
1 environmental chamber has even been set aside for student work. The addition
will also contribute to the many educational programs that the site hosts by
providing animal holding facilities for hands-on and exploration programs. The
center has been involved in outreach for over 20 years via a MarineQuest program
offering primary and secondary students and adults hands on experiences (66,000
to date), and also through a variety of camps, classes, and seminars.