* 0934967
* Fresno State Teaching Fellows (FRESTEF)
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2009,09/30/2015
* Lance Burger, California State University-Fresno Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 09/30/2015
* USD 1,500,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Fresno State Teaching Fellows
(FRESTEF) program at California State University-Fresno is increasing the pool
of highly qualified science and mathematics teachers in the Central Valley of
California through a comprehensive design requiring Fellows to complete either a
Master of Arts or Master of Science degree in the sciences or mathematics, in
conjunction with completion of requirements for a secondary school teaching
credential, thus creating excellent bridges between pedagogy and advanced STEM
content. The program features extensive involvement of STEM faculty through
instruction in graduate level programs, professional development workshops, and
mentoring of FRESTEF Fellows. The program builds upon the strong foundation of
two successful Noyce programs by offering special programmatic support for the
Fellows, including seminars on teaching in high needs schools, summer research
opportunities with established programs at the U.S. Department of Energy Labs,
and exemplary summer institutes which provide future and current science and
mathematics teachers with high quality, research-based curricula. The project is
providing fellowships and support to 18 highly trained science and mathematics
teachers who are expected to become key role models and leaders in their school
districts. Through extensive involvement of FRESTEF Fellows with the National
Science Digital Library (NSDL)/Noyce Commons and emerging on-line community, the
products of the Fellows program (including contributions in the form of on-line
publications, lessons, and other teaching and learning resources) are being
widely disseminated throughout the Noyce community in California. Partners
include the Central Valley Science Project, San Joaquin Valley Mathematics
Project, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, Lawrence Berkeley National
Laboratory, Math for America, and the Science Teacher and Researcher Program.
School district partners include Fresno, Clovis, Madera County, and Fowler
School Districts.