* 0934658
* Kenan Master Teaching Fellows: Linking Research Experiences and Curriculum Development with Leadership
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2009,09/30/2015
* Ruben Carbonell, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Nicole Bennett
* 09/30/2015
* USD 1,499,934.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The Kenan Fellows Program for Curriculum and Leadership Development, housed at
the Kenan Institute for Engineering, Technology, & Science on the North Carolina
State University (NC State) campus, is partnering with school districts in 11
counties, the University of North Carolina at Pembroke, Fayetteville Technical
Community College, and community leaders in North Carolina's Base Realignment
and Closure/Regional Task Force (BRAC/RTF) region to improve K-12 STEM education
in these counties' high-need schools. Additional support is provided by the non-
profit partner, the Kenan Fund for Engineering, Technology, and Science.
Representing a region that surrounds Fort Bragg and Pope Air Force Base,
BRAC/RTF was established to unify and serve 11 counties, 73 municipalities,
eight community colleges, and six state and private universities, and to help
identify and advocate for their needs in partnership with the military,
corporate and non-profit interests, and federal and state agencies.

Eighteen in-service Kenan Master Teaching Fellows (KMTF) from high-need schools
in the BRAC/RTF region are completing two-year fellowships and then continuing
for three years in formal Alumni activities as Master Teachers in their
districts. KMTFs receive $10,000 in annual salary supplements for each of the
five years they participate in the program, as well as a range of other support
including intensive professional development during the first two years to
ensure a rich fellowship experience. KMTFs are recruited and selected from a
diverse pool of the BRAC/RTF region's most outstanding STEM teachers, who
already hold master's degrees and have demonstrated excellence in teaching prior
to recruitment. This elite cohort of teachers is learning about the practices
and skills that characterize the innovative, high-tech labs and industries
moving into the area. KMTFs work with industry or academic mentors in a
particular cutting-edge research area, to learn more about important new
developments and to gain an understanding of the significance of current
research and scientific practice for students entering the work force and higher
education. Each KMTF/ Mentor pair works to translate STEM research experiences
into engaging lessons for use in North Carolina's classrooms. Fellows are
creating innovative curriculum resources aligned with the NC Standard Course of
Study. In Summer Institutes for Professional Development, KMTFs build advanced
skills to become more effective teacher-leaders and change agents in their
schools and districts. The Master Teachers are engaged in a range of leadership
activities in their home districts and are involved in preservice education at
the partnering institutions.