* 0934783
* Living on Earth: Alaska NSF EPSCoR Social-Ecological Systems Workshop
* O/D,EPS
* 05/15/2009,04/30/2011
* Anne Sudkamp, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Uma Venkateswaran
* 04/30/2011
* USD 155,236.00

EPS-0934783&lt;br/&gt;Schweitzer: University of Alaska ? Fairbanks &lt;br/&gt;A
Social-Ecological System (SES) is broadly defined as a system with interacting
and interdependent physical, biological and social components, with a special
emphasis on human interactions with nature. As the world?s climate changes, and
these intensifying changes increasingly hold ramifications for human
populations, the need for concerted analysis of social-ecological systems (SES)
is intensified. Such dynamics are especially pronounced in Alaska, but are also
present throughout the United States as population shifts and climate changes
combine to produce changes in the intricate web of relationships that link human
and natural systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The increasing urgency of the
situation calls for a sharper focus on the methods and means of integrating
biological, physical, and social sciences into SES models. The Alaska EPSCoR
Social-Ecological Systems Workshop will provide an ideal platform from which to
accomplish this. The goals of the SES workshop, to be held in Anchorage in May,
2009, are to enable information-sharing across EPSCoR jurisdictions about SES
issues, including both policy and research matters; to identify areas for cross-
jurisdictional SES research projects, which will improve funding
competitiveness; and to consider collaboration and outreach strategies among
researchers, policy-makers, and managers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
merit: Workshop speakers will discourse on emerging scientific innovations in
social-ecological systems, highlighting new research tools available in the
field. As SES is still an emergent field, the workshop will potentially have a
transformative effect on SES study. The workshop is specifically designed to
build collaborations among NSF EPSCoR researchers and jurisdictions, thereby
strengthening the nation?s research capacity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impact: SES study is by its nature interdisciplinary, and the workshop will
include researchers from across the scientific spectrum. It will also heavily
involve the policy and management side of SES study, potentially impacting not
just how SES researchers proceed but how their findings are utilized and
implemented. Speakers will highlight opportunities for STEM educational outreach
and workforce development through community-based research. In its study of
specific populations SES is inherently concerned with diversity issues, and the
workshop will deal with diversity in this sense as well as by tackling the issue
of increasing the participation of underrepresented groups in SES research.
&lt;br/&gt;