* 0934157
* PREM-The University of Texas Pan American/University of Minnesota  -Science and Engineering of Polymeric and Nanoparticle-based Materials for Electronic and Structural Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2016
* Timothy Lodge, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Continuing Grant
* jose caro
* 08/31/2016
* USD 2,819,124.00

This Partnership for Research and Education in Materials (PREM) creates a
partnership between the University of Texas Pan American (UTPA) and the
University of Minnesota (UMN) Materials Research Science and Engineering Center
(MRSEC) focused on the development of polymeric and nanoparticle based materials
and devices. While this collaboration builds upon the growing research activity
at UTPA, this PREM embodies the first science and engineering collaboration of
this magnitude at UTPA. Research conducted in this partnership are in five
thrusts: (1) the exploration of nanoparticle-based materials, such as laser-
induced aggregation of nanocrystallites as well as nanoparticles-in-photonic
crystal material systems, for applications to photovoltaic solar cells, (2) the
development of soluble conjugated polymers for spin-processable, low cost,
plastic light emitters as well as conjugated-polymer-in-photonic crystal system
low-threshold lasers, (3) the functionalization of nanoporous materials for the
application of mechanical-to-interfacial energy conversion, (4) the development
of self-healing polymeric materials with block copolymers for smart flexible
materials applications, and (5) the study of nanoreinforced polymeric composite-
thin film and metal-thin film interfaces to improve the mechanical properties of
these systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Materials science educational outreach is
performed utilizing existing UTPA programs such as Upward Bound, GearUp and Tex-
Prep programs. In addition to these outreach activities, this PREM also presents
materials science sessions to K-12 students and participates in the Research
Experience for Teachers (RET) program for science teachers hosted at the partner
UMN MRSEC. Besides the education and outreach to the community in general, this
PREM increases the participation of women STEM faculty members and promotes
their retention in materials research as more than 57% of the UTPA participating
faculty are women.