* 0934748
* Silicon Valley Consortium for Mathematics and Science Teachers (SVCMST)
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Patricia Stoddart, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Joan T Prival
* 08/31/2011
* USD 74,836.00

The Silicon Valley Consortium for Mathematics and Science Teaching (SVCMST) is
engaged in planning a project to help increase the teacher workforce in
mathematics and science in one of the most technologically vital geographic
areas in America, Silicon Valley, California. The ultimate goal is to recruit
and prepare new teachers who will be hired in hard to staff, culturally and
linguistically diverse middle and high schools in Silicon Valley school
districts. SVCMST is a collaboration designed to bring together faculty, staff
and administrators from the University of California, Santa Cruz education,
mathematics, and physics departments, Foothill and De Anza Community Colleges
(both in Silicon Valley), Franklin McKinley School District, East Side Union
High School District (both highly impacted districts in SV/San Jose),
representatives from the science and technology based industry (Silicon Valley
Leadership Group), as well as education experts from the Silicon Valley
Education Foundation, to work collectively and collaboratively on the pressing
issue of providing STEM teachers to the most highly impacted school districts in
Silicon Valley. This planning grant focuses on matching needs (those who are
expert in science and mathematics, but jobless and underserved districts that
need STEM teachers) in a creative, cost effective and timely way. The SVCMST is
identifying best ways to create synergies, create future cost share
possibilities, learning how to work as a cohesive unit. Efforts focus on
preparing a new category of secondary science and mathematics teachers
by:&lt;br/&gt;(1) Re-qualifying STEM professionals recently unemployed due to
the recession&lt;br/&gt;(2) Recruiting and preparing new teachers to teach
mathematics and science to the increasingly culturally, linguistically and
economically diverse student population&lt;br/&gt;(3) Expanding the knowledge
base on the development of teacher knowledge and skill in teaching science and
mathematics to diverse student populations &lt;br/&gt;(4) Researching and
designing new evaluation tools for measuring success.&lt;br/&gt;The goal is to
help meet both an "achievement gap" (lagging scores, jobs and college placements
for culturally and linguistically diverse students) and an "occupation gap"
(increasing need for math and science teachers, and the presence of recently
unemployed Silicon Valley science and math specialists) in one "re-qualifying"
program.