* 0934390
* Collaborative Research: I/UCRC on Grid-Connected Advanced Power Electronic Systems (GRAPES)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Juan Carlos Balda, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Raffaella Montelli
* 08/31/2014
* USD 565,000.00

Center for Grid-Connected Advanced Power Electronic Systems (GRAPES)

IIP-0934390 University of Arkansas Mantooth

IIP-0934378 University of South Carolina (USC) Dougal

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The purpose of this proposal is to start a new I/UCRC "Grid-Connected Advanced
Power Electronic Systems (GRAPES)" with a focus on developing the new knowledge,
tools, hardware, software, and personnel that are required to pervasively insert
power electronics into the 21st century power grid in ways that will strengthen
and modernize the grid. The lead of the proposed Center will be the University
of Arkansas (UK) with the University of South Carolina (USC) as a research
partner.

New software will be developed to enable grid connected power electronics to
benefit the grid as well as controlled loads. This will include new novel medium
voltage multiport power converter system to efficiently and reliably integrate
energy storage systems (ESS), and renewable distributed energy resources (DER),
into the utility grid. The new IUCRC will target three industries: 1) utilities
and other end users, 2) equipment manufacturers, and 3) component suppliers.

This proposed center has the potential to improve sustainablility and
profitability of US manufacturing by developing new technologies that will
reduce energy consumption and pollution. The proposed I/UCRC plans to develop
leading-edge industry relevant research, and to make full use of an already-
developed national-caliber facility for design, development, test, evaluation,
and standardization of distribution-level grid-connected power electronic
equipment. Students and faculty members will gain valuable experience by
interaction with industry partners. The PIs adequately describe their plan for
including under represented groups in all areas of the research program. The
Center will train students and practicing engineers and establish new courses
that will integrate research with education. This center has the potential to
make the US a leader in power electronic systems for grids especially for
developing countries.