* 0934859
* Temple Noyce Teacher (TNT) Scholars Program, Phase 1
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2009,09/30/2015
* Hai-Lung Dai, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 09/30/2015
* USD 900,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The Temple Noyce Teacher Scholars (TNT) Phase 1 project, a collaboration of
Temple University's (TU) College of Science and Technology and College of
Education, is building on existing TU partnerships with the Pennsylvania
Department of Education and three high-need, urban school districts - Chester-
Upland, Harrisburg, and Philadelphia. Utilizing two model math and science
teacher preparation programs, TNT is providing coordinated financial support,
mentoring, and a shared learning community to 80 new and aspiring teachers at
opposite ends of their careers - undergraduate math and science majors and mid-
career and retired STEM professionals. The first program, TUteach, includes
undergraduate math and science majors who are simultaneously pursuing secondary
(7-12 grade) math or science teacher certification in an accelerated 4-year
program. Noyce scholars, a total of 40 over the 5 years of the award, receive
financial support to participate in TNT for 1 year, obligating them to teach in
a high-need district for at least 2 years. The second, E=mc2, is a 1-year
program that prepares mid-career and early retiree STEM professionals for
teaching math or science in the middle grades (4-8). E=mc2 participants who
receive Noyce stipends (a total of 40) are obligated to teach in one of the
high-need, partner districts for 3 years. Both programs feature closely
integrated course work and field-based teaching experiences in urban classrooms,
and mentoring by experienced teachers. For TUteach participants, exposure to and
practice in urban classrooms begins in the freshman year. The program is
fostering communities of practice with face-to-face and on-line supports; the
communities incorporate master teachers who facilitate school-based meetings and
conduct formal observations of, and conferences with each new teacher. They in
turn are supported by TUteach faculty mentors and E=mc2 mentor teachers.

Intellectual Merit. The TNT is preparing 80 high-quality, Pennsylvania-
certified, middle-grades and secondary math and science teachers to teach
rigorous math and science content through innovative, inquiry-driven approaches
in urban school contexts. As it brings these new approaches to the training and
support of new teachers, TNT is also heightening general awareness of the need
for high-quality math and science teachers in high-poverty, high-minority, low-
performing schools. Project evaluation is contributing to the larger knowledge
base about replicable models for effective recruitment, development and
retention of math and science teachers for urban schools.

Broader Impacts. Temple University, with its diverse faculty and student body,
is one of the largest preparers of teachers in its region, and has an
established reputation for developing innovative approaches. The broader impacts
promise to be significant with respect to both the number and quality of
teachers, particularly those from under-represented groups, who are trained in
high-need subjects for high-need schools.