* 0934615
* Luminescent Solar Concentrators Based on Semiconductor Nanorods
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* David Kelley, University of California - Merced
* Continuing Grant
* Lin He
* 08/31/2014
* USD 1,318,996.00

This award on solar energy research is co-funded by the Divisions of
Chemistry,&lt;br/&gt;Materials Research, and Mathematical Sciences of the
Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences. A collaboration of
chemistry, materials science, and mathematics groups at the University of
California - Merced will explore a new kind of luminescent solar concentrator
(LSC), based upon alignment of semiconductor nanorods in a liquid crystalline
matrix. The idea behind this approach is that aligned nanorods will be better
able to couple incident solar energy, collected over a very large area, into
small area photovoltaic devices. The team will use semiconductor nanorods and
heterojunction nanorods to act as light collector/emitter, and will align these
particles in an anisotropic, liquid crystalline matrix. The hybrid materials
will be characterized by a number of analytical techniques, and the resultant
materials will be modeled with sophisticated radiative transport methods. The
young scientists working on this project will have the opportunity to work in an
excellent interdisciplinary environment at this Hispanic-Serving Institution,
the newest campus of the University of California
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite years of effort, breakthroughs in solar
energy technology have been slow in coming. This unique effort by an
interdisciplinary group of a chemist, a materials scientist and a mathematician
is taking a new look at an old design for solar energy collection and conversion
-- using a large-area device to collect and transmit energy to a small-area
photovoltaic energy converter. The basic idea is to minimize the cost and
increase the efficiency of the expensive component (the photovoltaic device) by
decreasing its area, without sacrificing the amount of light that would be
collected in going from a large-footprint to a small-footprint device. In
addition, to the broad impact that improved solar-energy conversion would have
for society, the postdoctoral fellows, graduate and undergraduate students
working on this project will benefit from receiving an interdisciplinary
education. This will help prepare them for scientific careers solving other
important socially- and technologically-relevant problems.&lt;br/&gt;