* 0934795
* Impacting Metro-Atlanta Science Teaching (I-MAST)
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2009,09/30/2015
* Jennifer Leavey, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 09/30/2015
* USD 899,949.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Impacting Metro Atlanta Science
Teaching (I-MAST) is a collaborative effort involving the College of Education
and the College of Arts and Sciences at Georgia State University (Georgia
State), Georgia Institute of Technology (Georgia Tech), and four high-need
school districts (Atlanta Public Schools, Cobb County School District, DeKalb
County School System, and Gwinnet County Public Schools) in the Metro Atlanta
area. I-MAST is addressing the critical need for high quality science teachers
who are prepared for and committed to teaching in Metro Atlanta high-need school
districts. I-MAST Robert Noyce Scholars are being recruited and selected from
the pool of STEM majors from Georgia State and Georgia Tech to pursue secondary
science teacher certification via a 5-year Master of Arts in Teaching (MAT)
Science program at Georgia State; selection criteria ensure the participation of
underrepresented groups. Twenty-four of these STEM undergraduate majors are
receiving 2-year scholarships in their senior year of undergraduate studies and
their first year of teacher certification studies. An additional entry point for
I-MAST is for STEM graduates interested in changing careers to teaching; 12 STEM
graduates are receiving one-year scholarships to pursue studies leading to
certification and to a MAT degree. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. The
I-MAST program incorporates an innovative, research-informed model for
cultivating reflective science teachers. Paradigms associated with inquiry-
based, reflective teaching and learning are woven throughout I-MAST's
recruitment, teacher preparation, and induction efforts. Noyce Scholars are
introduced into the culture of reflective practice early on, and the program
continuously provides opportunities for Noyce Scholars to engage and participate
in reflective practices through course work, internships, and induction support.
Program evaluation and associated research is documenting the impact of program
strategies for cultivating reform-minded, reflective science teachers through
these connective and consistent efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact. In
addition to preparing and supporting 36 new, highly qualified, reform-minded and
reflective science teachers for high need Metro Atlanta schools, the I-MAST
program is aimed at enhancing and reinforcing on-going collaborations between
institutes of higher education and school districts in efforts to improve the
educational experience for and capacity to succeed of Metro Atlanta students.
I-MAST program findings are being shared with the greater community through
professional conference presentations, publication in refereed research and
practitioner journals, reports and recruitment materials, and the I-MAST
webpage.