* 0934701
* Theory 2 Practice (T2P) - MU Master Science Teaching and Mentoring Fellows Program
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2010
* Sandra Abell, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Deborah E. Allen
* 06/30/2010
* USD 74,858.00

Through this planning grant, steps are being taken to develop the framework for
a Master Teaching Fellows program that focuses on turning theory into practice
in science instruction. This program builds on an existing Noyce scholarship
program in the Columbia region; it is anticipated that the Master Teaching
Fellows program will include many of the same partners from the scholarship
program, including the Columbia Public Schools. The planning activities are
beginning with an assessment survey to develop goals and activities for the
program that are responsive to local needs. As part of this planning project, a
non-profit organization that has the willingness, capacity, and expertise to
support the goals of the program is being identified and recruited. The
educational program for the Master Science Teaching Fellows is being developed
including making plans for recruitment strategies, establishing admission
requirements, defining the roles and responsibilities of all participants,
designing a management structure, planning for sustainability, and developing an
evaluation plan. Other planning activities in this project include
identification of sources of university cost share, securing school district
support for implementing salary supplements for the Fellows, and evaluating the
progress of the planning activities themselves.