* 0934919
* The Science Teachers Acquired through New Directions in New Mexico (STAND-NM)
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2009,06/30/2016
* Stephen Kanim, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 06/30/2016
* USD 886,106.00

Science Teachers Acquired Through New Direction in New Mexico, STAND-NM, is
recruiting 21 undergraduate Physics, Chemistry, Biology, and Earth Science
majors into the secondary science teaching profession. The STAND-NM is providing
a venue for collaboration and involvement of science and education faculty
invested in the success of the STEM students that is improving the preparation
of these teachers, providing professional development and science-specific
induction support for beginning science teachers, and improving the pedagogical
content knowledge of secondary science teachers. Highly qualified teachers are
graduating from this program with a very strong foundation in both content and
pedagogical knowledge. Given the unique and diverse environment New Mexico State
University is situated in, the 21 Noyce Scholars are being provided with many
opportunities to teach a diverse range of students in high-need areas and the
Noyce Scholars are being recruited from under-represented groups, including
Hispanics, Native Americans, African Americans, and women. Through education
research this program is also adding to the knowledge and understanding of the
development of science teachers' pedagogical content knowledge in a population
of pre-service teachers who have received the majority of their content
knowledge before their pedagogical preparation. A fuller understanding of the
development of pedagogical content knowledge is being gained by following these
teachers into the early years of their teaching careers.