* 0934348
* GOALI:  An Integrated Framework for Stiction Detection and Compensation in Control Loops
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2009,02/28/2015
* Raghunathan Rengasamy, Texas Tech University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Burka
* 02/28/2015
* USD 323,857.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Raghunatha Rengasamy and Randy Miller
&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Clarkson University&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
0553992&lt;br/&gt;Title: An Integrated Framework for Stiction Detection and
Compensation in Control Loops&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF GOALI project is a joint effort between
Clarkson University and Honeywell, USA for the development and implementation of
controller performance monitoring techniques. The last decade has seen the
emergence and commercialization of on-line control loop performance-monitoring
techniques. The primary objectives of any performance-monitoring tool can be
categorized as: (i) detection of performance degradation, (ii) diagnosis of the
cause for performance degradation, and (iii) corrective action. While the first
objective has been addressed comprehensively in the literature, work on the
other two objectives is lacking. In this project, the focus will be on
oscillation diagnosis, stiction detection, and stiction compensation.
Quantitative and qualitative techniques will be explored for solving these
problems. Through industrial collaboration with Honeywell, all the techniques
that are developed will be extensively validated on one million industrial
control loops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Shape-based and model-based algorithms will be developed
for stiction diagnosis. The scalability issues in the deployment of these
algorithms will be studied through benchmarking on a million industrial control
loop dataset. The development of both model-free and model-based stiction-
compensation algorithms are envisaged. Preliminary results suggest that highly
optimal compensation signals can be designed with benign valve movements for
stiction compensation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will generate tools that can be leveraged by the
US process industries to maintain their competitive edge. Results arising out of
the project will provide Honeywell with a performance assessment tool that can
be benchmarked on a large database of loop data and subsequently implemented on
a wide variety of control loops. It has been estimated that detection and
diagnosis of control loop degradation alone could reduce energy cost of the
overall process industry by 1% which could amount to as much as $300 million per
year. This could be a driving force for other control vendors to embrace and
develop their own controller performance monitoring tools. The dissemination
activities include: publication in archival journals, presentation at
conferences targeted at academicians and industry participants, and inclusion of
material in a book on fault diagnosis that the PI is co-authoring. A laboratory
experiment will be upgraded at Clarkson University and will be used to teach
undergraduate students the concept of Controller Performance Assessment. The PI
will work closely with Clarkson's Pipeline of Education Program to recruit
talented underrepresented students from universities with which Clarkson has
established articulation agreements and/or memorandums of
understanding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;