* 0934672
* Narrative-Centered Computing for Childhood Environmental Awareness
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* William Tomlinson, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2011
* USD 280,371.00

This project seeks to create a framework for narrative-centered computing (NCC)
that will help children reason more effectively about (a) the distributed chains
of causation that mediate environmental change, and (b) how they can intervene
effectively within those chains. The NCC framework begins with a new mechanism
for computational storytelling called spatiotemporal anchoring. Spatiotemporally
anchored stories consist not of a linear "filmstrip," but instead of a network
of story nodes. Each node depicts a small element of the overall plot, and is
anchored to a specific location in space and time. To advance the story, users
explore a rich geographical representation of the relevant spatiotemporal
locale, discovering story nodes and the interconnections between them. Because
nodes can be anchored at variable levels of spatiotemporal resolution and
interlinked in non-linear ways, exploring these narratives will help children to
develop more nuanced abilities for reasoning about distributed causation and
variable scale. These abilities, in turn, will translate into more effective
engagement with environmental issues. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While focusing on a
particular topic in education, this project seeks to develop a new information
technology method for enhancing human cognitive abilities in general. A striking
feature of our global environmental predicament is the disparity between the
breadth of the problem and the limited nature of humanity's current response.
This disconnection may reflect underlying limitations on our intuitive cognitive
and emotional processes. As organisms that are adapted to "humansized" scales of
complexity and causation, we lack effective means for reasoning about the kinds
of temporally, spatially, and socially distributed interactions that drive
environmental phenomena. This innovative research seeks to address this problem
and to overcome our difficulties in reasoning about distributed data by focusing
instead upon our substantial ability to connect to
stories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NCC framework also includes novel interaction
mechanisms through which users can influence unfolding events in a story world
via targeted behaviors in the real world. These mechanisms will allow children
to see how their own environmentally relevant patterns of behavior, mediated by
intuitively understandable causal mappings, could cause positive or negative
changes in a story ecosystem. This feedback between user's actions and the
unfolding story will have powerful implications for children's developing sense
of environmental responsibility. The data that drives these interaction
mechanisms will also provide a natural means of evaluating the effectiveness of
this research. As a way of testing and refining the NCC framework, the research
will include the creation of a testbed interactive narrative, to be deployed
online and as a temporary science museum exhibit. This narrative will use
spatiotemporal anchoring along with video and traditional cinematographic
techniques to dramatize the interactions that take place within a representative
California ecosystem, for example, a marine environment in which sea otters,
kelp forests, and sea urchins all interact. The behavioral impact and
educational effectiveness of this narrative will be evaluated both via the
aforementioned data collection mechanisms as well as through interviews with
users. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will make a significant contribution
to Human-Centered Computing by developing a novel approach to embedding complex
distributed phenomena in an interactive narrative format. The spatiotemporal
anchoring technique developed here will be useful not just in the context of the
present environmental system, but in a variety of other domains such as formal
pedagogy (e.g., interactive narratives for understanding other STEM topics),
social networking, games (e.g., massively multiplayer worlds in which players
create story nodes to drive the plot), and personal information architecture
(e.g., a geographically-anchored personal life history device). By focusing on
children as the target audience, this research will also make substantial
contributions to the emerging domain of child-centered computing. In particular,
this work will lay the foundation for further investigation into how story and
narrative can be used to create computational systems that even very young
children can readily utilize. The environmental themes of the system will also
conform to both national and California state guidelines for science education,
thus giving it the potential to be broadly deployed in formal classroom settings
as well as in informal learning contexts such as homes and science
museums.&lt;br/&gt;