* 0934953
* Mathematics Studio Fellowship Program - A Model for Mentoring New and Master Teachers
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2015
* Rebekah Elliott, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 05/31/2015
* USD 1,500,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Mathematics Studio Fellowship
Program involves a close collaboration between Oregon State University (OSU) and
Teachers Development Group (TDG), a non-profit organization for K-12
professional development in mathematics. It builds on a pilot program for the
studio classroom begun through the Oregon Mathematics Leadership Institute
(OMLI) Partnership. The OSU and TDG partners are providing a 5-year professional
development cycle for 8 Master Teaching Fellows (MTF), and a 5-year master's
degree and professional development program for 4 Teaching Fellows (TF).
Participating high needs school districts use the mathematics studio classroom
model, allowing for tight connections between the MTF and TF components of the
program. During the M.S. degree year, the pre-service TFs attend studio
classroom cycles, and later work as teachers in districts that have adopted the
studio classroom model. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a mathematics studio classroom,
which embodies many of the evidence-based principles for effective professional
development, school teachers and administrators sit on the periphery of the
classroom, observing while a peer (the studio teacher) conducts a lesson with
actual students. At the teacher's side is a coach who can suggest teaching
strategies "in the moment." Immediately following the lesson the resident
teachers and administrators, the studio teacher, and the coach engage in
facilitated discussion about the mathematics of the lesson, the mathematical
thinking of the students as evidenced by the classroom discourse, and the
influence of the teaching decisions and moves made during the class. In this
project, the MTFs serve as studio teachers, help to plan the studio cycles, and
begin to assume the role of coach. In addition they assist with the design and
co-teaching of a seminar in best practices in teaching mathematics that is
offered to the TFs. TFs participate as resident teachers in the studio
classrooms during their earliest field experiences. This model is thus serving
as a greenhouse for encouraging and nurturing deep and substantive professional
discourse about mathematics and student learning in the real context of
classroom teaching. The studio classroom structure is especially helpful in
supporting and nurturing new teachers by inducting them into a highly
functioning professional learning community.