* 0934593
* Pipeline for Excellent Rural Teachers (PERT) Project:  A Planning Grant Proposal
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Lisa Montplaisir, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 08/31/2011
* USD 74,999.00

Through this planning grant, steps are being taken to develop the framework for
the Pipeline for Excellent Rural Teachers (PERT) program that will train and
support both Teaching Fellows and Master Teaching Fellows. It is anticipated
that the partnership that emerges through this planning grant will include
several tribal high schools and colleges in the region. Due to the large
geographic area for the anticipated partnership, Fellows will be supported by an
online mentoring program that will be based on previous successful models for
mentoring in rural communities. The planning activities are beginning with a
needs assessment survey to determine the level of interest in the region for the
program and the expected outcomes. A partnership with the North Dakota
Association of Tribal Colleges is also being fostered during the planning
period. The educational curriculum for professional development of Master
teachers is being designed, drawing on existing courses and structures where
appropriate and a current master's degree program is being restructured to
accommodate the needs of the Teaching Fellows. Other planning activities include
identification of sources of university cost share, development and field-
testing of an online mentoring system, and development of a recruitment plan for
the Fellows.