* 0934254
* Increasing Seawater Filtration Capabilities to Enhance Coastal Mesocosm-scale Research
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2012
* David Secor, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 01/31/2012
* USD 114,155.00

The University of Maryland is awarded a grant to upgrade the seawater filtration
system at the Center for Environmental Science Chesapeake Biological Laboratory
(CBL). CBL is a center within the Chesapeake Bay for controlled aquatic
experiments at mesocosm scales (&gt;1 m3) with emphasis in fisheries,
restoration ecology, oceanography, and ecotoxicology. The new filtration system
will be sited in the new Fisheries Research Complex, which houses CBL's primary
seawater system of 1400 sq. ft. net assignable space. A principal requirement of
the seawater system is highly filtered seawater to avoid the inadvertent
influence of microbes, contaminants, and plankton that enters the seawater
supply. During spring and summer ambient seawater contains extremely high
concentrations of plankton, which exceeds the current filtration capacity and
restricts seawater flow during these important research seasons. The award
supports a variable flow, large capacity (300 gallons per minute) seawater
filtration system to curtail introduction of plankton and other suspended
materials down to 5 µm. A dual-bank set up will save energy while demand is low,
increase capacity during plankton blooms, and assure excess capacity for future
upgrades to the seawater facility. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This facilities
enhancement will increase educational opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate students and support CBL's "K through gray" outreach and teacher
training programs. Through CBL's Visitors Center, thousands of students, policy
makers, and members of the public have toured CBL's seawater facility, which
engages visitors in displays on sturgeon conservation, sea grass restoration,
Chesapeake Bay acidification, and other ongoing research. The enhancement will
also support critical research that continues to permit CBL faculty to provide
environmental and living resource managers with scientifically sound advisory
service. Past advisory service has resulted in more protective water quality
standards (i.e., dissolved oxygen) for Chesapeake Bay living resources; improved
fisheries management of blue crab, striped bass, menhaden, and sturgeons;
evaluation of restoration potential for eel grass and oysters; and improved
understanding of the benthic-pelagic coupling of nutrients and contaminants.