* 0934397
* Collaborative Research: USArray Data Processing Workshop for the Next Generation of Seismologists
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2010
* Suzan van der Lee, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 05/31/2010
* USD 24,546.00

This project is focused on a workshop to educate advanced graduate students,
post-docs, and other early career scientists on current state-of-the-art
concepts in data processing and high performance computing. The primary goal is
to produce a new set of leaders who are more able to exploit the large volumes
of data coming from the EarthScope program. The emphasis for this workshop will
be on USArray data, although methods to be discussed and developed here are
applicable to PBO and other digital waveform/time series data. By bringing
together domain experts in seismic data processing as instructors we expect to
also use the workshop as a first step for refining short-term and long-term
community needs in the data processing cyberinfrastructure required to support
the USArray program. The workshop will be held at Northwestern University in
late July to early August of 2009. We are planning for up to 15 students and
five or more guest lecturers in addition to the PIs. This will be a hands-on
short course with lectures followed by computer exercises designed to reinforce
the concepts being taught. Some exercises will use local computers, but many of
the exercises will utilize high performance computing machines that are part of
the NSF sponsored teragrid consortium. Students will complete a design concept
project at the conclusion of the workshop. They will be required to attempt to
implement their design after the workshop and present the results in the fall of
2009 in a webinar. Course materials will be organized and posted to the web in
collaboration with the Education and Outreach Program of the Incorporated
Research Institutions or Seismology. We expect these materials to be useful in
many graduate-level course in seismology.