* 0934415
* FSML:  Improvements at the Kewalo Marine Laboratory
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2011
* Robert Richmond, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2011
* USD 174,206.00

&lt;br/&gt; The University of Hawaii is awarded a grant to provide basic
instrumentation to the Kewalo Marine Laboratory that will allow and enhance the
ability to use molecular techniques in its research and training programs in
cellular, developmental, evolutionary, and environmental biology. The
instruments include a refrigerated table top centrifuge, a spectrophotometer
capable of quantifying small volumes of nucleic acid, a digital gel
documentation system capable of detecting chemiluminesence signals required for
Western, Northern and Southern blotting, a quartz pipette puller, a ballistic
gene gun, a microplate reader, and a microtome capable of cutting semi-thin
plastic sections. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Marine laboratories provide
unprecedented access to a diverse array of research opportunities unavailable at
most research universities. At the Kewalo Marine Laboratory, uniquely situated
adjacent to living coral reefs near downtown Honolulu, NSF-funded researchers
and their trainees use modern cellular and molecular approaches to investigate a
wide variety of basic biological phenomena utilizing a full range of marine
organisms, including mollusks, annelids, acoel flatworms, nemerteans, polyclad
flatworms, sipunculids, crustaceans, chaetognaths, kinorhynchs, placozoans,
ctenophores, sea anemones and local scleractinian corals. Each of these systems
has its own unique set of handling issues, optical properties, and learning
opportunities. Research at the Kewalo Marine Lab runs the gamut of studies on
the evolution of body plan diversity, life history evolution, regeneration, and
from symbiosis to investigations of the effects of biofilms and environmental
stressors on developing embryos and larvae. The instruments will facilitate the
research on local Hawaiian fauna by resident scientists at the Kewalo Marine
Laboratory, their diverse undergraduate and graduate students and postdoctoral
fellows, visiting scientists, and training programs that reach out to under-
represented Pacific Islander students and high school teachers. Further
information about Kewalo Marine Laboratory may be found at
http://www.kewalo.hawaii.edu/.&lt;br/&gt;