* 0934545
* Tuskegee University Robert Noyce Teaching Scholars in Mathematics and Science Education in the Alabama Black Belt
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2009,09/30/2015
* Walter Hill, Tuskegee University
* Standard Grant
* Nicole Bennett
* 09/30/2015
* USD 900,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of
2009&lt;br/&gt;(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tuskegee University is
providing two or three-year scholarships to 18 high achieving science and
mathematics majors preparing to become effective teachers who are committed to
teaching in high-need schools in 7 partnering rural school districts located in
Alabama Black Belt counties. The Noyce Scholars are provided with a purposeful,
discrete, hierarchal, sequential, inquiry-centered and topical curricula in each
year of their STEM major; and appropriately challenging and contemporary
mathematics and science teacher education foundation structured to be highly
synergistic with a professional practice infusion program element leading to
teaching certification. The project provides on-going support and mentoring for
program graduates after employment as teachers in the target high need school
districts. Noyce Scholars are required to participate in professional activities
including the Saturday Recruitment Academy, intensive summer short courses, new
teacher-mentor biannual sharing/support conferences, on-campus seminars and
selected regional conferences. Noyce Scholar graduates and their teacher
colleagues join Tuskegee University faculty as members of a learning community
to continuously improve training of teachers, student learning outcomes and
retention of effective teachers. The scholarship program was developed in
cooperation with a diverse group of personnel including teacher educators,
scientists, and mathematicians at Tuskegee University, the Deans of two of its
colleges, the University's Provost, along with school and district officials
from seven high needs Local Education Agencies (LEAs). The various elements of
the program prepare Noyce Scholars to be highly proficient in their STEM
discipline as well as understand the importance of applying the standards set
forth by bodies such as the Division of Education at Tuskegee University, the
Alabama Department of Education (Alabama Quality Teaching - AQT), National
Council for Accreditation of Teacher Education (NCATE), as well as essential
standards and objectives formulated by the National Council of Teachers of
Mathematics (NCTM) and the National Research Council (NRC). The project is
producing science and mathematics teachers knowledgeable about both the STEM
content and research-based teaching methodologies. Scholars have the academic
preparedness to make a profound impact on the mathematics and science education
of children from the partnering high needs school districts. In addition, the
Noyce Scholars also serve as mentors and role models for the children in the
high needs schools.