* 0934259
* EAGER: Application of 26Al-10Be Dating to Alluvial-Lacustrine Successions of Unaweep Canyon: Implications for Geomorphic and Climatic Evolution in the Colorado Plateau
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2011
* Gerilyn Soreghan, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 05/31/2011
* USD 42,266.00

EAGER: Application of 26Al-10Be Dating to Alluvial-Lacustrine Successions of
Unaweep Canyon: Implications for Geomorphic and Climatic Evolution in the
Colorado Plateau&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gerilynn Soreghan, University of
Oklahoma&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0934259&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Unaweep
Canyon of western Colorado is a geomorphic enigma whose age and origin has
considerable bearing on our understanding of landform and climate evolution of
the greater Colorado Plateau for both the late Paleozoic and late Cenozoic. This
proposal seeks funding for measurement of the cosmogenic radionuclides 26Al and
10Be in quartz from core and outcrop of Plio-Pleistocene sediment within and
near Unaweep Canyon. The Plio-Pleistocene sediments were newly mapped in
2003-2006, and the core was collected in 2004. Our preliminary data indicate
that Unaweep Canyon is a Paleozoic landform buried by later Paleozoic and
Mesozoic sediments and then re-exhumed during the Cenozoic, a controversial
claim. Despite considerable age-dating efforts in our previous research, we have
found no material in this sedimentary succession that can be dated using
conventional methods. Thus, the purpose of this proposal is to apply newly
developed methods of ?burial dating? based on the production and decay of
cosmic-ray-produced radionuclides to determine the age of the sediments from the
newly acquired core and the newly mapped outcrops. &lt;br/&gt;Successful dating
of the target sediments will yield three tangible benefits. First, it will solve
a significant regional geologic problem by establishing the timeline of
geomorphic events and will yield insight into the rate and nature of Cenozoic
fluvial incision of the Colorado Plateau?a long-standing problem. Second, it
will help to move a newly developed dating method from the developmental stage
into practical applications. Third, the borehole penetrates ~ 150 meters of
lacustrine sediments believed to be of middle Pleistocene age, thus offering the
potential to access an extremely valuable record of Pleistocene paleoclimate and
paleoenvironment. This work will also result in significant broader impacts,
including strengthening interdisciplinary collaborations, exposing students to
cutting-edge techniques, and disseminating the research via publication and
classroom use. This project is ?high risk-high payoff? because it involves
application of new expertise, but offers potential for great dividends in terms
of research advances in geomorphology and paleoclimate. &lt;br/&gt;