* 0934322
* CI-ADDO-EN: Collaborative Proposal: Supporting Web-Scale Experimentation using the Lemur Toolkit
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2016
* W. Bruce Croft, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 05/31/2016
* USD 530,000.00

This project maintains and enhances existing community software infrastructure,
and creates new community data infrastructure to enable the information
retrieval research community and related research communities to conduct
research on a "web scale", meaning datasets of a billion or more web pages
together with large query logs. The software infrastructure is based on the
Lemur Toolkit and the associated Indri search engine, which are used by many
information retrieval researchers due to the support for multiple retrieval
models, multiple forms of evidence, and a powerful probabilistic query language.
The enhancements to Lemur include support for the popular MapReduce style of
distributed processing and other efficiency improvements to make it practical to
do research on large web datasets 'out of the box' in common computer hardware
environments.

The new data infrastructure consists of maintenance and distribution of a newly
created billion-page dataset, another new web dataset, and large, anonymized
search logs that match the datasets. The combination of large datasets and
corresponding large search logs enable a broad community to conduct research
with more realistic data resources than were available previously. This research
will lead to further advances in the understanding of the underlying issues for
large-scale, personalized search, which will be an important part of the next
generation of search engines.

For further information, see the project web site at the URL:
http://www.lemurproject.org.