* 0934875
* SAGAMORE XVI Conference on Charge, Spin and Momentum Densities; Santa Fe, NM;
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2010
* Philip Coppens, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2010
* USD 30,000.00

0934875 Coppens

This award from the Division of Materials Research at NSF to the State
University of New York at Buffalo supports the participation of young scientists
at the Sagamore XVI Conference. The Conference will be held in Santa Fe, New
Mexico, from August 2-7, 2009 supports. The Sagamore conference started in the
US in 1964, has been held every three years in a number of countries, including
the UK, France, Finland, Germany, Sweden, Portugal, Poland, Australia, Japan,
and Canada. The meeting in 2009 will be the first in the United States in almost
40 years. NSF funds will support early career scientists including minority
participants, students, postdocs and young scientists. Early career scientists
will make up a significant fraction of the over 100 expected participants and
are expected to interact extensively on an informal basis with the more senior
scientists present. The conference will discuss a wide range of topics such as
charge, spin and momentum Densities, but this time will include sessions on
Modern Neutron Diffraction, electronic structure of nanoparticles and time-
resolved diffraction, which are rapidly developing related fields. The
conference is sponsored by the Department of Energy (DOE), the International
Union of Crystallography, and will be hosted by the Lujan Neutron Scattering
Center at Los Alamos National Laboratory.