* 0934502
* Financial Assistance for the CYGNUS 2009 Conference on Directional Dark Matter Detection; June 2009, Cambridge, MA
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2010
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 04/30/2010
* USD 7,000.00

This award will partially support the participation of younger scientists
(graduate students and postdoctoral researchers) in the CYGNUS 2009 Conference
on Directional Dark Matter Detection. It is the second in a series of meetings
dedicated to the theoretical and experimental challenges surrounding directional
dark matter detection. The conference will be held at MIT from June 11-13, 2009.

Astrophysical observations suggest that the matter content of the Universe is
dominated by nonbaryonic dark matter. Although dark matter is expected to
permeate our galaxy, no dark matter particle has been unambiguously detected
directly. Many groups worldwide have undertaken programs to search for the
interaction of dark matter particles with baryonic matter in the laboratory.
Because the interaction rates between dark matter and baryonic matter are so
small, these experiments are plagued by Standard Model backgrounds. The dark
matter signal, however, is astrophysical in origin, and should be separable from
backgrounds if the direction of arrival is measured. This idea has prompted
several international groups to pursue the development of dark matter detectors
that provide directional sensitivity.

The goal of the CYGNUS Conference series is to bring together the international
scientific community working on both theoretical and experimental aspects of
directional dark matter detection and Galactic dark matter distribution, and to
coordinate efforts towards a large future directional dark matter experiment.

For the Broader Impacts, all presentations will be archived and publicly
available through the conference website so that many others can take advantage
of the talks.