* 0934703
* California Coast Noyce Scholars
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Dale Oliver, Humboldt State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 08/31/2014
* USD 899,670.00

The Departments of Mathematics, Science, and Education at three California State
University (CSU) campuses that have strong undergraduate programs in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM), and a significant commitment to
teacher preparation, have come together in a project aimed at increasing
preparation of 43 math teachers for high-need schools in underserved regions.
The project establishes the California Coast Noyce Scholarship (CCNS)
partnership among these three CSU campuses - Humboldt State University (HSU),
CSU Channel Islands (CSUCI), and CSU Monterey Bay (CSUMB) - in order to double
the number of outstanding math teachers prepared to teach in high needs schools.
The strategies of this Noyce partnership address the fact that the lead campus,
HSU, has many undergraduates in STEM majors interested in teaching careers, but
is located in the north coast region of the state, with limited demand for new
teachers. The other two institutions, in two of the highest-growth regions in
the state, are not able to meet the large local demand for mathematics teachers.
Through this partnership, undergraduate Noyce Scholars are able to complete a
STEM degree at any of the three campuses, transfer seamlessly to one of the
other partner campuses for their teaching credential, and continue as a Noyce
Scholar during their post-baccalaureate teacher certification (credential)
program. The pathway is typically from HSU to CSUCI and CSUMB to prepare Noyce
Scholars for the teacher-shortage regions the campuses serve. Noyce Scholars on
each campus complete a rigorous undergraduate mathematics program and teacher
certification program. The CCNS project is an integral part of the mathematics
major on each campus and includes significant support for Scholars as
undergraduates and during their teacher credential program. The project also
provides scholarships to STEM professional career changers seeking math teaching
certification. The three campuses collaborate in an ongoing basis on common
projects and through continuous interaction in an online Noyce Scholars Teaching
Commons. In addition, they jointly host an annual conference for the Noyce
Scholars on the three campuses to meet one another, learn together, share ideas
and practices, and become part of a community that continues as they begin their
teaching careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is implementing and
evaluating a design for addressing the shortage of qualified mathematics and
science teachers by facilitating movement from a campus with a large supply of
STEM undergraduates and limited teaching opportunities to campuses in regions
that have a large unmet need for new mathematics teachers that cannot be
addressed by the local institutions that prepare new teachers. It is an
innovative approach that is helping to document and report on the factors that
make this type of transition a success and the challenges that must be overcome
for it to work effectively. Its strategies are being disseminated through
reports, publications, and presentations at state and national professional
association meetings. The CSU Chancellor's Office considers the program to be a
highly significant model and is sharing information about its leadership role
within the National Association of State University and Land Grant Colleges
(NASULGC) Science and Mathematics Teacher Imperative.