* 0934842
* CSUTeach:  Preparing a New Generation of Noyce Scholars
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2015
* Gregory Lupton, Cleveland State University
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Richardson
* 06/30/2015
* USD 899,747.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The UTeach model is transforming the
STEM teacher education program at the University. Features of intellectual merit
include developing compact four-year degree programs that include both a content
degree in mathematics, physics, biology or chemistry and teaching licensure.
This is being accomplished by melding education coursework with science,
engineering, mathematics, and technology content. Free one-credit courses and
paid summer internships provide early and continuing opportunities for STEM-area
freshman and sophomores to learn about STEM teaching as a career. Juniors and
seniors who commit to becoming Noyce Scholars receive $10,000 per year. The
Scholars complete field experiences in local, high-need schools that have
student populations that will expose the student teachers to an environment that
mirrors that anticipated at the first teaching job. New teachers receive ongoing
support through graduate coursework and professional development opportunities,
visits from UTeach Master teachers, and a dedicated online community for ongoing
discussions and networking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While this new model for
teacher preparation breaks with the traditional college of education program, it
retains all of the important features including research-based theories for
delivering content in the urban classroom, including culturally relevant
pedagogy and teaching students with exceptionalities. A total of 20 new STEM
teachers are being prepared by this UTeach Model. The University is the first
institution in Ohio to implement the UTeach model and promises to have broad
impact because the Chancellor of the University System of Ohio has indicated
interest in expanding this model to other state institutions. Partners in this
effort include the National Math and Science Initiative, the UTeach Institute,
the Ohio STEM Learning Network, and the Cleveland Metropolitan School District.