* 0934516
* CMG: Reconstructing Climate from Tree Ring Data
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Edward Cook, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 08/31/2013
* USD 598,083.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This project seeks better ways to use tree ring data to infer changes in
climate. Annual growth rings in trees have long been used as a primary means of
reconstructing climatic conditions over the past two millennia, extending our
knowledge of climate beyond the period of the instrumented record. However, tree
ring growth depends on factors other than climate, and non-climatic influences
must be removed when tree ring data is used for climate reconstruction.
Traditional methods for filtering out non-climatic influences can be too
extreme, removing some of the climate signal as well as the non-climate noise.
The research in this project will improve upon traditional filtering methods
using Bayesian hierarchical modeling, a technique in which statistical models
will be constructed to specify how tree rings growth is expected to vary in
response to both climatic and non-climatic (e.g. tree age) factors. The models
will then be combined with tree ring data to produce both climate
reconstructions and estimates of the level of uncertainty present in the
reconstructions. Additional research will consider the extent to which tree
ring-based reconstructions might benefit from changes in the way tree ring data
is collected. In particular, the potential benefit from taking additional cores
from each tree will be evaluated.

Tree ring-based climate reconstructions are an important source of information
on the range of natural climate fluctuations, and thus they play an important
role in assessing the extent to which recent climate changes are outside the
envelope of pre-industrial climate variability. The improvements in tree ring
analysis resulting from this research will thus have a broad impact on our
understanding of both natural and human-induced climate variation and change. In
addition, tree rings are an important source of information regarding the range
of past variability in water resources, which is of interest to water managers
in the semi-arid southwestern states. Beyond these benefits, the research will
develop statistical techniques which will be applicable to a range of scientific
problems in which the behavior of a complex system must be inferred from proxy
data.