* 0934595
* CMG: Multivariate Nonstationary Spatial Extremes in Climate and Atmospherics
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Peter Guttorp, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 09/30/2013
* USD 325,000.00

This project will develop methods to estimate the likelihood of extreme weather
and climate events, both in observations and in climate model simulations.
Extremes, expressed as the magnitude of an event that is only expected to occur
once in a given time period, such as the size of the 100-year flood, are central
to planning for infrastructural projects like dams and levees. But return times
for extreme events are difficult to estimate from the relatively short time
period available from the instrumented record. The calculation of expected
extreme values for a given return time is further complicated by long-term
trends in the data due to climate change, which contradict the stationarity
assumption on which traditional statistics is predicated. Beyond these temporal
issues, long-term data for extreme event studies is only available at specific
locations, while estimates of extreme value likelihood are desired over the
large intervening regions. The work conducted under this project will develop
statistical techniques to overcome the difficulties presented by nonstationarity
in time and sparseness in space. Three new frameworks will be introduced to
characterize extremes: (1) Nonparametric multivariate spatial Dirichlet-type
mixture models for the observations, (2) Bayesian nonparametric functional data
analysis to estimate multivariate spatial extremes, and (3) Mixture models, with
marginals that have generalized extreme value (GEV) distributions with spatially
varying parameters and the observations are spatially-correlated even after
accounting for the spatially varying parameters. The research will produce
spatial maps of extreme values for temperature, both from observations and
climate model simulations of the recent past (1970-2000).

The research will be of interest to a large audience including statisticians,
climatologists, and resource managers. One motivation for the work is the
problem of determining how the frequency of extreme events will change in a
changing climate. Climate change is usually expressed in terms of changes in
long-term means averaged over large regions, but the adverse impacts associated
with changes in extremes, such as increases in the occurrence of heat waves, can
pose greater challenges than changes in means. In addition, planning for extreme
events is usually conducted based on past occurrences of extremes, but new
techniques such as the ones developed here will be required to anticipate the
likelihood of extremes in a changing climate.