* 0934210
* Jasper Ridge: Facilities for Understanding Wildland/Suburban Boundaries
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2009,02/28/2013
* Christopher Field, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 02/28/2013
* USD 249,582.00

Stanford University is awarded a grant to upgrade environmental monitoring
capabilities at its Jasper Ridge Biological Preserve (JRBP). This proposal
requests funds for infrastructure to implement a revised mission for the
preserve, to better understand and manage the urban/wildland interface,
especially it biological diversity. The requested funds will: a) expand
broadband network infrastructure to extend connectivity to at least 80% of JRBP
lands, b) install an array of soil moisture sensors in grassland habitats for
monitoring habitat conditions known to affect native biodiversity, c) install
and test fire detection units near the boundaries of the preserve, along with
cameras to monitor mammals at the perimeter and interior of the preserve, and d)
document the condition of various habitats in an efficient, low-impact,
standardized way using close-range remote sensing. These technologies will help
JRBP monitor the urban/wildland interface, engage surrounding landowners in
preserving local biodiversity, and help offset external impacts with internal
policies. It will allow JRBP to conduct more vegetation management and
restoration activities in a research context, while still protecting both
longterm and new research that is strictly observational.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Jasper Ridge Biological Preserve is a 482 ha protected
natural area contiguous with and owned by Stanford University. The preserve is
distinguished by a combination of four features - a history of fundamental and
influential discoveries, a balanced emphasis on research, education, and
conservation, a high biotic diversity relative to its size, and a location on
the campus of a major university near a metropolitan area. JRBP is used as a
research site by faculty and students from Stanford as well as many other
universities. In recent years, the site has hosted 55 to 68 research projects at
any time. The site is used by many college classes, with 1200 to 2600 Stanford
student visits per year, plus approximately 500 by students at other colleges.
JRBP is also active in K-12 education, regional land management coordination,
and public education. The equipment to be installed with funds from this award
will support Stanford and non-Stanford research, class experiences, interactions
with land managers, K-12 education, and outreach to the general public. Further
information about Jasper Ridge may be found at http://jrbp.stanford.edu/.