* 0934300
* Collaborative Research:  Planning Grant: I/UCRC for the Ceramic, Composite and Optical Materials Center
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2010
* Joseph Kolis, Clemson University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 07/31/2010
* USD 10,000.00

Planning Grant for an I/UCRC for the Ceramic, Composite and Optical Materials
Center

0934300 Clemson University; Dennis Smith 0934258 Rutgers University; Richard
Haber The Center for the Ceramic, Composite and Optical Materials Center (CCOMC)
will focus on providing a broader range of relevant technologies critical to
materials-based companies. Clemson University and Rutgers University are
collaborating to establish the proposed center, with Clemson University as the
lead institution.

The Center for Ceramic Research (CRC) at Rutgers University, a past member of an
ending NSF I/UCRC for Ceramic and Composite Materials Center, proposes to join
with the Center for Optical Material Science and Engineering Technologies
(COMSET) at Clemson University to form the proposed new Center (CCOMC) with new
technological thrusts. COMSET has developed a strong industrial base, with three
spin-off companies that, combined with Rutgers University, would provide a new
and unique research program. The proposed Center (CCOMC) will focus on five
thrust areas including ceramic materials and processing, nanoparticulates and
processes, opaque and transparent armor ceramics, optical material synthesis and
processing, and materials for energy conversion. The proposed research program
across the five thrust areas will be carried out by an interdisciplinary group
of faculty and across different academic disciplines. The PIs are well-qualified
and have adequate resources to conduct the proposed research. Both institutions
in this Center plan to use the NSF planning grant fund to hold a meeting with
prospective industrial partners to establish the proposed Center's
organizational framework, and to establish research projects of greatest
relevance.

The proposed center (CCOMC) has the potential to improve sustainability and
profitability of US manufacturing by developing new technologies in the ceramic,
optic and composite material field. CCOMC has plans in place for involving
under-represented groups, to recruit highly qualified faculty and graduate
students, and to motivate undergraduate students through unique research
experiences and fellowships. Results will be disseminated through semi-annual
meetings, publications, and a website for information, results and
accomplishments. CCOMC will continue to integrate research and education; and by
providing hands-on experience to students, the Center will attempt to motivate
students to go beyond common approaches towards learning by hands-on experiences
in state-of-the-art facilities focusing on today's relevant materials issues.

