* 0934837
* CMG RESEARCH:  Predictive Modeling of Thermally Driven Hydrologic Fluxes for Land and Atmosphere Interactions Across Space and Time Scales
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,12/31/2014
* Binayak Mohanty, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 12/31/2014
* USD 450,000.00

Soil moisture plays a critical role in many environmental and hydroclimatic
applications. In fact, soil moisture is so central to understanding land and
atmosphere exchange that the 2007 Phoenix Mars Mission included devices
specifically designed to measure soil temperature, thermal properties, and water
content. Recognizing the importance of soil moisture as a vital state variable,
the 2007 NRC Earth Science Decadal Survey report recommended the satellite
mission Soil Moisture Active/Passive (SMAP) for global soil moisture mapping.
There are other ongoing global missions, such as the C-ban AMSR-E sensor on the
AQUA satellite, which provides soil moisture of the top 1cm of the earth?s skin
with two orbital daily coverages in the Southern Great Plains of the U.S.
Routine measurements by remote sensing are unable to capture rapidly shifting
near-surface soil, heat, and water transport processes despite their importance
to understanding land surface hydrology. Because of that, the need for
mathematical models to estimate such variabilities and to predict large-scale
behavior is more imperative than ever. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work
focuses on developing predictive multiscale models for soil moisture dynamics
based on liquid and vapor flow coupled with heat transport. These models take
into account complex nonlinear interactions at different spatial and temporal
scales. Uncertainties at the fine scale are modeled via probabilistic models.
The proposed methodologies are designed to readily incorporate available dynamic
data at different scales and, thus, will provide an improved guidance for ground
validations of upcoming space missions concerning measurements of soil moisture
and temperature for heterogeneous subsurface environments.