* 0934855
* Noyce Physics-Mathematics
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2009,09/30/2015
* Diane Miller, Middle Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 09/30/2015
* USD 899,972.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The College of Basic and Applied
Sciences at Middle Tennessee State University is preparing 36 new physics and
mathematics secondary teachers over 5 years. Students major in either math or
physics, complete thirty semester hours in the other discipline, and are
certified to teach both disciplines in the state of Tennessee. Students receive
deep content knowledge in the basic and applied science courses taught by
faculty that model strong discipline-specific pedagogy. Traditional classroom
management and educational psychology courses are provided by the education
department. Starting in their freshman year, the pre-service teachers practice
hands-on, inquiry-based teaching under the guidance of master teachers and
quality classroom mentors, so they learn to model the practice of inquiry.
Careful selection of the master teachers and classroom mentors ensure that the
pre-service students receive a rigorous and inspiring introduction to the
teaching profession. Students are paired with a master teacher from the moment
they enter the program. This relationship continues through their induction
period. Induction support includes visits from the master teacher, a website for
sharing concerns and finding information that will aid their teaching such as
lesson plans, potential classroom speakers, and sites for field trips.