* 0934491
* CMG: Coarse-graining and Multiscale Analysis of Stochastic Particle-resolved Aerosol Models
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Lee DeVille, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 08/31/2014
* USD 773,466.00

This research project seeks better ways to simulate atmospheric aerosols, or
tiny particles suspended in air. Aerosols are important for at least three
reasons: 1) they include harmful particulate pollution, 2) they include
condensation nuclei which are essential for the formation of clouds and
precipitation, and 3) they affect Earth's temperature, both directly by
reflecting sunlight back to space and indirectly by affecting the reflectivity
of clouds. Aerosols are difficult to simulate in weather and climate models
because of their large numbers, small size, and the complex ways in which they
form, interact with each other, and dissipate. Due to limitations in computing
power, aerosols are often represented in very simple ways, and many atmospheric
models track aerosol concentration only as a function of the effective radius of
the particles. But in reality aerosols of a given size behave quite differently
depending on their chemical makeup (e.g. sulfate, nitrate, ammonium, sea salt,
black carbon, mineral dust, etc.), so that it would take perhaps 20 separate
parameters to properly describe each particle. The coarse-graining technique to
be developed in this project provides a framework for developing approximate
aerosol simulation techniques, in which aerosol concentrations are simulated by
tracking the evolution of a finite number of randomly generated
"superparticles". Each superparticle represents a distribution of particles in
the 20-dimensional parameter space, and the aerosol simulation is accomplished
by tracking the evolution of the superparticles.

The project will have several benefits beyond its contribution to aerosol
simulation. For the broader scientific community, improvements in aerosol
simulation will lead to better simulations of climate change, since much of the
uncertainty in climate simulations comes from uncertainty in aerosols and their
interactions with clouds. Better aerosol simulation also means an improved
ability to simulate particulate air pollution, which will lead to improvements
in air quality assessment and forecasting. In addition, the project will support
education through the development of an undergraduate course in which calculus
concepts are taught through their application to atmospheric thermodynamics.