* 0934878
* Texas Leadership Initiative: Mathematics Instruction Transformed (Texas LIMIT)
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2009,09/30/2015
* Lesa Beverly, Stephen F. Austin State University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 09/30/2015
* USD 1,494,187.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Texas Leadership Initiative:
Mathematics Instruction Transformed (Texas LIMIT) project represents a
partnership among Stephen F. Austin State University, five east Texas school
districts (Nacogdoches ISD, Lufkin ISD, Palestine ISD, Tyler ISD, and Rusk ISD),
the Region 7 Education Service Center, and the non-profit Educational
Advancement Foundation. The partners are working together to develop and retain
sixteen Master Teaching Fellows who will be secondary mathematics leaders able
to facilitate efforts to improve mathematics instruction in their respective
schools and districts. The Fellows are participating in a leadership training
program that provides in-depth study of mathematics and educational leadership,
are providing mentoring to inservice and preservice teachers, and are
functioning as content specialists within their districts on a variety of
advanced mathematics topics. Fellows are also participating in leadership
training to include differentiated instruction for diverse populations and
inquiry-based/discovery learning. The project is being rigorously assessed to
determine the impact of the program on the Fellows' content knowledge,
pedagogical content knowledge, instructional practices, and leadership
knowledge, ability, and practice and ultimately the impact of the program on
their students' mathematics learning and participation in advanced-level
mathematics courses.