* 0934288
* Expanding Collaborative Research and Education Opportunities to Protect Biological Diversity on Public Lands in Upstate New York
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2010,03/31/2013
* Peter Fauth, Hartwick College
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 03/31/2013
* USD 24,811.00

Hartwick College is awarded a grant to develop a five-year strategic plan for
the Robert R. Smith Environmental Field Station (Smith EFS), located on the Pine
Lake Environmental Campus (PLEC). The funding expands opportunities for research
and education in collaboration with state agencies responsible for the recently
created Riddell State Park (RSP), which borders Pine Lake. The Smith EFS will
produce a five-year strategic plan that will enable two specific goals, 1)
create a unique partnership between the Smith EFS and New York State Office of
Parks, Recreation, and Historic Places (OPRHP) involving research and education
focusing on the impact of recreation on the biological and ecological diversity
of public lands, and 2) enhance the capacity of the Smith EFS to support the
partnership and expand its role as a center for research, education, and
training. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the effects of non-consumptive
outdoor recreation on wildlife in different habitats will become increasingly
important as the popularity of such activities continue to increase. To this
end, Riddell State Park is an ideal location for establishing research on the
impacts of recreation on ecosystems because plans to develop its public
facilities have not yet begun. The collaborative partnership at RSP provides an
opportunity for Hartwick science students and faculty to work with state agency
biologists and external researchers to design thoughtful studies that
investigate the potential long-term impacts of recreational use on public lands,
including pre- and post-development comparisons of population abundances and
distributions. The strategic management plan will greatly enhance the statewide
profile of Smith EFS and enable the field station to meet the collaborative
research and education initiatives planned for RSP. This project will advance
discovery and understanding of ecological impacts of public lands use at the
species, community, and ecosystem levels. The involvement of college and pre-
college students, K-12 teachers, underrepresented populations, and the local
public in Smith EFS educational initiatives will increase ecological literacy
among the general population and enhance the participation of these stakeholders
in the sustainable management of public lands via their connections to and
influences on the greater community.&lt;br/&gt;