* 0934520
* SOLAR: Novel Nanomaterials and Mathematical Analysis for Ultra-High Efficiency Photovoltaic Systems: A New Paradigm in Solar Cells
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Ronald Coifman, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 07/31/2013
* USD 1,728,445.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;Increasing solar cell efficiency and affordability
are critical objectives for achieving energy sustainability. The use of
semiconducting nanomaterials paired with organic semiconducting polymers offers
promise here, with the possibility to realize cost effective high performance
heterojunction devices. Current approaches however are limited by small exciton
diffusion lengths and the sub-optimal transport characteristics of the
percolated nanomaterial aggregates found in today?s state of the art devices.
Overcoming these limitations can lead to significant breakthroughs in solar cell
performance. This proposal aims to address the above mentioned limitations. The
proposed work is a 3-year project that focuses on the synthesis of novel
nanomaterials with long excitonic lifetimes such as GaN single walled nanotubes,
and the use of well aligned self-assembled mesophases as templates for the
directed assembly of these novel nanomaterials. Assembly of anisotropic
nanomaterials in nm-spaced arrays will provide significantly increased photo-
induced charge transfer by providing electron-hole dissociation surfaces of
high, controllable periodicity, separated by length scales that are smaller than
the exciton diffusion length itself. . Dissociation at these aligned surfaces
provides direct electron conduction pathways to the external electrodes of the
device. The organization of this high surface area for exciton dissociation will
be accomplished using methods that are scalable and do not require advanced
lithography. Harmonic analysis will be leveraged to considerably enhance both ab
initio calculations of the electro-optical properties of novel nanomaterials and
design of experiments in the multi-parameter space that correlates photo-voltaic
performance with material composition and device
assembly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
work will provide the design basis for clean and sustainable energy generation.
Successfully executed, it will result in new materials and processes enabling
higher efficiency and more cost-effective solar cells. This project has a broad
technical impact as the materials and methods developed during the course of the
basic research can be applied in other areas such as thermoelectric energy
harvesting, light emitting diodes, photodetectors and advanced chemical
separations. A number of educational and outreach activities have been
integrated into the proposed work. These include a research seminar program run
in partnership with three undergraduate focused institutions, recruitment of
students, especially from underrepresented groups, for summer research projects
and the creation of a new module on experimental design for the introductory
undergraduate Chemical Engineering course at Yale University. The impacts of the
proposed research overall are: (1) Development of new science that will drive
transformative advances in solar technology (2) Development of materials and
methods with a broad range of technological relevance beyond photovoltaics (3)
Highly interdisciplinary training of graduate students and researchers cutting
across chemistry, materials science and mathematics (4) Involvement and
mentoring of undergraduate students in research (5) Recruitment of
underrepresented groups to science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;