* 0934806
* CMG RESEARCH: The Application of Polar Field Theories to Large-Scale Continental Deformation
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2014
* Natalie Domelle, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 09/30/2014
* USD 510,996.00

Plate tectonics theory cannot account for the observed motions occurring within
continental plate boundary zones, where deformation is diffuse, spatially
complex, and accommodated over multiple faults. Studies of block and continuous
deformation models are equally successful at reproducing GPS data in continental
regions, thus highlighting non-uniqueness. Therefore, in order to better
understand the nature of deforming continental lithosphere we propose to apply
polar field theories, a generalization of classical continuum mechanics that
allows for viscous flow with substructure, to model these regions. The goal of
this proposal is to (1) test if continental deforming lithosphere can be modeled
as coherent structures in a micropolar fluid whose motion is driven by the
stress field boundary conditions resulting from the relative motions of rigid
tectonic plates; (2) identify coherent (block) structures that can be obtained
in a mean field sense by a statistical mechanical formalism; (3) use projection
operator tools to examine relaxation to coherent structures and related
phenomena; in order to understand the nature of continental deformation.

The ability of plate tectonics theory to explain the motion of rigid spherical
caps or plates with respect to each other tends to break down along continental
boundaries of plates where relative plate motions are taken up over 100s to
1000s of km over numerous faults. This diffuse nature of continental plate
boundaries have led researchers to model continental lithosphere as a continuous
viscous fluid where the effect of individual faults at the surface are
integrated over the length scale of the entire plate boundary. Others have
argued that the brittle nature individual faults act as 'mini' plate boundaries
and have modeled deforming continental lithosphere as a finite number of
rotating rigid blocks separated by large strike-slip faults sliding past each
other in a 'mini plate tectonics' system. Recent studies of both classes of
models show that solutions to observations are non-unique. In reality, the
behavior of the continental lithosphere is not a single end member case and the
exact nature of the deforming continental lithosphere is still not fully
understood. In classical continuum mechanics there is an implicit assumption of
a discrete scale separation between the 'physical' particles (atoms, molecules,
crystals, grains, etc.) and the 'material' particles (e.g. fluid particles).
However, there is a large subset of matter that cannot be adequately modeled by
classical continuum mechanics, because no such discrete scale separation exists.
Such materials can often, however, be adequately modeled by a generalization of
classical continuum theories, known as polar continuum mechanics. In this
proposal we put forward the hypothesis that the continental lithosphere is yet
another example of a polar continuum and propose to apply polar theories, which
can naturally allow for both intra-plate deformation and narrow concentrated
zones of deformation to fully understand the nature of continental deformation.