* 0934839
* Top Notch Teachers with Dual Degrees at the University of Missouri T2D2@MU
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2009,09/30/2015
* John Adams, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* John Haddock
* 09/30/2015
* USD 891,728.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's aim is to double the
number of secondary science teachers graduating from Missouri University -
Columbia's undergraduate science teacher education program. Contributing to the
achievement of this goal are: 1) recruitment of highly qualified STEM
undergraduates into science teaching careers; 2) preparation to teach science
that is aligned with national standards; and 3) support for science teachers
during the new teachers' induction years. The recruitment strategies include
informal science internships for ten freshmen and sophomore students during the
summers of 2010, 2011, and 2012. During the project's third through fifth years
a total of fifty $11,000 annual scholarships will be awarded to thirty juniors
and seniors enrolled in the dual science and education degree program.
Scholarship recipients are obligated to teach science for two years in a high
need school district (preferably in Missouri) for each year they received a
scholarship. This obligation must be completed within eight years of graduation.
Partner school districts include Hannibal School District No. 60, Mexico
Missouri Public Schools, Moberly School District, and the Saint Louis Public
Schools. Noyce Scholars while serving as student teachers and as new teachers
participate in the Noyce Scholar Support Network (NSSN), an on-line
collaboration and learning environment where past, current, and future Noyce
Scholars, along with Missouri University science educators and scientists, form
a community of learners. Instrumental to increasing teacher retention is a cadre
of mentor teachers in the partner schools, and support for Noyce Scholars to
participate in state and regional science teacher
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;