* 0934825
* Support of Junior Scientists to Participate in the 2009 Gordon Conference on Nuclear Chemistry
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2010
* Mark Riley, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 04/30/2010
* USD 5,005.00

This award provides support for 14 junior scientists from US institutes to
attend the 2009 Gordon Research Conference on Nuclear Chemistry. With subtitle
?Nuclear Structure through Spectroscopy and Reactions? the conference focuses on
the latest and sometimes controversial research at the cutting edge of
fundamental nuclear science. Topics include: Structure of light nuclei: Abinitio
calculations and clustering; Structure of exotic nuclei from spectroscopy and
reactions; Nuclear structure near exotic shell closures; Advances in nuclear
astrophysics; Novel nuclear shapes and high-spin structure; Production and
spectroscopy of heavy nuclei; Phonon excitations and algebraic models; Structure
from masses, moments and transition rates; Exotic decay modes and weak
interactions; New instruments for frontier research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
conference addresses key questions stated in the NSAC Long Range Plan for
Nuclear Physics, particularly concerning the science associated with the latest
generation of radioactive beam accelerator facilities. This being the 57th
Nuclear Chemistry GRC, the conference has a proven record of gathering the key
players in a format that is conducive to the conception of future directions for
the field and the formation of new research
partnerships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The participation of under-represented
minority groups, women and younger scientists in the conference will be
encouraged, applying the principles of affirmative action. The invited speakers
include several women; in fact the first two speakers on the program are women.
The vice chair of the conference is a woman, as is the previous chair.