* 0934827
* CMG Collaborative Research:  Multiscale Modeling of the Coupling between Langmuir Turbulence and Submesoscale Variability in the Oceanic Mixed Layer
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2014
* Gregory Chini, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 09/30/2014
* USD 451,010.00

A proper parameterization of upper ocean mixing processes is important for ocean
climate models. This is a particularly difficult problem because it includes
both the effects of vertical turbulent mixing, tending to destratify the
boundary layer, and submesoscale lateral mixing and slumping, tending to
stratify the boundary layer. The vertical mixing is dominated by Langmuir
turbulence, in which both wind stress and surface wave Stokes drift drive an
upper ocean turbulent boundary layer. The lateral mixing is dominated by
submesoscale instabilities, with O(1) Rossby and Richardson numbers, driven by
lateral density and velocity gradients. These are particularly prominent at
ocean fronts. Taken together, these processes span a range of scales (meters to
tens of kilometers) equal to that spanned by eddy-resolving climate models
(kilometers to tens of megameters). Understanding and parameterizing this regime
is a grand challenge to mathematical theory, modeling and
observation.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This project will bring together new
approaches in multiscale asymptotic theory, large eddy simulations (LES) of
turbulence, and ocean observations to tackle the difficult problem of upper
ocean, three-dimensional, submesoscale mixing. The theoretical approach uses
asymptotic analysis to produce reduced equation sets. A new asymptotically
reduced version of the Craik?Leibovich equations describing anisotropic Langmuir
turbulence will be used to model vertical wind-wave driven. This study aims to
apply similar techniques to the competing lateral submesoscale processes to
obtain reduced, coarse-scale equations which capture the submesoscale dynamics
and their two-way coupling with Langmuir turbulence. A series of numerical
experiments using both the reduced equations and the full equations with LES
turbulence closures will be conducted to test the accuracy of the reduced models
and to develop scaling laws for the coupled multi-scale
system.&lt;br/&gt;Results emerging from these theoretical efforts will be
verified by comparison with existing measurements of upper ocean vertical
kinetic energy, vertical heat and buoyancy fluxes, and energy and scalar
dissipation rates made using Lagrangian floats. These data will be compared to
predictions of Langmuir turbulence, for floats deployed in regions of low
horizontal gradients, and to predictions including submesoscale processes, for
floats deployed in regions of higher gradients. Parameterizations of the coupled
processes will be embedded in coarser resolution IPCC-class OGCMs and the
results compared with those of existing mixing parameterizations and global
climatological data sets.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The new parameterizations
may result in significant improvements in the ability of IPCC-class OGCMs to
predict climate change. Moreover, it is likely that the multiscale modeling
methodology developed by the PIs can be generalized to treat the atmospheric
boundary layer, with embedded roll vortical structures not dissimilar to
Langmuir circulation. Multiscale continuum nonlinear dynamical systems, such as
the ocean surface mixed layer addressed in this proposal, are ubiquitous in
engineering applications and applied sciences including, but hardly limited to,
geophysics, oceanography, meteorology, and astrophysics. A promising (and
arguably the sole robust) route for gaining insight into the complex behavior
exhibited by these systems is through investigations made by multidisciplinary
teams. This project will form such a team, collaborating across disciplines,
between theory and observation, and among three different institutions. Finally,
the project will enable postdoctoral scholars and a graduate student to receive
advanced training and mentoring in the disciplines of physical oceanography,
fluid dynamics, observational data analysis and applied and computational
mathematics. These next generation researchers will be given an excellent
opportunity to learn this modern and truly interdisciplinary approach to
scientific inquiry.&lt;br/&gt;