* 0934643
* The Role of International Students  in Domestic Engineering Graduate Student Recruitment and Retention
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Lisa McNair, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Donna Riley
* 09/30/2013
* USD 200,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This engineering education research
award to Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University will employ
researchers to develop a clearer understanding of the role that international
students play in establishing the culture of a graduate engineering community,
such as a department or research group, with particular emphasis on how this
community affects domestic student recruitment and retention. Investigating the
socialization of engineering graduate students in engineering communities that
are internationally diverse compared to many undergraduate environments
represents a major step in identifying a potential significant factor affecting
domestic graduate student attrition. Understanding the factors that influence
attrition will ultimately increase domestic undergraduate enrollment and
retention in graduate programs. An advisory board of engineering graduate deans,
a department head, and a graduate education researcher from four collaborating
institutions will oversee the project and host a summit of 40 engineering
graduate deans, department heads, faculty, and graduate students in 2011 in
Washington, DC. Results from this research are likely to have a significant
impact on understanding what universities can do to foster an environment that
is conducive to increasing domestic participation in engineering Ph.D. programs.
Increasing such participation will enhance the innovation potential of US
universities and thus contribute directly to economic competitiveness.