* 0934998
* Collaborative Research:  Sustainability in Supply Chain Management and Facility Logistics Curriculum
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Abhijit Gosavi, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Alan Cheville
* 07/31/2011
* USD 149,838.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This engineering education research award to the Missouri University of Science
and Technology will employ researchers to create an integrated engineering
curriculum that emphasizes sustainability and globalization in the context of
green manufacturing and green facility logistics. Course projects will be
developed and pursued by teams composed of students at four partner
institutions, namely: Missouri University of Science and Technology, Colorado
State University-Pueblo, University of Puerto Rico-Mayaguez, and the Universidad
Publica de Navarra (Spain). The curriculum re-design is systems oriented and
subjected to multiple levels of assessment that are anticipated to answer
research questions relating to the efficacy with which sustainability concepts
were learned by students, both individually and in teams. Outreach is planned
with local K-12 school districts through teacher professional development using
project-created materials. The collaborative partnership will create a flexible
pipeline of students that stimulates concurrent interest in engineering in K-12
students. This will encourage more student awareness of sustainability
engineering and lead to more engineering graduates needed to fill engineering
jobs.