* 0934709
* PRIME: Preparing Regional Increases in Mathematics Educators - A Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2015
* Sarah Kasten, NORTHERN KENTUCKY UNIVERSITY RESEARCH FOUNDATION (DO NOT USE)
* Standard Grant
* John Haddock
* 07/31/2015
* USD 897,690.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Northern Kentucky University (NKU)
selects talented undergraduate students interested in mathematics education and
prepares them to be fully qualified, well-prepared teachers who will teach
secondary mathematics in high-need schools. The University provides them on-
going support during their early teaching years. The project is a collaboration
among NKU, and three school districts: Covington Independent and Newport
Independent Schools in Kentucky and Cincinnati Public Schools in Ohio. The
project supports two-year scholarships to a minimum of 28 academically talented
students in their junior and senior years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NKU's program
includes the following elements: an aggressive recruiting plan which includes a
partnership with Cincinnati State Technical and Community College; opportunities
for incoming freshmen and rising sophomores to engage in summer experiences
designed to stimulate their interest in becoming secondary mathematics teachers
working in high-need schools; two-year scholarships for carefully selected,
academically talented students in their junior and senior years; an outstanding
teacher preparation program including valuable enhancements that foster a
community of learners and expose participants to contemporary literature on, and
effective practices in the teaching and learning of secondary mathematics; and
mentoring and coaching support for program
graduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Program graduates have a direct, positive impact
on the high school students they teach, and, by serving as role models for other
teachers in the high-need schools, the graduates benefit the education of even
more students in meaningful ways. The program is generating information about
strategies that are effective in recruiting undergraduates, graduating them as
teachers committed to working in high need schools and retaining them in the
teaching profession. This information can be used nationally to enhance programs
for pre-service and in-service teachers.