* 0934714
* Robert Noyce Scholarship Program at the University of Vermont
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Lesley-Ann Dupigny-Giroux, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Lidia C. Yoshida
* 08/31/2015
* USD 899,926.00

The goal of the Robert Noyce Scholarship Program at the University of Vermont
(UVM) in collaboration with Burlington and Milton High schools is to address the
serious deficiency of highly qualified science teachers in the nation's high
need schools by identifying and cultivating a total of 67 STEM (science,
technology, engineering and mathematics) undergraduate students and
professionals who are interested in pursuing a secondary science teaching
career. The program is based on innovative and culturally responsive science
pedagogy combined with expertise in up-to-date scientific research and is being
implemented in three parts. First, the program is providing 40 undergraduate
freshman and sophomore STEM students with opportunities to conduct scientific
research and explore science teaching as a career alongside scientists and
science teachers through a 10 week summer science program. Second, the UVM Noyce
Program is providing 12 junior and senior STEM undergraduates who are pursuing
science teaching as a career with scholarships and opportunities to engage in
professional internships and peer mentorship programs. Third, the UVM Noyce
Program is supporting 15 STEM professionals to pursue coursework at UVM toward a
Master of Arts in Teaching degree and secondary science teacher licensure. The
Noyce Program is recruiting a competitive pool of STEM undergraduates and
professionals through marketing and advertising that is enticed by Noyce
stipends and scholarship support. UVM's Noyce Program is seeking to develop and
disseminate innovative pedagogical and mentorship practices that effectively
recruit, educate and retain highly qualified and committed future science
teachers.