* 0934731
* MTSU NSF Master Teaching Fellowship Program
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2009,09/30/2015
* Michaele Chappell, Middle Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Nicole Bennett
* 09/30/2015
* USD 1,496,765.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The Middle Tennessee State University (MTSU) NSF Master Teaching Fellowship
Program is aligning, coordinating, and integrating resources across the College
of Education, College of Basic and Applied Sciences, STEM Industry Partners,
non-profit partners (the Rutherford County Chamber of Commerce and
Mind2Marketplace), and 6 high needs P-12 school districts (DeKalb, Grundy,
Lewis, Lawrence, and Rutherford Counties and Tullahoma City) to select and
support the development of 14 master teachers to become MTSU NSF Master Teaching
Fellows. While these master teachers already possess the requisite criteria to
be considered master teachers, their effect on their school and district is
being transformed through their development and empowerment into a professional
learning community of Master Teaching Fellows (MTFs), leading educational
transformation across all STEM disciplines in high-needs schools. The 14 master
teachers are assessed via a series of content, pedagogy, pedagogical content
knowledge, STEM workforce development skills, and educational leadership
instruments. Based on the data from these pre-assessments, the Master Teaching
Fellows participate in a collaborative inquiry development process that
generates an annual Master Teaching Fellow Enhancement Plan (MTF-EP). The
project is supporting each MTF with an annual $10,000 salary supplement/stipend
for five years. Additionally, the MTFs are supported with a team of content,
pedagogy, and leadership mentors from MTSU as well as a district administrative
partner and a STEM Industry partner as they take on an instructional leadership
role in their school and district. The common transformative element of the
program is the annual lesson design / action research project. All Master
Teaching Fellows develop and implement a lesson design / action research project
each year and present their findings to colleagues, administrators, and regional
and/or national conference audiences. Through the consistent and regular
participation of teachers, administrators, STEM industry partners and university
faculty, the project is seeking to institutionalize lesson design / action
research as a sustained element within the school districts' school improvement
and professional development programs.