* 0934739
* CMG:  Functional Data Modeling of Climate-Ecosystem Dynamics
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Mark Friedl, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 08/31/2013
* USD 363,851.00

The goal of this project is to develop better methods for analyzing the response
of vegetation to changes in climate. Satellite observations of the earth's
surface can be used to track changes in vegetation over the last three decades,
and the task of relating these changes to changes in climate is both important
and challenging. Among the significant changes are the earlier onset of the
growing season and "greening" and "browning" trends occurring in high northern
latitudes, apparently in response to increases in surface temperature. Research
conducted in this project will attempt to quantify climate-vegetation
relationships using "functional data analysis", a form of analysis in which a
set of functions is used to represent variations of vegetation in space and
time. Once these functions are defined, their characteristics can be related to
trends and fluctuations in climate. Changes in the date of spring onset, the
length of the growing season, and other phenological changes can be studied by
associating them with properties of the functions and their derivatives. For
example, the onset and termination of growing seasons may be defined by points
of inflexion, or zero-crossings of the second derivatives of the functions,
while the peak of the growing season occurs at a zero-crossing of the first
derivative. A particular challenge in relating remotely-sensed vegetation to
climate variations is the heterogeneity of the land surface, as surface
characteristics can vary tremendously over short distances. The challenges posed
by land surface heterogeneity will be addressed by "mixture modeling". In this
modeling framework the different land surface types found in satellite
observations are represented by a linear superposition of probability density
functions, which can be characterized through cluster analysis. The work will
lead to improvements in our ability to identify and quantify the vegetation
response to climatic changes in regions where land surface type is highly
variable.

Research conducted under this grant will address a question which is both
scientifically and societally important. The question of how vegetation is
affected by climate change is important from a conservation standpoint, since
climate change can threaten ecosystems and biodiversity. Human welfare also
depends on ecosystem services which may be interrupted by changes in climate. In
addition, vegetation changes can act as a feedback on climate change, since
vegetation can affect climate by changing surface albedo, regulating terrestrial
uptake of carbon dioxide, and modulating surface evapotranspiration. In
addition, the tools developed in this project will be applicable to a variety of
problems at the intersection of statistic and earth system science. Methods
developed in the project will be disseminated to students in courses on
statistics and natural sciences, and software and sample datasets will be made
available to the scientific community to encourage adoption of new
methodologies.