* 0934085
* Collaborative Research: FSML-Enhanced Cooperative Research and Education at Flathead Lake Biological Station and Taylor Wilderness Research Station.
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2009,09/30/2014
* Brian Kennedy, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 09/30/2014
* USD 254,497.00

History: The Flathead Lake Biological Station (FLBS) scientists in Montana have
a record of research on ecosystem dynamics in many sites: Glacier-Yellowstone,
northern British Columbia, Alaska and Kamchatka. Cooperative work between FLBS
and Taylor Wilderness Research Stations in Idaho (TWRS) has developed
synergistically: FLBS benefits by access to another site for cooperative studies
of river ecology in context of landscape and climate drivers and TWRS benefits
by access to advanced ecosystem models, novel remote sensing tools and products
and advanced data management tools and protocols. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project
plans: The University of Montana and University of Idaho are awarded a
Collaborative Research FSML grant to facilitate field station infrastructure and
interinstitutional collaboration building on the strengths of the individual
programs and institutions. The Flathead Lake Biological Station in Montana and
the Taylor Wilderness Research Station in Idaho, along with the Yellowstone
Ecosystem Research Center (YERC) in Wyoming, are key stations in the region that
can address issues of climate and land-use changes on terrestrial and aquatic
processes that influence landscape connectivity and biodiversity. A primary
installation will be a distributed-sensor array (RiverNet) in river and riparian
systems at the Flathead (Middle Flathead River) and Taylor (Big Creek) Stations
that will collect real-time data needed for demonstrating influences of climate
and landscape change. This instrumentation will complement existing
infrastructure at YERC. Aquatic sensors will collect real-time data on water
depth, dissolved oxygen, conductivity, NO3 and water temperature. Riparian
sensors will collect data on air temperature, humidity, total solar radiation,
PAR and soil moisture and temperature at 20 cm and 50 cm depths. The design of
the distributed sensor networks is the result of university researchers and
engineers and instrument specialists at Cisco Systems Inc., a partner in this
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Taylor Wilderness Research Station will
augment its power infrastructure to facilitate data acquisition from
instruments, sensor arrays and computer operations through a combination of new
solar arrays (43 kWh/day) and a microhydro turbine (50
kWh/day).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Flathead Lake Biological Station will remodel
its Freshwater Research Lab to facilitate analyses and data management from the
RiverNet arrays by reworking the existing entrance areas to create office and
lab space for RiverNet analysts, construct a secure server room, and connect
lighting and servers to an existing emergency generator. All remodeling includes
energy-efficient lighting and heating systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
infrastructure represents the first step toward development of a research
coordination network in the region that is characterized by large federally
protected areas (National Parks and wildernesses) embedded in complex mosaics of
mountain and range habitats with steep elevational and latitudinal gradients of
temperature and precipitation. Large blocks of roadless areas, coupled with
largely undeveloped river bottoms of the upstream segments of three great rivers
of North America (Columbia, Missouri, Saskatchewan), provide linkage corridors
that have important ecological and economic functions that maintain the natural
and cultural attributes of the regional landscape. However, the entire region is
undergoing environmental and economic change as agricultural and forest lands
convert to exurban uses and climate warming reduces snowpacks and lengthens
growing seasons. The coordinated research empowered by the awarded
infrastructure will add to an understanding of how natural processes are
affected in this changing world and help inform the inevitable debate on how
society should react to the potential threats. The field stations involved have
strong educational programs and are of great interest to the general public as
representative of wilderness and wildland areas. Increasing station capabilities
with this award will help recruit students and provide knowledge on
environmental change needed in educational curricula. In addition, the
cooperative programs of the station mix students from local Indian tribes with
nontribal students. The programs will broaden appreciation of traditional
ecological knowledge (TEK) as the Taylor Station is in close proximity to an
ancient Shoshone tribal village (Sheep eaters). It will also expose students to
cutting-edge, high-tech research.