* 0934965
* Recruiting, Preparing, and Retaining Diverse Science and Mathematics Teachers: The La Verne Noyce Teacher Scholars Program
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2015
* Christine Broussard, University of La Verne
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 05/31/2015
* USD 899,746.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

The La Verne Noyce Teacher Scholars (LVNTS) program is a collaborative effort
between the University of La Verne's College of Arts & Sciences (CAS),the
College of Education & Organizational Leadership (CEOL), and local high need
school districts in Southern California. The LVNTS program provides two
scholarship options. The first option is for undergraduate transfer or in-house
Biology, Mathematics, Chemistry, and Physics majors interested in teaching. The
undergraduate scholarship provides tuition support for the junior and senior
years, and credential year one. The second option is for Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) graduates from other institutions who desire
to become teachers in STEM disciplines. The graduate scholarship provides
tuition support for the year long certification program. Twelve three-year
awards (junior through fifth year) and 8 one-year awards (certification only)
are anticipated. In addition, the LVNTS program provides summer internship
opportunities for undergraduates focusing on STEM disciplines and teaching in
summer science camps and working with faculty. Fourteen internship opportunities
are being offered. Every candidate that is recommended for a credential by the
state of California must complete a two-year Beginning Teacher Support &
Assessment Induction Program to clear his/her credential. As part of this
program, a qualified mentor teacher supports the new teacher. In addition, the
LVNTS program coordinator and a support group, composed of former La Verne
students now past their first two years of teaching, maintain contact with the
Noyce Scholars to provide support, assess their needs, and verify service.