* 0934747
* CMG COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Advanced Computational Models for Geological Storage of Carbon Dioxide
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Hong Wang, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 09/30/2013
* USD 300,000.00

Geological storage of captured carbon dioxide is an important part of an overall
carbon capture and storage (CCS) strategy to reduce anthropogenic emissions of
CO2. Mathematical models to describe geological storage involve partial
differential equations for multiphase, multicomponent mass and energy transport
in porous media, augmented by nonlinear material-specific constitutive equations
and equations of state. These governing equations must be solved over large
three-dimensional domains, at the field scale or even the full basin-wide scale,
and over time periods of hundreds to thousands of years. These systems exhibit
potentially large spatial variations over multiple length scales, and may
involve large uncertainties in some of the key parameters, especially when
leakage of CO2 or leakage of displaced brine is considered. The importance of
leakage estimation, coupled with the large uncertainty in parameters associated
with leakage, implies that a Monte Carlo type of approach is needed. This, in
turn, implies that efficient computational tools are essential. This proposal
focuses on the development and analysis of a set of new modeling and simulation
approaches for large-scale injection and subsequent transport of carbon dioxide,
including potential leakage along concentrated flow paths such as leaky wells.
The objectives of the proposed research include (i) to develop new Eulerian-
Lagrangian methods for multiphase multicomponent flow and reactive transport
with application to storage of carbon dioxide; (ii) to embed the Eulerian-
Lagrangian methods in a multi-scale hybrid framework to simulate large-scale
transport as well as leakage along concentrated pathways; and (iii) to develop
and analyze new, highly efficient stochastic approaches to deal with the large
uncertainties inherent in the storage problem of carbon dioxide. In combination,
these new computational approaches will allow for large-scale simulation of CO2
injection, migration, and possible leakage across a wide range of domains and
applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Anthropogenic emissions of carbon dioxide
continue to increase the atmospheric concentration of carbon dioxide. The
current concentration is the highest atmospheric concentration for at least the
last 650,000 years. Current consensus is that such increases in atmospheric
carbon dioxide are leading to global warming of the earth, with wide-ranging
environmental implications. The carbon problem is arguably the most important
environmental problem of the 21st century, and technological solutions are the
only hope to solve the problem. One of the most promising technical solutions is
carbon capture and geological storage. This proposal focuses on development of
new computer simulation approaches that will allow the very large simulations
required to properly analyze the geological storage option, including detailed
risk assessment analysis with a focus on fluid leakage from the injection
formation to other subsurface formations or to the atmosphere. This work will
thereby have potentially wide impact on both technological and policy decisions
associated with geological storage of captured CO2. Furthermore, the results of
this work will be applicable to a wide range of other physical systems involving
subsurface fluid movement, including groundwater contamination problems as well
as oil and gas recovery. The proposed research activities will provide advanced
interdisciplinary training to graduate and undergraduate students, including
undergraduate students from the historically black South Carolina State
University. All of these activities will have broad and long-lasting impacts and
contribute directly to the intellectual infrastructure of the nation while
addressing one of the grand environmental challenges for the 21st century.