* 0934702
* Learning To Teach for Equity in Science and Mathematics Classrooms: The Florida State University Noyce Scholarship Program
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Joseph Travis, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 08/31/2014
* USD 726,260.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The forty-two Noyce Scholars recruited
into this project are benefiting from a newly instituted program resulting from
a revamping of three separate science and mathematics secondary teacher
preparation programs at Florida State University. It is modeled after the
U-Teach Program at the University of Texas Austin. Two school districts, Gadsden
County and Leon County, and the Tallahassee Community College are partnering
with FSU to ensure a strong recruiting base and appropriate school experiences
for the Scholars. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: In addition to the
strong science and mathematics background the Noyce Scholars have, the program
is designed to produce teachers with special skills in working with districts
with special needs and to analyze how best to accomplish this. Mentors work with
the Scholars from the beginning of their entry into the program to ensure that
students get appropriate positive experiences and have an opportunity to reflect
on and learn from those experiences. The program includes workshops and seminars
for the Scholars that highlight some of the challenges they will encounter in
high needs districts and how best to meet these challenges.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: In addition to the impact of the Scholars
on the schools and students they will work with, through a new teacher induction
program, special mentors will work with the Noyce Scholars after graduation to
create an ongoing community devoted to addressing and meeting the challenges
encountered in high needs school districts.&lt;br/&gt;