* 0934008
* Investigations on Transport Phenomena Governing Replication of Electroforming Micromolds for Fabrication of High Aspect Ratio Microstructures
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2009,08/31/2011
* Ranga Pitchumani, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 08/31/2011
* USD 267,994.00

CTS-0651752: INVESTIGATIONS ON TRANSPORT PHENOMENA GOVERNING REPLICATION OF
ELECTROFORMING MICROMOLDS FOR FABRICATION OF HIGH ASPECT RATIO MICROSTRUCTURES;
PI: PITCHUMANI&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROJECT ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Fabrication of
microstructures has been the subject of considerable attention in recent years.
While techniques such as surface silicon micromachining and bulk silicon etch
are used as practical methods for thin microstructures, processes such as LIGA
(an acronym for the German words for lithography, electrodeposition, and
molding) offer the capability to fabricate high aspect ratio microstructures
(HARMs). A drawback of LIGA-based fabrication, however, is the need for repeated
synchrotron exposure and development steps, which are both expensive and time-
consuming. Commercial viability of the LIGA process requires economical
replication technologies to eliminate the repetitive synchrotron exposure and
development steps.&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: Responding to the above-
mentioned need, proposed is a collaborative investigation with Sandia National
Laboratories on a new technique for rapid replication of electroforming
micromolds with integral microscreens. The process is based on injection molding
or hot embossing of plastic replicates with integral metallic screens onto a
LIGA-fabricated master microtool, to produce sacrificial electroforming molds in
which the metallic screen acts as the conducting base and the plastic features
provide insulating sidewalls for electrodeposition of the desired metallic
micropart. Since many plastic replicates of the electroforming molds could be
produced rapidly from a single LIGA-fabricated microstamp base, the need for
repetitive synchrotron exposure and development is obviated, thus resulting in
an economical and commercial advantage. Proposed is a balanced computational and
experimental study on the transport phenomena governing the fabrication process,
to systematically investigate the effects of the various process, material, and
geometric parameters. A comprehensive processing-to-part simulation capability
will be developed, which will be used to investigate the competing effects of
the phenomena governing the process and, in turn, to derive optimum process and
material designs. Experimental studies will focus on (a) characterization of
microscale polymer rheology of the materials considered to provide the needed
fundamental information in the modeling; and (b) several systematic processing
runs to validate the computational models and to demonstrate the optimum regimes
identified from the modeling. The proposed program will have a significant
technological impact in the MEMS industry through the development of
capabilities for rapid and cost-effective fabrication of
microparts.&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACT: The program will have significant
educational impact by training two graduate students in an important field of
much technological relevance. The students will gain valuable experience through
internships and close interactions with researchers at Sandia during the
program. Efforts will be made to recruit one or both students who are either
women or from other underrepresented groups, which will broaden the societal
impact.&lt;br/&gt;