* 0934320
* Vester Field Station
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2009,03/31/2011
* Aswani Volety, Florida Gulf Coast University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 03/31/2011
* USD 24,070.00

History: &lt;br/&gt;Florida Gulf Coast University, part of the State University
System of Florida, opened its doors to the public in 1997. From an initial size
of ~2500, the student body has grown to well over 10,000 in a little over a
decade, growing at an annual rate of 12-20%. The undergraduate programs in
Marine Science, Environmental Studies and the M.S. in Environmental Science
program have been identified as flagship programs for FGCU. These programs, with
support from FGCU's Coastal Watershed Institute and the Whitaker Center for
Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics Education, enable FGCU
students, faculty and staff to focus research, education and outreach activities
on the environments and coastal watersheds of Southwest Florida. The location of
FGCU, a few miles inland from the coast, limits access to the natural habitats.
In June 2007, the FGCU Foundation acquired a waterfront facility to support the
University's marine and environmental science programs. The facility offered the
potential for research and education programs. The Field Station property
consists of a main residence that includes a student classroom and faculty
workspace; an eight-unit apartment building; and a multipurpose building with an
additional apartment, a conference room, and a wet and dry lab. The site
includes 11 boat slips (including 5 boat lifts), providing access to mangroves,
oyster reefs, mud flats, and seagrasses. The proximity of VFS to the main
campus, its location in the Estero Bay Aquatic Preserve, and its boat docks and
lifts provide access for FGCU faculty and students, as well as visiting
scientists, involved in research and training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Planning
Grant Activities: To date, the use of and renovations to the Field Station have
been purely tactical in approach, increasing research and training capacity at
the site for specific projects rather than relying on a strategic plan that
would impact a broader group of faculty and students and would result in a more
thorough and inclusive use of the facility. The applicants are organizing a
planning effort to develop a five-year strategic plan for facilities use and
improvement that will drive research, training and outreach and guide future
renovations, equipment purchases, and other infrastructure support at the Field
Station. The planning effort is involving potential users and will incorporate a
needs assessment, the identification of a core research facility,
recommendations from an expert panel, and site visits to other field stations
and marine labs. They plan to increase capacity for research, education and
outreach at the Field Station that encourages interdisciplinary collaborations
among faculty and students. The additional research capacity and access to
coastal waters is intended to attract collaborators from around the world. The
Field Station will enable FGCU faculty, staff and students to be more engaged in
restoration activities (e.g., community-based restoration of oyster reefs)
within the Estero Bay Aquatic Preserve and to expand marine environmental
education and outreach to local middle and high school students and community
colleges, as well as to minority and underrepresented groups. The Field Station
will also further the University's role in the coordination of research
activities and information sharing related to the Estero Bay and Caloosahatchee
watersheds. We view this facility as a component of the broader research mission
of the University that spans the coastline from the Ten Thousand Islands and
Rookery Bay to Charlotte Harbor.