* 0934742
* CMG Collaborative Research: Enabling ice sheet sensitivity and stability analysis with a large-scale higher-order ice sheet models adjoint to support sea level change assessment
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Paul Hovland, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 08/31/2012
* USD 160,002.00

Hovland 0934742&lt;br/&gt;University of Chicago&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funds are
provided to enable applications of powerful mathematical concepts and
computational tools for rigorous sensitivity analysis, pseudo-spectra and
generalized stability theory, and advanced state estimation in the context of
large-scale ice sheet modeling. At the center of the proposal is the generation
and application of adjoint model (ADM) and tangent linear model (TLM) components
of the new Community Ice Sheet Model (CISM). The goal will be achieved through
rigorous use of automatic differentiation (AD) to ensure synchronicity between
the ongoing model development and improvement in terms of better representation
of higher-order stress terms (which account for crucial fast flow regimes) of
the nonlinear forward model (NLM) code and the derivative codes. The adjoint
enables extremely efficient computation of gradients of scalar-valued functions
in very high-dimensional control spaces. A hierarchy of applications is
envisioned:&lt;br/&gt;(1) sensitivity calculations in support of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) in order to determine to which
control variables the polar ice sheet volumes are most sensitive; based on
adjoint sensitivity maps, to establish quantitative estimates of ice sheet
volume changes for relevant forcing scenarios; and to assess how sensitivities
change when including higher-order stress terms;&lt;br/&gt;(2) coupling of the
ADM and TLM to calculate pseudo-spectra or singular vectors (SV?s) of relevant
ice sheet norms; SV?s provide perturbation patterns which lead to non-normal
growth, optimally amplifying norm kernels over finite times; among the many
applications of SV?s are optimal initialization of ensembles to assess
uncertainties; SV?s are calculated through matrix-free iterative solution of a
generalized eigenvalue problem via Lanczos or Arnoldi implicit restart
algorithms;&lt;br/&gt;(3) a long-term goal is the development of an ice sheet
state estimation system based on the adjoint or Lagrange Multiplier Method (LMM)
in order to synthesize, in a formal manner, the increasing number and
heterogeneous types of observations with a three-dimensional, state-of-the-art
ice sheet model; an important requirement is that the adjoint incorporate new
schemes that are being developed for CISM to capture crucial, but as yet
unrepresented physical processes.&lt;br/&gt;