* 0934176
* Acquisition of a Confocal Laser Scanning Microscope at the Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* David Emerson, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2013
* USD 341,265.00

Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences is awarded a grant to purchase a Confocal
Laser Scanning Microscope (CLSM). Imaging in the biological sciences has
undergone a renaissance in the last couple of decades, a significant reason for
this has been the advent of confocal laser scanning microscopes (CLSM). The CLSM
is the essential for live cell image analysis, including the investigation of
intracellular structures, understanding the architecture of microbial biofilms,
as well as the simultaneous identification, in situ, of multiple microbial
species for ecological studies. Researchers at the Bigelow laboratory study a
wide range of processes in the ocean that are ultimately the result of
microorganisms. As a result, imaging tools for studying microscopic cells and
communities are critical to the scientists mission.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The instrument will aid the research of at least 8
of the Bigelow scientists as well as a variety of external collaborators who
regularly collaborate at the facility. The facility hosts a new REU site, trains
numerous postdocs and student interns, holds an annual high school training
course (and numerous other courses for undergraduates as well), and also hosts a
public lecture series. All of these programs emphasize the facility's research
strengths, which benefit from the addition of the new instrument. By extension,
all of these activities will also benefit from the proposed addition.&lt;br/&gt;