* 0934169
* FSML:  Experiential classroom modernization for the Duke University Marine Laboratory
* BIO,DBI
* 03/15/2010,02/28/2011
* Cindy Van Dover, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 02/28/2011
* USD 236,567.00

Duke University is awarded a grant for infrastructural and equipment
improvements to a classroom building that serves as the home for experiential
learning courses in marine sciences at its Marine Laboratory in Beaufort, North
Carolina. These classroom improvements include installation of audiovisual
systems, modernization and expansion of casework, replacement of teaching
microscopes, replacement of seawater tables, and upgrade of the facility to meet
the standards of the American Disabilities Act. The classrooms serve a broad
academic base that includes undergraduate and graduate students from Duke
University and undergraduates from more than thirty colleges and universities
that belong to the Marine Science and Education Consortium (MSEC). The
classrooms are also used by the Duke Talent Identification Program summer
program, which serves gifted children (grades 8 through 10) from around the
country, and by the BOOST program, which serves under-represented minority
students at elementary and middle school levels. The Marine Laboratory is a
center for natural and social science research and education in marine systems,
where NSF-funded researchers and their students study interactions between
humans and the environment. Key research themes include conservation biology of
marine mammals, bioacoustics and behavior in marine systems, marine microbes and
carbon fluxes, environmental sociology, physical-biological interactions in the
marine environment, fisheries policy and management, chemical ecology, and
geospatial ecology. The coastal setting of the Marine Laboratory behind the
barrier islands of North Carolina and the easy access to natural and disturbed
environments makes it ideal as a center for experiential learning and the
proposed classroom improvements will support these field-learning opportunities.