* 0934310
* The Andrews GREEN House:  Green Research and Education for Ecological Networks
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2014
* Barbara Bond, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 01/31/2014
* USD 347,900.00

Oregon State University is awarded a grant for the development of the Andrews
GREEN House, a model of green design for field stations that will address
longer- term housing needs while opening important new avenues for research and
education. The GREEN House will be a triplex that meets a long-standing need for
creative housing for the growing community of visiting writers, educators and
scientists who contribute to the vitality and productivity of the Andrews Forest
Program. The proposed building will be constructed using latest mechanical and
energy efficient designs and local materials. It will be operated using
renewable energy, with monitoring of energy usage, air quality and carbon
footprint. The GREEN House will be a living laboratory with wireless sensors
installed throughout the structure that provide web based data side-by-side with
the data streams from sensors in the surrounding forest. Information about this
new energy efficient structure will be archived and analyzed in comparison to
existing residential and laboratory buildings on site to compare energy use and
air quality. Information and data about the GREEN House will be incorporated
into a website and teaching modules - inviting students, researchers, agencies
and the public to interact and evaluate the house and its environment from
multiple perspectives. This project enables a focus on the explicit linkage of
"human" and "natural" systems in research and education programs. Evaluation of
energy efficiency and alternative energy options in building and sustaining a
new residential structure would be one component of this new research emphasis.
The scientists, writers and educators who stay at the GREEN House will play key
roles in exploring human-environment connections and generating valuable
scientific information linking constructed and natural environments, and will be
a centerpiece of a multifaceted education program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts will result from new and expanded collaborations to: 1) use the GREEN
House as a model for cost-efficient sustainable buildings in rural, forested
environments, and further LEED standards; 2) incorporate project information and
experiential learning into energy-efficient construction training; 3) create new
curriculum and teaching materials about renewable energy, energy-efficient
buildings, and human-environment connections for K-12 and college programs; 4)
stimulate the economic well-being of local and rural businesses and help them
explore new technologies; 5) develop an interactive web portal to provide data
and information and stimulate interest in sustainable building technology for
rural areas; and 6) promote reflection on the connections between the
constructed and natural environments.