* 0934845
* Urban Teacher Education Program Secondary Math and Science
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2016
* Paul Sally, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* John Haddock
* 09/30/2016
* USD 900,000.00

The University of Chicago Urban Education Institute's Urban Teacher Education
Program (UTEP) and the University of Chicago are preparing 72 highly trained
teachers to address the shortage of well-qualified educators in mathematics and
science in urban schools. The university has high admissions standards and
demanding academic programs that ensure its graduates possess strong grounding
in their content areas, providing UTEP with an excellent applicant pool. UTEP
has a strong track record retaining teachers at rates far beyond those reported
for urban schools generally. The program is a two-year plus program, which
includes 15 months of intensive clinical experience; a tight weave of clinical
and academic work; a commitment to portraying teaching as intellectual work;
careful selection and support of clinical instructors to mentor students during
their internships; a unique focus on the context of urban education, including
exploration of issues of race, class and culture; a two-year induction support
program; a rigorous admissions process and assessment system that follows
students through clearly defined check points; a well established relationship
with Chicago Public Schools (CPS) that provides institutional and financial
support; and a commitment to recruiting minority candidates. The program draws
heavily from the expertise of faculty at the University of Chicago.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;UTEP's innovative program design, which has proven to be
successful in the preparation and retention of urban elementary teachers, is
making a similar contribution to secondary teacher education in the critical
areas of math and biology. UTEP has demonstrated the power of joining the forces
of committed University faculty with experienced urban practitioners, a
partnership that will deepen as the program moves into the realm of secondary
education. The unusual support UTEP receives from its parent University and from
the Chicago Public Schools can serve as a model for the ways in which academic
institutions can fulfill their obligations to the cities which host them. Like
its elementary counterpart, the secondary teacher preparation program is built
upon an existing and fruitful partnership between the University of Chicago
Urban Education Institute and Chicago Public Schools. Further, CPS has supported
UTEP as a strategy for school improvement, placing clusters of graduates in
partner schools with a concentration of clinical instructors, interns, and
program graduates.