* 0934350
* Field Facilities Improvements for Terrestrial and Aquatic Ecology at the Kellogg Biological Station
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2013
* Jeffrey Conner, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 01/31/2013
* USD 176,000.00

The W.K. Kellogg Biological Station (KBS) of Michigan State University (MSU) has
been awarded a grant to enhance educational and research opportunities by
renovating nine ponds at the Experimental Pond Facility, improving cyber-
infrastructure connectivity to the pond site, and installing emergency backup
power at the facility. KBS is the largest off-campus unit of MSU and is known
worldwide as a premier field site for research, education, and outreach in
ecology and evolutionary biology. KBS provides access to diverse natural and
managed habitats, many suitable for experimentation, together with modern
laboratory facilities, to conduct terrestrial and aquatic ecology. Research
activity at KBS has grown to the point that some of our facilities are stretched
to the limit. The increasing numbers of resident and visiting researchers
working at the Experimental Pond Site, along with a growing diversity and number
of educational and outreach activities using this and other KBS facilities, are
putting increasing demand on infrastructure and require that we upgrade and
improve the facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The nine ponds that will be
renovated have undergone natural succession over the past 20+ years and have
become unsuitable for many types of experimental studies due to low oxygen
conditions and dense stands of submersed vegetation. Renovation of these ponds
will allow KBS to continue to serve the needs of resident and visiting
scientists, while ensuring flexibility for experimental design. Funds from this
award also will be used to connect the Experimental Pond Facility to a 1Gb fiber
optic backbone that now links KBS to MSU's main campus (fiber optic backbone
installed in fall 2009 with MSU funds). This connection between the pond site
and the KBS academic building will provide cyber-infrastructure support for data
transfer between automated sensors at the pond site and other new
instrumentation between the pond laboratory, the KBS main site, and MSU's
campus. The backup electric generators to be installed at the Pond Laboratory
with this award will ensure reliable temperature and air-supply to protect
organisms (and experiments) during power outages.