* 0934818
* CMG Collaborative Research: Envirodynamics on River Networks
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* William Dietrich, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2013
* USD 159,548.00

The topology of river networks has been extensively studied over the past
decades using the suite of quantitative methods developed in the pioneering
works of Horton, Strahler, Shreve, and Tokunaga. As a result, stream-ordering
schemes and statistical self-similarity concepts have been explored to a
considerable extent in hydrologic and geomorphologic sciences and have
penetrated other areas of natural sciences. At the same time, questions related
to how the static topology of a river network affects the dynamical processes
operating on this network have been studied to a considerably lesser degree,
while the impact of such processes is of the greatest interest from
environmental, economic, and societal points of view. This project maintains a
sustained research effort focused on environmental transport along river
networks, in particular, and dynamic processes on hierarchical branching
structures, in general. The main goal is to develop a theoretical and modeling
framework that will facilitate predictive understanding of the relationships
between the geometry of a network and dynamic processes that operate on it. The
analytic methods to be developed and applied in the project arise from the
theories of hierarchical aggregation and complex networks. The proposed
transport modeling is based on the mathematical theory of Boolean delay
equations (BDEs), a framework especially tailored for the mathematical modeling
of systems that exhibit thresholds, multiple feedbacks and distinct time delays.
The BDE modeling will provide a flexible basis for a preliminary assessment of
land-use and climate change effects on resource attributes of a river system,
including sediment grain size distribution, algae production and transport,
nutrient loading, and fish population. It will also constitute a simple
?platform? for testing hypotheses and guiding further data collection efforts
for improved prediction under uncertainty. The project will adapt concepts and
tools from other disciplines, mainly dynamical and complex systems, to earth-
surface research.

The proposed study opens a new direction in earth-surface modeling, focused on
environmental transport on river networks. The intellectual merit of this
project resides in the novel mathematical, modeling, and data exploration
approaches, put forward by an interdisciplinary team toward predictive
understanding of environmental dynamics on river networks. The critical societal
and economic importance of network dynamic problems? in the geosciences and
other areas of the physical and life sciences?adds substantially to the
proposal?s intellectual merit. The project will result in better predictive
understanding of environmental fluxes including precipitation, sediment bedload,
nutrients, pollutants, etc., and provide new insight into rivers? habitat
structure and food webs. The project will impact other science areas that
involve network dynamics and hierarchical aggregation, including gene
interactions, social networks, spread of diseases, and Internet security. The
new results will be achieved by further developing a novel theoretical concept
of dynamic networks, integrating this concept into concrete applications, and
developing corresponding numerical models. The project PIs are actively involved
in promoting interactions between mathematicians, physicists and researchers in
geosciences and will further strengthen such interactions within this project.
The collaborative and cross-disciplinary approach of this project makes it an
ideal training ground for graduate students, post-docs and young scientists.