* 0934901
* Noyce: Preparing Excellence and Diversity in Secondary Mathematics Teachers for Illinois' High Needs Schools
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2014
* Joseph Miles, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 05/31/2014
* USD 900,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The Department of Curriculum and Instruction and the Department of Mathematics
at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (UIUC) are awarding Noyce
Scholarships to 39 students, including 24 undergraduate mathematics majors and
15 postbaccalaureate students, enrolled in programs leading to secondary
teaching certification in mathematics. School districts served by the project
include the small urban districts of Champaign, Urbana, Decatur, and Danville as
well as rural districts in Tolono, Rantoul, and Mahomet. The Noyce Illinois
program combines a rigorous mathematics and education curriculum with extensive
interaction with leading faculty in the area of equity and effective mathematics
teaching of marginalized students. It offers early field experiences and student
teaching placements in high needs school districts, supported by targeted
opportunities to learn and apply the latest theories and cutting-edge practices
for supporting marginalized students to learn mathematics in the 21st century.
Summer internships in K12 STEM education programs are offered as a recruitment
strategy for prospective Noyce Scholars. A monthly Noyce Seminar focuses on
problems from the field, reflection on coursework, the skills needed for
teaching in high needs schools, and video examples of classroom teaching. Noyce
Scholars have access to the particularly rich and diverse array of summer
enrichment programs operated by the University of Illinois across the Colleges
of Engineering, Agricultural and Economic Sciences, Liberal Arts and Sciences,
as well as UI Extension. Noyce Illinois incorporates formalized mechanisms to
support ongoing interactions among Noyce graduates and campus groups as well as
professional development sessions and online mentoring geared to support
graduates in their first year of teaching.