* 0934860
* High-speed super-resolution light microscopy for 3D imaging of living cells
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Arnold Vainrub, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 09/30/2012
* USD 287,553.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-
5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0934860&lt;br/&gt;Vainrub&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Light
microscopy is the major biological research technology that enabled modern
knowledge of structure and function of biological cells. With the discovery of
super-resolution light microscopy in the late 1990s the size of observable
features diminished twenty times to as small as ten nanometers, promising to
revolutionize sub-cellular and molecular biology research. Super-resolution
microscopy is still in its infancy. Specifically, imaging speeds are below 1
frame/s. The research objective of this proposal is the development of a novel
microscopy platform that combines spatial super-resolution in all three
dimensions with high imaging speed of 5000 frames/s to enable study of fast
intracellular events. The principle of the method is based on simultaneous
illumination of the object by about a hundred thousand narrow light spots, each
focused to the diffraction-limited size. The illumination pattern is generated
by a computer-controlled digital micro-mirror device (DMD); the pattern's
quality satisfies the rigid super-resolution conditions as tested by preliminary
experiments. The super-resolution image will be reconstructed using 9-25 frames
recorded for different illuminations. Theoretically, in linear mode the 3D
resolution enhancement is two-fold compared to the classical diffraction limit.
In non-linear mode of saturated fluorescence further resolution enhancement
occurs with no theoretical limit. This supreme 3D imaging capability will be due
to the super-resolution in axial direction and low out-of-focus light. The
developed technique will be widely applicable to the study of the structural
organization and dynamic processes in living cells, in particular in the area of
mitochondria research.