* 0934433
* SOLAR: Integrated Electro-Photonic Development of Polymer Solar Cells
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2014
* Edward Samulski, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2014
* USD 1,616,219.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award on solar energy research is
co-funded by the Divisions of Chemistry, Materials Research, and Mathematical
Sciences of the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences. A
collaboration of chemistry, physics, and applied mathematics groups at the
University of North Carolina will explore the limitations of bulk-heterojunction
polymer solar cells, which have been identified as economical and easy to
manufacture. An interdisciplinary team will design, fabricate, and optimize
photonic crystal solar cells that specifically address the disparate length
scales in polymer photovoltaic materials, thereby confronting the major
challenge in solar cell technology: efficiency. The aim is to achieve
simultaneously an efficient absorption of photons with effective carrier
extraction, but unfortunately the two processes have opposing requirements.
Efficient absorption of light calls for thicker modules whereas carrier
transport always benefits from thinner ones, and this dichotomy is at the heart
of an efficiency/cost conundrum that has kept solar energy expensive relative to
fossil fuels. The UNC approach, based on the advanced optical control possible
with photonic crystals, enables efficient light capture by a photonic
arrangement of nanostructures while significantly reducing the effective path
carriers need to travel to reach contacts. Integrating an applied mathematics
component into the team will enable rigorous and simultaneous optimization of
both photonic crystal designs and carrier extraction pathways. Moreover, the
optimized nanostructures will be scalable to large areal dimensions via a
technique called PRINT (Pattern Replication In Nonwetting Templates), a recent
breakthrough in roll-to-roll nanomolding pioneered in Chapel Hill.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymer solar cells have demonstrable advantages
such as ease and economy of fabrication, but to compete with the lower cost of
fossil fuels they must attain higher efficiencies. A collaborative group of
researchers at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill will use an
interdisciplinary approach to optimize a novel type of photonic-crystal solar
cell. Inspired by nature's own design, a design manifested in the beautiful
iridescent colors of minerals, gems, insects, and butterflies photonic crystals
enhance the absorption of light and are expected to increase solar cell
efficiency. The unorthodox alliance of three disciplines at UNC (applied
mathematics, chemistry and physics) will leverage rigorous mathematical modeling
to optimize the design and fabrication of photonic crystal solar cells.
Moreover, this atypical conjunction of a mathematician, a chemist and a
physicist working together on the challenging problem of polymer solar cell
efficiency will provide a unique educational environment for undergraduate and
graduate students, one wherein the power of a diversity of backgrounds is
emphasized in approaches to complex, interdisciplinary problems.