* 0934893
* LSU NOYCE TIGERS:  Teaching Investigating  Guiding  Engaging Researching Serving
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2015
* Frank Neubrander, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 07/31/2015
* USD 645,140.00

Louisiana State University is providing 24 scholarships over four years to
juniors and seniors preparing to become science and math teachers in the GEAUX
Teach program. In addition, summer research internships are available for
freshmen and sophomores to provide teacher candidates with authentic hands on
mathematics and science research experiences. These experiences are designed to
enable mathematics and science teachers to accurately relay to secondary school
students not only the facts and skills of the school subject, but also something
of the actual culture of research in the discipline. Thus STEM students may be
attracted to the GEAUX Teach program not only because it leads to a teaching
credential, but also because it supports their summer internship in a laboratory
setting assisting with ongoing research projects under the guidance of
university researchers. Although authentic research experience is necessary for
the fully capable mathematics and science teacher, it may not be sufficient to
ensure teachers can translate that experience into curriculum innovation. To
address this, the internship experience is designed to involve summer scholars,
as a cohort, with teacher mentors - former graduates of the GEAUX Teach who were
previous recipients of Noyce Scholarships whose teaching practices embody the
ideals of disciplinary fidelity. By reinvesting in its own graduates, the GEAUX
Teach program is building a recursive community of teaching excellence in the
surrounding school districts. The project is conducting an assessment of the
success of the graduates using a value-added analysis of teacher effectiveness.
The evaluation design links the GEAUX Teach program with the statewide data base
of longitudinal data within a complex three layer hierarchical model and uses
prior achievement, attendance, and demographic variables at the student,
classroom, and school levels to estimate teacher preparation effects. This
provides a systematic, longitudinal evaluation of NOYCE Scholarship awardees,
addressing the impact of the program on teacher retention, attrition, and
service in high-need schools/districts.