* 0934931
* The California State University, East Bay Noyce Teaching Fellowship Program
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2017
* Kathy Hann, California State University, East Bay Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,549,500.00

The College of Science and the College of Education and Allied Studies at
California State University, East Bay (CSUEB), the Alameda County Office of
Education (ACOE), the Stephen D. Bechtel Jr. Foundation, and the Edward Teller
Foundation are collaborators on the CSUEB Noyce Teaching Fellowship program.
This program increases the number of highly qualified science and mathematics
students who obtain a teaching credential and master's degree at CSUEB. It
provides scholarships for the first credential/master's year and salary
supplements for the subsequent four teaching years for two cohorts of eight
Fellows. These sixteen Noyce Fellows complete an innovative cohort-based teacher
preparation program, acquire laboratory experience and take advantage of a
professional support network and mentoring, which helps them to succeed as
teachers in high-need school districts. Throughout the program and into the
Fellows' first teaching years, ACOE provides state-of-the-art professional
development, in order to retain these new teachers who possess exemplary depth
of mathematical and/or scientific content
knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Science fellows complete the Master's program
that is jointly offered by the Department of Teacher Education at CSUEB and the
Edward Teller Educational Center at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
(LLNL). Partnering with the LLNL provides rigorous scientific training to this
group of nascent teachers. This Master's program offers students graduate credit
for participation in three summer seminars taught by laboratory scientists and
other professionals at LLNL. During the 4th seminar, students are paired with an
LLNL scientist with whom they conduct research for 6-7 weeks daily; this
typically results in a publication or poster which may appear in a national,
refereed journal. Mathematics fellows complete the Master's in Teacher
Education, Option in Curriculum at CSUEB. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CSUB Noyce
Teaching Fellowship program recognizes that successful teachers must be able to
adapt their teaching methods to meet the demands of diverse learning styles in
the classroom. Therefore, the CSUEB program is structured to enable students to
combine core knowledge and effective teaching methods that will produce
successful learning experiences. The Noyce Fellowships support students in CSUEB
teacher preparation and Master's programs that promote teamwork, leadership and
problem solving and cultivate professional experiences that are designed to
strengthen competence, enhance self-confidence and increase the likelihood of
committing to teaching as a career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Noyce Teaching
Fellows are expected to become leaders within their schools and districts and
furnish the tools that will enable underrepresented groups to be competitive
within the increasingly mathematical, scientific and technical workforce.