* 0934013
* URM: Undergraduate Research and Mentoring at a Hispanic Serving Institution Investigating a Rare Ecosystem
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Kristine Lowe, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 08/31/2013
* USD 768,552.00

This award to the University of Texas -- Pan American is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). The
University of Texas -- Pan American (UTPA), in partnership with the University
of Arizona, the Georgia Institute of Technology, and Purdue University, will
establish an Undergraduate Research and Mentoring (URM) program that will engage
students from a Hispanic-serving institution (HSI) in research and mentoring.
The goal is to increase the participation of underrepresented minorities in
science. Cohorts of seven students per year will be recruited, and each student
will participate in the program for a full year. Over the 4-year period of the
grant, a total of twenty eight (28) students will be trained. The URM program
will combine coursework with independent research during the academic year, as
well as research at one of three collaborating institutions during the summer
months. The program also includes student presentations, community outreach, and
group activities consisting of workshops, ethics and writing courses, and
Graduate Record Exam (GRE) preparation. URM students will work with biology
faculty at UTPA to examine the interactions of arsenic and other pollutants with
plants and microorganisms in Laguna Madre, a hypersaline estuary ecosystem in
South Texas. In addition to enhancing students' critical thinking skills, the
program will train students on scientific writing and the ethical conduct of
science. In the summer, the students will conduct their research with
collaborating faculty at the University of Arizona, the Georgia Institute of
Technology, or Purdue University. In addition to accessing state-of-the-art
instrumentation, students will be exposed to the academic culture and research
environment of a research-intensive institution. URM students will visit local
schools and present their work at an annual Hispanic science exhibition as well
as at state and national conferences. The URM program provides an opportunity to
involve students in research that will directly impact their community, while
aiming to increase the training and diversity of biologists. More information is
available by visiting http://www.utpa.edu/dept/biology/nsf-urm.html, or by
contacting Dr. Kristine Lowe at (956) 380-8749 or klowe@utpa.edu.