* 0934568
* Design and Development of Efficient Solid-State Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Keith Promislow, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2013
* USD 1,906,221.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The development of dye-sensitized solar cells represents one of the most
exciting new areas of solar energy science. Composed of light-absorbing
molecules coupled to an inexpensive semiconductor, these devices offer the
promise of high efficiency at low cost relative to more conventional
alternatives such as silicon. However, dye-sensitized solar cells have yet to
realize their perceived potential, due in part to the myriad of chemical and
physical processes that must be optimized. In addition, it is widely viewed that
such a device must ultimately come in the form of a solid-state material in
order to enhance the longevity of the device itself while at the same time
lowering the cost of manufacture. In order to address the many challenges this
problem presents, this research project combines the efforts of scientists with
expertise in chemistry, materials science, and mathematics, with the goal of
developing efficient, solid-state dye-sensitized solar cells. The program is
based on a synergistic collaboration in which mathematical modeling will be
coupled with the synthesis and characterization of novel polymer-based
substrates for ion conduction, a key aspect of photovoltaic conversion in the
solid state. Solar cells will be created based on these new materials and
examined by a variety of methods in order to characterize their optoelectric
properties; this information will then provide the feedback necessary to
continue fine-tuning the solar cell in terms of both its performance and ease of
fabrication. These efforts will result in the development of a new class of
photovoltaics that will achieve high efficiency at low cost for use in solar
electricity applications or in the creation of devices for the synthesis of
solar fuels.

Warming of the Earth?s climate has dramatically heightened interest in the
development of carbon-neutral sources of energy. Although all options for
renewable energy -- solar, wind, hydro, geothermal, nuclear, and biomass -- can
be part of an overall energy strategy, solar energy is the only source with
total power sufficient to meet global energy needs. A central problem with solar
energy remains one of economics: in the area of electricity production, for
example, solar power is presently about ten times more expensive than power from
fossil-fuel sources such as coal. Cost reductions in solar energy derived from
current technologies will no doubt continue as their production becomes more
widespread, but truly significant breakthroughs in solar energy conversion
schemes will require new science that has yet to be discovered. This project --
the development of a high-efficiency, solid-state photovoltaic cells based on
inexpensive materials -- is an example of the kind of basic research that
promises to lead to new solar energy technologies.