* 0934307
* Studies of Severe Convective Storms and Tornadoes Using Mobile Doppler Radar Data
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/2010,05/31/2014
* Howard Bluestein, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 05/31/2014
* USD 761,234.00

Severe thunderstorms and the tornadoes they spawn produce significant loss of
life and property across the U.S. This research, which will support involvement
of the lead investigator and his students in VORTEX2 (the Verification of the
Rotation in Tornadoes Experiment, Phase 2) and follow-on analysis of data both
previously and yet to be collected, will employ unique mobile X- and W-band
Doppler radar measurements describing both tornadic and non-tornadic
thunderstorms. Of special interest are polarimetric measurements made in
supercells combined with rapid-scan (i.e., rapidly repeated) volumetric radar
descriptions of tornadic supercells. The former will provide 3-D descriptions of
hydrometeor distributions in these storms, which are necessary for a full
understanding of storm thermodynamics and dynamics while the latter will
illuminate rapidly evolving and recurrent storm features. Tandem numerical
experiments will ingest these measurements into a state-of-the-art cloud model
in order to obtain improved estimates of atmospheric variables not directly
measured by radar (such as air temperature, moisture content and vertical
velocity within storm updrafts/downdrafts). This project will also support
collection and analysis of data from the first rapid-scan polarimetric X-band
mobile Doppler radar utilized in the study of severe thunderstorms, whose
development was previously supported by NSF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Intellectual Merit of this work derives from obtaining a more complete
understanding of severe thunderstorms, the tornadoes they produce, and detailed
dynamical relationships between the two.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts
will be immediately realized through training of graduate students involved in
data collection and analysis, and through the PI's involvement in undergraduate
education and dissemination of result both through formal publications and
various media outlets. Ultimately, this work may have societal benefits through
improved numerical forecasts and more timely public warnings. Benefits will also
accrue through critical evaluation and resulting improvement of cutting-edge
mobile radar technologies.