* 0934682
* Alternative Careers in Teaching for STEM Professionals
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2016
* Michael Beeth, University of Wisconsin-Oshkosh
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 08/31/2016
* USD 899,968.00

ACT! is an alternative teacher licensure program for secondary science and math
(grades 6-12) providing highly qualified STEM individuals with the pedagogical
skills necessary to teach secondary students and provide leadership in science
and math education in their future school districts. ACT! specifically recruits
post-baccalaureate mid-career STEM professionals. The delivery and content of
the program are grounded in principles of adult learning. The program is
designed to recognize the unique backgrounds, learning and experiences that
individuals with real life experience in science or math can bring to secondary
teaching, the very real need to maintain some level of income while in a teacher
preparation program, and time and geographic limitations related to maintaining
family and work obligations. This project is providing critical financial
support for 75 students (over five years) who are obligated to teach in high
need schools. The ability to provide financial support is enhancing the
project's mission to support mid-career professionals as they transition to
careers as professional educators. The project places teachers in urban and
rural districts throughout Wisconsin and is establishing new partnerships with
three University of Wisconsin institutions serving the greater Milwaukee area,
the University of Wisconsin Waukeesha, and two institutions serving rural
communities - the University of Wisconsin Baraboo Sauk County and University of
Wisconsin Richland. This project is making the program accessible to STEM
professionals in two thirds of the state geographically and serves the majority
of the population in Wisconsin.