* 0934296
* FSML Very Large Ecological Array
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2011
* Todd Dawson, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2011
* USD 247,771.00

History: Blue Oak Ranch Reserve (BORR), established in December 2007, is the
newest addition to the University of California Natural Reserve System. In early
2004, the Blue Oak Trust approached the University with a proposal to donate
land to the Natural Reserve System. A four-campus review was completed in early
2005, with a strong recommendation by the committee for acceptance of the
property into the NRS. After three years of negotiations with the UC Natural
Reserve System System-wide Office, the Blue Oak Ranch Trust transferred
ownership of the 3,260 acre Ranch to the Regents of the University of
California, along with a grant of $3M towards startup operations and an
operating endowment. Two full-time academic professional staff work on site.

Project plan: This award to UC-Berkeley is for equipment to deploy a new
generation of ecological sensing system, the Very Large Ecological Array (VeLEA)
using commercial wireless sensor network technology designed for general purpose
environmental sensing. VeLEA will function as a scalable, configurable
distributed wireless (WiFi) communication backbone to allow investigators and
educators at BORR to deploy off-the-shelf environmental sensors, network
cameras, custom sensors and specialized instruments at any location or habitat
within BORR. The science applications for such a modular general purpose array
of sensors are multifaceted. VeLEA will provide a multi-scale representation of
the temporal and spatial variability of micro-meteorological parameters across
the diverse topographic and ecological communities at BORR, of relevance to
numerous proposed and ongoing research projects. Sensors distributed in hundreds
of locations will monitor soil profiles for moisture and temperature gradients,
near ground sensors will document temporal changes in temperature, relative
humidity, rainfall, wind speed and solar radiation. Aquatic sensors will track
surface and subsurface flows, concentrations and gradients of moisture across
micro and macro watersheds. Studies of the responses of species and ecosystems
to regional and microclimatic variability will benefit from the VeLEA
observatory data streams. Sensor network hardware can integrate sap flow sensing
to track transpiration and water flux from rainfall, through soils and into
trees and will be of value to studies of plant physiology.

The Blue Oak Ranch oak woodland and grassland habitats represent threatened
California ecosystems that are under pressure from development, invasive species
encroachment, and climate change. VeLEA cyberinfrastructure will be of use to
many users, for ecological research, instruction and public education. VeLEA
will directly benefit public understanding of climate change effects through
outreach on their website and at the local science and technology museums in the
Silicon Valley area. The PIs are establishing collaborations with private non-
profit K-12 science education outreach organizations and with the staff at local
science and technology museums in the San Jose area.