* 0934488
* Collaborative Research:  CMG-- Models, Tools and Analysis for Studies of the Magnetosphere and Upper Atmosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Stephan Sain, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 08/31/2014
* USD 516,406.00

The goal of this project is to improve models of the electrodynamic behavior of
the magnetosphere, ionosphere, and thermosphere through statistical techniques
for finding optimal values of unobserved parameters. Three such parameters will
be estimated: 1) a coefficient of proportionality between electron energy and
plasma temperature; 2) a parameter relating the flux of precipitating electrons
to the electron energy and the plasma density; and 3) a parameter relating the
energy gain of electrons traversing a potential drop to the plasma density,
electron energy, and the strength of the electric current aligned with the
magnetic field. While these parameters cannot be observed, optimal values for
them can be estimated by comparing model output generated using specific
parameter values against appropriate observations (magnetospheric storms as seen
by the POLAR Ultraviolet Imager, for example). Models used to simulate the
magnetosphere, ionosphere, and thermosphere are computationally expensive, so
that only a limited number of parameter values can be tested. This research will
develop strategies, based on hierarchical statistical modeling and the
development of scalar error measures, to efficiently search the parameter space
for optimal parameter values.

Better models of the ionosphere, magnetosphere, and thermosphere are of interest
for practical as well as scientific reasons. Strong currents during magnetic
disturbances heat the upper atmosphere, causing it to expand upward and greatly
increase the air density at satellite altitudes, which can significantly affect
the satellite orbits. In addition, the electron density of the ionosphere is
strongly affected by the electric fields on both quiet and disturbed days, and
variations in this density have impacts on satellite networks used for
communication and geolocation. Thus, research conducted here could contribute to
an upper-atmospheric forecasting capability of great practical benefit.