* 0934453
* Status, Contributions, and Future Directions of Discipline Based Education Research
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2015
* Heidi Schweingruber, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 08/31/2015
* USD 1,678,971.00

This is a comprehensive, consensus study of "Discipline Based Education
Research" (DBER) in the natural sciences. It is being undertaken by the Board on
Science Education (BOSE) of the National Research Council. It is examining what
is known from research on undergraduate learning in the sciences. There are
substantial education research literatures in the major science disciplines, in
cognitive psychology, and in science education. These literatures form the core
of this study. The focus is on concepts and topics in science that are
appropriate for the undergraduate level in all kinds of institutions, including
introductory courses and courses for non-majors. Taking stock of what is known
and variations across bodies of research constitutes the major part of this
study. As a major study with emphasis on research in subject-matter learning and
teaching, the study is building upon previous reports by the National Research
Council, such as "How People Learn" (NRC, 2000). The proposed study is being
carried out by a 14-member committee with expertise in instruction across the
scientific fields as well as in cognition and learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
growing number of studies have revealed that faculty content knowledge is by
itself often not sufficient for effective instruction at the undergraduate
level. Discipline Based Education Research (DBER) practitioners have
demonstrated new instructional approaches and materials which significantly
improve students' understanding of essential concepts and the nature of
scientific inquiry. In 2008, BOSE conducted two workshops to explore the
research underlying these new approaches and promising practices. The workshops
illuminated the efficacy of selected promising practices while also highlighting
weaknesses and gaps in the research requiring further study.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This consensus study is exploring both the strengths and
weaknesses of DBER. The study is also comparing DBER emerging from the different
STEM disciplines in order to distinguish practices whose efficacy has been
clearly demonstrated across the disciplines from those requiring further
research to demonstrate efficacy beyond a particular discipline or classroom
context. It will summarize the current scope and quality of DBER, suggest ways
in which education researchers across scientific disciplines can learn from one
another and from the broader research on learning, and identify important areas
for future research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because this is a consensus study,
all of the study's conclusions and recommendations will be subject to rigorous
review by 12 to 14 independent reviewers.