* 0934331
* CMG Collaborative Research: Fast and Efficient Radial Basis Function Algorithms for Geophysical Modeling on Arbitrary Geometries
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Gordon Erlebacher, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2013
* USD 199,998.00

Numerical method innovations in the geosciences have not paralleled
the&lt;br/&gt;explosion in computer hardware development over the last decades.
Yet, for&lt;br/&gt;scientific computing to advance, it is crucial that novel
numerical&lt;br/&gt;approaches are developed that improve the simplicity,
flexibility, and&lt;br/&gt;accuracy of algorithms while taking advantage of this
revolution in hardware&lt;br/&gt;technology. The current project is aimed at
exactly that objective: to&lt;br/&gt;develop fast, efficient and parallelizable
radial basis function (RBF)&lt;br/&gt;methodologies, enhanced by novel graphics
processing unit (GPU) technology,&lt;br/&gt;for applications in computational
geosciences. A collaborative team of&lt;br/&gt;computational mathematicians and
geophysicists has been established for this&lt;br/&gt;purpose. The RBF approach
is very attractive in that it achieves high-order&lt;br/&gt;accuracy for
arbitrary geometries in n-dimensional space, naturally permits&lt;br/&gt;local
refinement, is mesh-free (no grids), algorithmic complexity does
not&lt;br/&gt;increase with dimension and, generally offers higher accuracy with
longer&lt;br/&gt;time steps than traditional spectral methods for a given number
of nodes.&lt;br/&gt;However, RBFs are still in an early developmental stage; key
issues to be&lt;br/&gt;addressed are: 1) development of localized high-order
RBF-finite difference&lt;br/&gt;(RBF-FD) stencils on irregular node layouts in
n-dimensional space for&lt;br/&gt;arbitrary geometries with stable time-
stepping, 2) adaptive local node&lt;br/&gt;refinement schemes for RBF-FD, 3)
development of hybrid spectral RBF and FD&lt;br/&gt;schemes to maximize
advantages of RBFs and while minimizing their&lt;br/&gt;computational cost, and
4) implementation of the method on hardware&lt;br/&gt;accelerators, such as
GPUs. Scientific targets for application include 3D&lt;br/&gt;mantle convection
with varying properties, models of the geodynamo in an&lt;br/&gt;elliptic
geometry, and tsunami modeling with irregular coastline
topography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By advancing the frontier of computational
mathematics that will take&lt;br/&gt;advantage of today?s booming technology
industry, society can be offered a&lt;br/&gt;more in depth understanding of
geophysical processes related to mantle&lt;br/&gt;convection, the geodynamo, and
tsunamis. These phenomena play a key role in&lt;br/&gt;continental movement,
polarity reversal of the earth?s magnetic field,&lt;br/&gt;earthquakes, and
coastal flooding. The proposed innovative mathematicalcomputational approach may
hold the key to unlocking long-standing questions of fundamental importance in
such geophysics areas. An interdisciplinary collaborative team of computational
mathematicians and geophysicists has been assembled from a national lab and four
universities (NCAR-Colorado, Boise State Univ.-Idaho, Univ. of Minnesota,
Florida State Univ., and the Univ. of California?Davis) to develop new methods
in computational mathematics for addressing these critical geophysical problems.
The project supports collaborative participation among researchers at different
stages in their careers as well as Ph.D, Masters, and undergraduate students in
4 states and in a myriad of scientific and mathematical disciplines. These
students will have the opportunity to participate as members of an
interdisciplinary team composed of senior personnel with a demonstrated
commitment to education and research. NCAR will serve not only as an integrating
hub for scientific endeavors but provide a medium for students from across the
country to work together on multiple facets of the proposal. Through the
SciPARCS 10 week internship program at NCAR, students will have the opportunity
to engage in joint collaborative research, preparing them for a career in
computational geosciences for the 21st century.