* 0934923
* Math for America Los Angeles: Improving Student Achievement by Focusing on Teacher Quality, Preparation and Professional Development
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2014
* David Drew, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 06/30/2014
* USD 1,500,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of
2009&lt;br/&gt;(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Math for America Los
Angeles (MfA LA), a non-profit organization formed by the University of Southern
California (USC), Claremont Graduate University (CGU) and Harvey Mudd College
(HMC), seeks to raise student achievement in the greater Los Angeles area by
developing transformational secondary school mathematics teachers. The MfA LA
Teaching Fellowship program is designed to attract individuals with talent and
passion for mathematics and teaching to the profession, help them receive high-
quality training, then provide them with all of the resources that they will
need to become effective teachers. The 10 individuals selected to receive a MfA
LA Teaching Fellowship under this project commit to a five-year program that
includes one year of full-time graduate study and four years of teaching in a
public secondary school (middle or high school) in one of the six partnering
school districts (Los Angeles USD, Claremont USD, Pomona USD, Hacienda/La Puente
USD, Chaffey Joint Union High School District, and Corona-Norco UDSD). Fellows
receive a stipend and full tuition scholarship to attend either the Teacher
Education Internship Program (TEIP) at the CGU or the Masters of Arts in
Teaching (MAT) and Teaching Credentialing Program at the USC. While fulfilling
the four-year teaching requirement, Fellows receive up to $20,000 in additional
stipends per year and participate in comprehensive professional development with
the goal of becoming National Board Certified by the end of the five-year
Fellowship period. Professional development is designed in cooperation with the
HMC Professional Development and Outreach Group. MfA LA is part of the network
of Math for America sites and cooperates with the umbrella Math for America
organization, whose goal is to show how the principles behind this effort to
improve the quality of mathematics teaching and student achievement can be
replicated across the nation.