* 0934181
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Ubaid Agriculture at Kenan Tepe, Southeastern Turkey
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,06/30/2011
* Alexia Smith, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2011
* USD 15,000.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Alexia Smith, Philip Graham will analyze Ubaid
period archaeobotanical remains from the site of Kenan Tepe in order to better
understand the agricultural system at the site and its relationship to social
change. The Ubaid period was a time of social transformation that followed the
emergence of small agricultural villages and preceded the first large
territorial states. This development began in Southern Mesopotamia in modern day
Iraq, and gradually spread north. Kenan Tepe is located near the Tigris River in
Southeastern Turkey within the sphere of Northern Mesopotamia. It has generally
been assumed that the social changes evident at this time were facilitated by
intensified agriculture and that the spread of Ubaid culture modified existing
social structures through increased privatization of agricultural produce. This
hypothesis has never been tested with plant data. Archaeobotany, the study of
plant use in antiquity, is an ideal tool for investigation agricultural
practices and examining this idea. &lt;br/&gt;During the latter part of the
Ubaid period (4650 BC) Kenan Tepe was occupied by individuals living in
household units and elements of the Ubaid culture, such as the pottery,
architectural style, and other artifacts had been adopted. One of the Ubaid
household structures on the mound burned in antiquity in a catastrophic fire.
This burning led to the preservation of large amounts of botanical remains in
their original locations, providing a unique opportunity to investigate how the
agricultural system of the Ubaid period functioned and how that system was
expressed on the household level. The excavators at Kenan Tepe paid special
attention to the collection of micro remains, especially charred botanicals, and
over 300 samples will be examined in this study. Mr. Graham's research
integrates household archaeology and archaeobotany to investigate the level of
privatization of agricultural produce and social stratification by examining the
differences in the archaeobotanical assemblages between households. Activity
areas, or discrete locations where a specific activity occurred, will be
identified and associated with agricultural practice and plant use. By mapping
spatial differences in archaeobotanical assemblages across the site, the
movements of plants around the household and the settlement can be assessed.
&lt;br/&gt;This project will have broader impacts outside of archaeobotany and
the archaeology of the Ubaid. One goal of this project is to educate the public
about the important relationships between the agricultural economy and social
change. This will be accomplished by presenting the results of this study in
both Turkey and the United States. Copies of the results will be sent to
archaeologists working in Turkey so that they will have free and open access to
the data. In the United States, public outreach efforts include partnering with
two local museums, the Connecticut Archaeology Center and the Robbins Museum of
Archaeology in Massachusetts to give a series of free public lectures. At the
same time, publication in referred journals will continue to disseminate the
project's results to the scientific community. Finally, Philip Graham will gain
valuable training in archaeobotanical methods and data analysis and ecological
survey.