* 0934398
* Enhancing the Merriam-Powell Research Station to support climatic change research and education
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2012
* Thomas Whitham, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 03/31/2012
* USD 123,529.00

Northern Arizona University is awarded a grant to enhance opportunities for
experimental and observational field research on climate change and the
population and ecosystem impacts of climate change at the Merriam-Powell
Research Station (MPRS). MPRS is jointly operated with The Arboretum at
Flagstaff, where it is located. Improvements will: 1) make available common
garden research space with water, 2) make data collection from weather stations
on elevation gradient research sites more reliable, and 3) improve data
collection from flux towers in three forest stands under different management
treatments. Understanding climate change and what can be done to mitigate for
climate change impacts is one of the major scientific challenges of our time.
This is especially important in the American Southwest, which is currently 12
years into a record drought that is producing vegetation shifts among the most
severe in North America. The project will enhance the infrastructure for climate
change research at three multi-user research sites. The first site is a set of
five research areas along an elevation gradient used for monitoring climate
change impacts and for manipulative experiments. The second site is a set of
three eddy flux tower sites that are being used to examine how forest management
influences carbon balance. The third site is a set of common gardens to be used
for climate change and restoration research. Common gardens will focus on the
genetics of climate change (i.e., which genotypes and source populations do
best), and the consequences of climate change for biodiversity, community
structure and ecosystem function. Results from this research will be critical
for management decisions for the regions large tracts of public land and will
enhance outreach programming offered jointly by MPRS and The Arboretum. MPRS's
ability to offer high quality undergraduate research experiences, such as the
Research Experiences for Undergraduates program geared towards Tribal and
Community Colleges, will be enhanced by these improvements. A course at NAU on
"Climate Change Effects on Forest Ecology" will have distance learning and field
experience components and will accommodate both educators pursuing masters
degrees and undergraduates in the sciences. An undergraduate with strong
interests in math and biology will receive continued training as an assistant on
setting up data management systems to serve researchers.