* 0934604
* Beyond Seamless Transitions:  Blurring the Boundaries Along the Learning-To-Teach Continuum
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2010
* Jennifer Lundmark, University Enterprises, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Deborah E. Allen
* 05/31/2010
* USD 74,760.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This planning grant project at
California State University Sacramento is a partnership between two of its
colleges, the College of Education and of Natural Sciences and Mathematics, and
area school districts (including the Sacramento City Unified district).
Additional partnerships with school districts and with a nonprofit organization
are being developed as part of the planning activities. The California State
University Sacramento campus prepares highly qualified mathematics and science
teachers for a primarily urban service region, with a large population of low
income, culturally and linguistically diverse students. In conjunction with
other math and science-focused programs already in place, the planning grant is
laying the groundwork for submission of a full proposal to the Teaching
Fellowship/Master Teaching Fellowship track by allowing for completion of NCLB-
compliant subject matter programs in the sciences, re-design of a post-
baccalaureate credential program, completion of the design of a new Master of
Arts degree in Biological Sciences with a concentration for science teachers,
and collaboration with public school partners on revision of the 2-year
induction program for new teachers to integrate a significantly enhanced
disciplinary focus. In all cases, best practices from national literature on
recruitment, retention, preparation, mentoring and professional development for
mathematics and science teachers are being incorporated into the program design
and revision activities. This planning grant project is thus adding to the
discipline-based focus of teacher preparation work in two colleges, while
strengthening collaborative ties between them and their math/science teacher
induction colleagues. By refining the Beginning Teacher Support and Assessment
program to overlap with discipline-specific Masters degrees in biology and
mathematics (through first steps included in the planning grant), California
State University Sacramento is introducing a more rigorous, discipline-based
focus in new teacher support programs for mathematics and science teachers.