* 0934357
* The Addition of a Wet Laboratory at the Bull Shoals Field Station to Enhance Research and Teaching
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Janice Greene, Missouri State University
* Standard Grant
* Peter H. McCartney
* 08/31/2012
* USD 61,101.00

The Bull Shoals Field Station (BSFS), the biological field station for Missouri
State University, is awarded a grant to renovate a stone shed into a small wet
laboratory. BSFS is located in southwest Missouri in the heart of the Ozarks.
This unique ecosystem has provided many opportunities for terrestrial and
aquatic research, especially in the fields of plant ecology, aquatic ecology,
and wildlife ecology and management. The long-range planning committee
recommended that a wet laboratory was the most important facility needed to
increase use at BSFS. The addition of a wet laboratory will increase
productivity in research and training for students by providing a location for
immediate sample processing and close proximity between field and laboratory
experiments. Renovations will include adding plumbing, electrical wiring and
connection to the solar power system, insulation, new roof, new windows, and new
door. Several Missouri State classes are held at the field station, including
biology and science education courses, which include undergraduate and graduate
students and K-12 teachers. Though BSFS is a recently-established station with
no laboratory facilities, it also has hosted five conferences, numerous
workshops for students, teachers, and professionals, and has attracted four
outside researchers over the last five years because of the rich ecological
setting and recent updates to facilities. In addition, BSFS staff is actively
involved in water quality monitoring of area water resources and distributes the
information to local organizations and through the BSFS website. The addition of
a wet laboratory would provide more opportunities for course use, increase the
pool of potential users from inside and outside the university, and enhance the
current water quality research that is useful to the local community.