* 0934312
* Collaborative Research: EAGER Proposal on Non-Homogeneous Flow Fields in Nonlinear Rheology:  A Challenge to Current Paradigms?
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Gareth McKinley, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2011
* USD 25,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY The present EAGER proposal is a collaborative effort among
four U.S. institutions (Texas Tech University, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cornell University and Illinois Institute of Technology) and one
foreign institution (Technical University of Eindhoven in the Netherlands). The
technical goal is to detail the limits of validity of reported flow
instabilities in entangled polymer melts and solutions. The flow of polymer
fluids in conventional rheometers is generally assumed to be nearly viscometric
and stable. When instability or secondary flows occur, it is generally
acknowledged that such measurements cannot be used to determine material
parameters. This is important in any experimental challenge to, e.g., a
molecular theory such as the reptation model of polymer chain dynamics.
According to a new set of results that has appeared in the literature, the basis
for the experimental verification of the reptation theory is, in fact, based
upon experiments from non-homogeneous flows. If this is true, it changes the
paradigm for the dynamics of polymer fluids in nonlinear deformation regimes.
However, much of the community is skeptical of these results and there are
multiple reports in the literature of contradictory results. Hence, it is
paramount to establish the range of both flow conditions (rate and magnitude of
shear) and material parameters (e.g., entanglement density) for which such
observations are correct and the range where errors may have been made and to do
so in a way that the results are accepted by the community at large. The present
proposal is constructed to do this. The groups collaborate through an innovative
set of student teams having one representative from at least three institutions
for all experiments. Success of the work is defined as achieving an
interlaboratory consensus of the flow profiles in polymer solutions and melts.
Objectivity is developed by having multiple labs with multiple students
performing each type of experiment so that ?neutral eyes? have the major
influence in the examination of experimental data. Three types of experiments
will be performed, each will be performed in at least two labs and one will be
performed in all labs. The experiments are particle tracking velocimetry,
confocal microscopy fluorescence dye velocimetry and macroscopic parallel plate-
cone and plate comparisons of nonlinear properties.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY The major paradigm of polymer rheology is the reptation
theory. Because reptation is the present paradigm for polymer flow, it is widely
used in industrial settings to understand how to change molecular parameters in
making advances in polymer processing. There are several offshoots to reptation
theory as well that are beginning to be adopted in industry. Yet, recent work
has appeared that is being strongly advanced to challenge this paradigm. It has
reported strong flow instabilities which would invalidate the reptation theory
in the regime relevant to polymer processing. Hence establishing whether or not
the reported flow instabilities occur in industrially relevant ranges of flow
rates is important. The present proposal brings together collaborators from four
U.S. and one foreign university (Texas Tech University, Massachusetts Institute
of Technology, Cornell University and Illinois Institute of Technology,Technical
University of Eindhoven in the Netherlands) with the goal of establishing the
range of experimental conditions where such flow instabilities occur. Because
the general community has not uniformly accepted the reported results, the
present collaboration will provide both repeat (for validation purposes) and
novel experimentation to establish the range over which the reported results are
relevant and how they impact the current understanding of polymer nonlinear
rheology and its basis in molecular (reptation) theory. The present proposal
does this. In addition, because of its structure as a collaborative work through
an innovative set of student teams having one representative from at least three
institutions for all experiments. All students will participate in the
collaboration with the Technical University of Eindhoven.