* 0934275
* RAPID: Evaluation of CAM4 and CCSM4 Boundary Layer Clouds, Radiation, and Precipitation over the VOCALS Region
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2009,04/30/2010
* Xubin Zeng, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 04/30/2010
* USD 80,636.00

The importance of marine atmospheric boundary layer clouds in atmospheric and
atmosphere-ocean coupled models has been widely recognized, particularly over
the Southeast Pacific where the VOCALS (VAMOS Ocean Cloud Atmosphere Land Study)
field experiment was carried out in October and November of 2008. NCAR (the
National Center for Atmospheric Research) will release the new version of the
Community Climate System Model (CCSM4) in the summer of 2009. This model will be
used for the upcoming Fifth Assessment (AR5) of the IPCC (Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change). CCSM4 will include significantly revised model
formulations for clouds, radiation, precipitation, and other processes that may
improve the overall climate simulation compared with earlier versions, but it is
uncertain whether it may continue to have some of the same problems (at the
process level) as identified in the current version of this model, as well in as
other leading global climate models. Simulations using CCSM4 will comprise a
major U.S. contribution to the IPCC AR5. This RAPID project will provide CCSM4
modeling groups with timely and detailed information on how CCSM4 performs in
the perennially problematic VOCALS region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In situ data
from VOCALS and earlier experiments, as well as satellite measurements, will be
used to evaluate the boundary layer clouds, shortwave and longwave radiation,
and precipitation in CCSM4, focusing on budget analyses carried out at
individual time steps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CCSM4 represents a major U.S.
contribution to the IPCC AR5, with significant implications for science,
society, and policy. This project will involve the training of a graduate
student. Results will be made available, in a timely manner, to the research
community through a web page.