* 0934506
* Nonparametric Nonlinear Adaptive Detection and Estimation
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2008,09/30/2010
* Deniz Erdogmus, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 09/30/2010
* USD 172,037.00

NSF-ECS Proposal 0622239&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nonparametric Nonlinear Adaptive
Detection and Estimation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objectives and approaches: The
objective of this research is to create a unifying nonlinear information
processing framework to handle increasingly complex modeling and data analysis
problems encountered in science and engineering. The proposed framework exploits
and unifies three concepts: reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces, nonparametric
kernel density estimation, and information theoretic optimality measures.
Developed techniques will be illustrated in a brain interface, in which high
dimensional spatiotemporal electroencelaphogram activity will be translated to
intended commands for a robot. This interface will be designed to facilitate
fusion with myoelectrically controlled neural
prostheses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: Conventional techniques
relying on nonlinear programming of semiparametric models with low-order
statistical criteria, which is prone to various difficulties including model
complexity selection and existence of suboptimal solutions, cannot cope with the
challenges of increasingly complex engineering problems. Proposed work
facilitates the adaptation of nonlinear models exploiting smooth generalized
linear models and principled information processing in a novel unified
framework. This will advance the state-of-the-art in nonlinear adaptive signal
processing and machine learning. The brain interface testbed will facilitate
future collaboration between two currently disconnected neural prostheses
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The theoretical framework
will impact signal processing and machine learning, thus will have immediate
influence on fields that rely heavily on statistical modeling, data analysis,
and processing techniques. Specifically, contributions to the emerging neural
engineering field will impact the design of future neural prostheses, as well as
fundamental brain and cognition research. The project will help educate graduate
engineers with mathematical rigor and an interdisciplinary
focus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;