* 0934098
* SOLAR: Ultrabroad spectral bandwidth excitonic thin film solar cells based on carbon nanotubes
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Chunming Wang, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,500,000.00

This award on solar energy research is co-funded by the Divisions of Chemistry,
Materials Research, and Mathematical Sciences of the Directorate for
Mathematical and Physical Sciences. A collaboration of chemistry, materials
science, mathematics, physics, and engineering groups at the University of
Michigan and the University of Southern California will develop a unique, new,
thin film solar cell based on polymer-wrapped carbon nanotubes (CNTs). These
films will be used in donor-acceptor heterojunctions employing a range of new
organic materials and device structures, including polymers and small molecules.
The use of CNTs extends the optical sensitivity from the blue into the near
infrared, allowing organic-based devices to approach nearly thermodynamically-
limited power conversion efficiencies. Simulated excited state (exciton) flow
and charge transport through the CNT network uses new treecode algorithms and
semi-classical hydrodynamical models. Efficient, multi-dimensional optimization
methods are used to develop novel aperiodic dielectric stacks that couple the
broad solar spectrum into very thin films used as the active device region in
solar cells. A diverse range of undergraduate and graduate students and
postdoctoral fellows are engaged in this interdisciplinary research in renewable
energy. These students are provided with opportunities to influence policy
decisions regarding energy choices through coursework in energy policy and
geopolitics on their respective university campuses. The group is also involved
in the University of Michigan's Saturday Morning Physics lecture series,
providing the public with insights into the latest science and technologies.