* 0934711
* CMG Collaborative Research: Fast Multipole Algorithms for Geophysical Stress Modeling and Their Use in Large-Scale Simulation of Earthquake Occurrence
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Terry Tullis, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2014
* USD 391,011.00

Fast Multipole Methods (FMMs) are widely used in many branches of science and
technology, but there is a need for general-purpose, well-documented open source
implementations of optimized versions of the method, suitable for use in the
geosciences and other fields. One of the pressing needs for using FMMs is in
conducting large-scale mathematical modeling of the occurrence of many
earthquakes over a long period of time. Such simulations would produce a
synthetic catalog of earthquakes, whose statistical properties, in both space
and time, may be similar to the actual distribution of earthquakes that occur in
nature. Such simulations are analogous to the global circulation models used by
meteorologists and climate scientists to simulate weather and climate. In both
cases, the objective is to use basic physical laws to simulate the behavior of a
large and complex natural system. We have only recently gained enough knowledge
about the complex non-linear geosystem that generates earthquakes that it is
possible to conduct realistic earthquake simulations and test them against
observed earthquake behavior. It is now possible that the simulations can be
sufficiently realistic in detail and large enough in scale that they can be
useful in understanding the physics of earthquakes as well as the probabilities
of earthquake occurrence, understandings that have important societal benefits.
This project will develop FMM algorithms and implement them for use with
earthquake simulator codes. These improved codes will also be used to conduct
much-improved earthquake simulations. The software we create will be useful for
a variety of other applications in science and engineering beyond the one we
focus on; we will provide our documented libraries with example problems on an
open website and will publicize this to the scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop, test, and apply new
generations of efficient computer programs that can generate hitherto impossible
long artificial histories of earthquakes. These histories will enable scientists
to understand patterns of occurrence that can be used for estimating the hazard
that earthquakes pose to human life and property. For example, the California
Earthquake Authority, which sets earthquake insurance rates with billions of
dollars of implications for California and the world, presently bases its
estimates of the probability of earthquake occurrence on methodology that many
experts feel is inadequate. The ability to create computer models that generate
many long sequences of earthquakes is regarded by experts as the next important
step in improving our understanding of when and where earthquakes may occur in
many earthquake prone regions of the USA and abroad. In many ways this approach
is similar to the computer-based forecasts of weather and climate that are
presently much more advanced than are forecasts of earthquake occurrence. The
project involves a new and tight collaboration between mathematicians and
earthquake scientists who previously have been developing state-of-the-art
approaches in their fields independently. The computer programs that are
produced will enhance the ability or society to make fast and efficient computer
models with benefits in a range of scientific and engineering applications in
addition to their usefulness in understanding earthquakes. The programs will be
documented, publicized, and made freely available on a web site.&lt;br/&gt;