* 0934920
* Control of Composition and Phase at the Nanoscale: The Development of AlMn Nanoparticles
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,03/31/2012
* David Nikles, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Taleff
* 03/31/2012
* USD 200,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will discover methods to
synthesize AlMn nanoparticles in the tau phase. Bulk tau-AlMn is ferromagnetic
(Ms = 950 emu/cc) with a high magnetocrystalline anisotropy (Ku ~ 1 x 107
erg/cc). These particles are expected to have ideal magnetic properties
necessary to support the growth in data storage capacity for magnetic tape
beyond the year 2020. This technology demands tight compositional and size
distributions. From previous work on FePt it has been determined that a two-step
nucleation process can be used to control the compositional uniformity. One
metal forms the seed from which the other metal atom heterogeneously nucleates.
In this project the approach is to nucleate the formation of Mn seed particles,
followed by a heterogeneous reduction of Al3+ at the particle surface. The
nucleation step will either be a thermal decomposition of an organometallic
manganese compound (e.g., Mn2(CO)10) or reduction of Mn2+. Cyclic voltammetry
will be used to determine the reduction potentials for the Mn2+ and Al3+
precursors, thereby providing a means of identifying the reducing agents for the
nucleation and growth steps. The particles will be prepared in the presence of
trioctylphosphine capping ligands to provide a dispersion of particles in an
organic solvent. Reaction conditions will be identified that provide control
over the particle composition and size distribution. High resolution TEM images
will be used to measure the distributions of particle sizes and EDAX on
individual particles will provide their compositions. Post synthesis heat
treatment in an inert atmosphere will determine conditions for obtaining the
chemically ordered, ferromagnetic tau&amp;#61472;phase with high
magnetocrystalline anisotropy. Time-dependent remnant coercivity measurements
will provide values of important magnetic properties, i.e, Ms, Hk, Ku, and V.
The effect of particle size, composition and chemical ordering on the magnetic
properties will be ascertained. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The world-wide demand for information storage capacity is
growing faster than our ability to provide data storage media. Magnetic storage
tape is the lowest cost, most reliable and highest volume metric storage density
medium for archiving digital data. It is an indispensible component of the
overall data storage hierarchy. The Information Storage Industry Consortium
(INSIC) has projected that by 2018 current magnetic particles will not support
further growth in data storage density. This research project aims at addressing
the systematic development of a new class of magnetic nanoparticles that will
support further increases in storage density and make tape a viable medium
beyond 2018. The particles are a ferromagnetic aluminum-manganese tau phase
alloy and this project will discover new chemistry to prepare these particles.
The development of these particles will require an essential understanding of
compositional, phase and structure stability in multi-component metallic alloys
in the nanometer regime. The results will elucidate the intrinsic growth
mechanisms of nanoparticles. This will bring to fruition the ability to tailor
nanoparticles for applications beyond magnetic storage such as catalysis,
hyperthermia cancer treatments, and energy harvesting systems. This project will
support a graduate student, who will earn a Ph. D. in Materials Science under
the joint direction of D. E. Nikles (chemistry) and G. B. Thompson (metallurgy).
The student will have a unique multidisciplinary educational experience at the
interface between nanoparticle chemical science and nanoparticle metallurgy. The
project will also support a high school student who will spend the summer in
doing research as part of a Nanoscience and Engineering High School Internship
Program.