* 0934735
* CalTeach at Santa Barbara
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2009,09/30/2014
* Pierre Wiltzius, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* V. Celeste Carter
* 09/30/2014
* USD 900,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The University of California, Santa Barbara's (UCSB) Division of Mathematical,
Life, and Physical Sciences, UCSB's Gevirtz Graduate School of Education (GGSE),
three regional community colleges (Santa Barbara City College, Ventura Community
College, and Alan Hancock College), and seven school districts in Santa Barbara
and Ventura counties are collaborating to prepare exceptional secondary science
and mathematics teachers for California's secondary schools. CalTeach at Santa
Barbara (CTSB) is recruiting STEM majors into science and math teaching through
a new Minor in Science and Mathematics Education. The project is increasing the
overall number of science and mathematics credential candidates in UCSB's fifth
year Teacher Education Program by 47% and building cohorts of students through
shared activities so as to prepare and retain student-centered, reform-minded
science and mathematics teachers. An estimated 75 scholarships ($10,000 each)
are being awarded over a five year period to STEM majors who have successfully
completed their undergraduate degree and been accepted to the UCSB Teacher
Education Program. Selection procedures favor students who are the first in
their families to attend college, bilingual, and/or graduates of the
undergraduate Minor in Science and Mathematics Education. Three scholarships
each year are designated for community college transfer students. Scholarship
recipients complete their student teaching in schools serving substantial
numbers of students who are economically disadvantaged and/or English learners.
They fulfill their teaching commitments in designated, high need partnership
school districts while completing an enhanced beginning teacher induction
program. Evaluation research is determining how best to meet program objectives
of recruitment, teacher preparation, and establishment of cohorts of exceptional
science and mathematics teachers.