* 0934594
* CMG Collaborative Research: Subsurface Imaging and Uncertainty Quantification.
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Liliana Borcea, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This is a collaborative multi-disciplinary three-year project that addresses the
fundamental problem of determining (or "imaging") the location of subsurface
geologic materials and the spatial distributions of their physical properties
that control movement of groundwater and contamination. These spatial variations
occur in complex patterns and at all size scales. Subsurface engineering
applications that require accurate imaging of these variations include reliable
environmental monitoring, predictive modeling, and efficient groundwater
remediation. The project will develop the next generation of subsurface imaging
tools to significantly improve estimates of formation and property
distributions, and to improve quantification of the corresponding predictive
uncertainty to provide a sound basis for management or policy decisions. A team
of scientists and engineers with overlapping expertise in mathematics,
statistics, modeling, and hydrogeology has been assembled from Stanford, Rice,
Utah, and Boise State universities. Theoretical and modeling developments will
be combined with controlled experiments at a field-scale test facility (Boise
Hydrogeophysical Research Site, or BHRS) with three known scales of sedimentary
structure and property variation, including layers and lenses with both high-
contrast and gradational boundaries. In particular, the research team will: (i)
develop a firm mathematical foundation for the analysis of inverse problems (or
imaging) under realistic assumptions about the completeness of measurements,
including improved methods for representing complex systems; (ii) employ novel
statistical tools that exploit recent advances and trends in computation; (iii)
develop new analytical approaches for stochastic (or statistically uncertain)
systems with realistic variability; (iv) combine these developments with
experimental studies and independent evaluation of model performance against
archive data sets available from BHRS; and (v) advance an emerging field method
(hydraulic tomography) to acquire data sets for modeling 3D hydraulic
conductivity distributions in aquifers. Students and a post-doctoral scientist
will work with senior researchers and will participate in all aspects of this
project to gain cross-disciplinary knowledge and experience. In addition to
dissemination through peer-reviewed literature and professional meetings, the
team will develop web-based tutorials and training sets with data and models
from the project, and a short course on field and modeling methods from the
project. This project has broad impacts for society and for scientific and
engineering infrastructure. Most available freshwater is stored in the
subsurface. Groundwater is the primary source of water for over 50 percent of
Americans, and for roughly 95 percent in rural areas. In the world, many of the
most important aquifers are being gradually depleted. In coastal areas, where
world population is growing the fastest, seawater intrudes into aquifers as
groundwater levels drop and/or sea levels rise. This research will lead to
better methods for management of this important resource by developing the next
generation of subsurface imaging capabilities based on advancements in the
mathematics of inverse modeling, stochastic differential equations, multi-scale
simulations, and new field methods such as hydraulic tomography.