* 0934650
* REU Site: Ecological, environmental and conservation biology studies in Ghana, West Africa
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2009,04/30/2011
* Daniel Wubah, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 04/30/2011
* USD 131,422.00

This joint award from the Division of Biological Infrastructure and the Office
of International Science and Engineering supports the continuation of the
Research Experiences for Undergraduates program at the University of Cape Coast
(UCC), Ghana. This REU site program focuses on ecology, biodiversity and
conservation biology in the tropics. Students from US universities will spend
six weeks at UCC during the summer working on defined research projects under
the mentorship of Ghanaian scientists. A total of twelve students will
participate in the program during this award period (2007-2010). This program
has two main research foci: i) bioprospecting for potentially useful plants and
ii) ecological and biodiversity studies. Participants will design experiments in
collaboration with their mentors, collect and analyze their data, and present
their results in Ghana. Upon their return to the US, students will make
presentations at regional and national meetings. Field sites will include the
Kakum National Forest and Elmina beach. Participants will acquire skills in
ethnobotany, tropical biology, aquaculture, ecology, entomology, taxonomy and
analytical chemistry. They will be expected to publish their results in peer-
reviewed journals. The ecological studies will yield new and valuable
information on tropical species of insects and plants that may not have been
described in the literature yet. Data gathered in the project will also
contribute towards an inventory of potentially endangered species and
conservation studies as a whole. Participants will have an invaluable cross-
cultural experience. More information is available at
http://www.honors.ufl.edu/ucc/ or by contacting Daniel Wubah at dawubah@ufl.edu.