* 0934317
* CMG Collaborative Research: Fast and Efficient Radial Basis Function Algorithms for Geophysical Modeling on Arbitrary Geometries
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Natasha Flyer, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2015
* USD 200,001.00

Numerical method innovations in the geosciences have not paralleled the
explosion in computer hardware development over the last decades. Yet, for
scientific computing to advance, it is crucial that novel numerical approaches
are developed that improve the simplicity, flexibility, and accuracy of
algorithms while taking advantage of this revolution in hardware technology. The
current project is aimed at exactly that objective: to develop fast, efficient
and parallelizable radial basis function (RBF) methodologies, enhanced by novel
graphics processing unit (GPU) technology, for applications in computational
geosciences. A collaborative team of computational mathematicians and
geophysicists has been established for this purpose. The RBF approach is very
attractive in that it achieves high-order accuracy for arbitrary geometries in
n-dimensional space, naturally permits local refinement, is mesh-free (no
grids), algorithmic complexity does not increase with dimension and, generally
offers higher accuracy with longer time steps than traditional spectral methods
for a given number of nodes. However, RBFs are still in an early developmental
stage; key issues to be addressed are: 1) development of localized high-order
RBF-finite difference (RBF-FD) stencils on irregular node layouts in
n-dimensional space for arbitrary geometries with stable time-stepping, 2)
adaptive local node refinement schemes for RBF-FD, 3) development of hybrid
spectral RBF and FD schemes to maximize advantages of RBFs and while minimizing
their computational cost, and 4) implementation of the method on hardware
accelerators, such as GPUs. Scientific targets for application include 3D mantle
convection with varying properties, models of the geodynamo in an elliptic
geometry, and tsunami modeling with irregular coastline topography.

By advancing the frontier of computational mathematics that will take advantage
of today?s booming technology industry, society can be offered a more in depth
understanding of geophysical processes related to mantle convection, the
geodynamo, and tsunamis. These phenomena play a key role in continental
movement, polarity reversal of the earth?s magnetic field, earthquakes, and
coastal flooding. The proposed innovative mathematicalcomputational approach may
hold the key to unlocking long-standing questions of fundamental importance in
such geophysics areas. An interdisciplinary collaborative team of computational
mathematicians and geophysicists has been assembled from a national lab and four
universities (NCAR-Colorado, Boise State Univ.-Idaho, Univ. of Minnesota,
Florida State Univ., and the Univ. of California?Davis) to develop new methods
in computational mathematics for addressing these critical geophysical problems.
The project supports collaborative participation among researchers at different
stages in their careers as well as Ph.D, Masters, and undergraduate students in
4 states and in a myriad of scientific and mathematical disciplines. These
students will have the opportunity to participate as members of an
interdisciplinary team composed of senior personnel with a demonstrated
commitment to education and research. NCAR will serve not only as an integrating
hub for scientific endeavors but provide a medium for students from across the
country to work together on multiple facets of the proposal. Through the
SciPARCS 10 week internship program at NCAR, students will have the opportunity
to engage in joint collaborative research, preparing them for a career in
computational geosciences for the 21st century.