* 0934063
* My Community, Our Earth: Fellowships for Geospatial Technologies and Biodiversity in Africa
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2011
* Douglas Richardson, Association of American Geographers
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 09/30/2011
* USD 50,227.00

The Association of American Geographers (AAG) will support the participation of
four students competitively selected from US universities to engage in intensive
collaboration with interdisciplinary teams of counterpart students and their
mentors in Africa. Teams will explore how geographic technologies and expertise
may be applied to local and regional biodiversity challenges. The proposed
activities build upon two important new AAG-run programs within Africa: a
capacity building program for African scientists managed by AAG with funding
from USAID/NASA and collaboration with African counterpart institutions
receiving support from the US State Department under the Geospatial Technologies
for Sustainable Development program. The project will permit a cohort of
undergraduate and graduate researchers to acquire meaningful international
research and collaboration experiences in geographic technologies and
biodiversity through participation in programs that currently do not support
wide US participation. Students will receive mentoring support, travel, living
expenses, and stipends to attend a training workshop in Nairobi, Kenya, a three-
month research activity with African student mentor teams, and ongoing virtual
collaborations over the course of one year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit. Geographic Information Science (GISc) provides a valuable set of
technologies, methods and perspectives of demonstrated utility in addressing
challenges to biodiversity conservation within the context of its complex
relationship to other socio-economic phenomena, its increasingly data intensive
and spatially explicit nature, and emerging digital access to georeferenced
biological data as well as new software tools and services that create novel
research opportunities for ecological analysis, predictive modeling, and
synthesis.The AAG?s assessment on the state of GIScience for sustainable
development and the identification of fundamental geospatial datasets in Africa
reveals a strong need for more extensive educational and professional
development collaborations, including both events and networks, among US and
African institutions to help strengthen the capacity of the geospatial community
to transform these datasets into knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts. This proposed project seeks to support NSF OISEs mission to develop
global scientists and engineers in terms of linkages to research programs of
other countries, particularly developing countries, where often counterpart
resources are typically scarce. The program will provide support for new
scientists and engineers by involving US graduate and undergraduate students
with opportunities to gain early career international professional experience.
The program will disseminate workshop materials and project results broadly.
Team project reports and white papers will form the basis for additional
research products, including conference exhibits and summary publications to be
disseminated via international venues, including at United Nations (New York),
AfricaGIS (Uganda), and AAG (Washington, DC) conferences in
2009-2010.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the Office of
International Science and Engineering through the EAGER (EArly-concept Grants
for Exploratory Research) mechanism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;