* 0934956
* CMG Collaborative Research: Particle Filters and Ecological Models (PFEM): Application of chainless Monte-Carlo methods to mapping the ecology of the North Pacific Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Robert Miller, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 09/30/2013
* USD 817,005.00

Intellectual Merit. Dynamic response of the world ocean ecosystem to interannual
and decadal climate variability has been characterized by changes either in
rates (e.g. rate of primary and export production) or in community structure.
These changes in community structure cannot be easily modeled without
introducing additional complexity in the ecosystem model. Similar limitations
exist when ecosystem models have to reflect changes in the community from one
region of the world ocean to another. The working hypothesis of this study is
that advances in data assimilation techniques, coupled physical-biological
modeling and high performance computing will help construct maps of parameter
estimates for ecological models that will reflect these changes in species and
community structure. Parameter estimation using remotely sensed ocean color and
in situ observations is especially challenging since the state and/or
measurement functions are highly non-linear, and the posterior distribution of
the process states is not Gaussian. Several data assimilation techniques have
been utilized in the last decade or so for coupled models of ocean physics and
biogeochemistry but most of them rely on weakly non-linear and Gaussian systems
(e.g. variational methods, Ensemble Kalman Filters) or are prohibitively
expensive (e.g. particle filters). In particle methods one estimates the
probability density of an ensemble of particles (instances of the model modified
by observations). This is usually done by a Bayesian construction, with the
resampling needed for accuracy done by Markov chain Monte Carlo. For large-scale
systems this procedure can be prohibitively expensive, because the number of
particles may need to be substantial and because the MCMC may have an excessive
fraction of rejections. This study will employ newly-developed methods, where
the probability density is sampled directly, without a Bayesian step, and where
the resampling is done without recourse to Markov chains. A chainless Monte-
Carlo particle filter is designed to overcome the shortcomings of variational
methods and Markov chain Monte-Carlo particle methods for highly nonlinear, non-
Gaussian systems with very high state dimensions. These chainless methods have
performed well in smaller systems. The aim is to produce spatially and
temporally varying parameter estimates for an ecological model of medium
complexity coupled to a mixed layer model, based on assimilation of remotely-
sensed surface chlorophyll-a observations in the north Pacific basin. Parameter
values will be interpreted in terms of species distribution and nutrient
cycling. This project will evaluate the ability of this coupled model to
simulate observed seasonal to interannual variability, evaluate its sensitivity
to forcing, and relate the results to considerations of ocean ecology. Broader
Impact. The new data assimilation techniques will be broadly applicable to the
highly nonlinear high dimensional problems that appear in interdisciplinary
oceanography and applied mathematics. Examination of error estimates will lead
to quantitative assessment of the information content of remotely sensed
observations, and facilitate planning of future observing programs. The results
of the coupled model simulations should provide useful information for
assessment of the impact of climate change. The particle methods will be a
significant advance in the state of the nonlinear filtering art, and be widely
applicable in science and engineering. On the educational side, the project will
provide training for future scientists in the field of interdisciplinary
modeling and data assimilation.