* 0934695
* Math for America San Diego Noyce Fellowship Program
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2017
* Barbara Edwards, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Richardson
* 07/31/2017
* USD 1,500,000.00

The University of California, San Diego, and the San Diego chapter of Math for
America (MfA) , in partnership with California State University San Marcos and
San Diego State University and four school districts (Escondido Union High
School District, Grossmont Union High School District, Oceanside Unified School
District, and San Diego Unified School District) are helping to transform
mathematics teaching in the San Diego community through a model program designed
to significantly increase the numbers and skill levels of mathematics teachers
in the region. The fundamental objective of the effort is to improve student
learning of mathematics by providing 24 selected teachers with extensive
professional support in their credential year and throughout their first four
years of teaching in high-need schools. The MfA SD Noyce Fellowship Program
encompasses a comprehensive plan of financial, educational and professional
support provided to carefully selected Teaching Fellows. The project provides
for strong professional development services, including annual summer
institutes, throughout the term of the fellowships; mentoring of the new
teachers by experienced, exemplary teachers in their schools; an incentive
system designed to attract and reward high quality individuals by making
teaching positions competitive with nearby, high-tech industries; and a robust
evaluation plan to measure progress and programmatic success. The project is
benefiting from the national network of Math for America which offers a common,
electronic fellowship application process, collaboration in the development of
evaluative mechanisms, and enhanced fund-raising. MfA SD is a cohesively
designed program of inter-related and integrated academic, professional, and
social support systems. There is a commonality in their purpose and an
intellectual infrastructure that unites its professors, fellows, teachers, and
administrators in a structure for mathematics education that is guided by two
fundamental questions: "What is the mathematics that should be taught in
school?" and "How should it be taught?" The evaluation component is designed to
impact not only understanding of the project's findings, but also illuminate
programmatic elements that contribute to teacher retention, influence teacher
learning, and reveal data about teacher experiences so they can be shared with
education researchers nation-wide.