* 0934192
* Collaborative Research PREM: City College-Chicago MRSEC Partnership on the Dynamics of Heterogeneous and Particulate Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Sidney Nagel, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2014
* USD 350,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;The Partnership in Research and Education in
Materials (PREM) at the City College of New York (CCNY) involves a collaboration
with the Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) at the
University of Chicago. The PREM has two broad goals: to provide the highest
quality research and education opportunities in material dynamics; and to use
CCNY?s diverse and high-quality student body and research university status to
drive permanent added participation of under-represented groups in materials
science. The overarching goal of the research is to develop methodology for
description of material dynamics. This work has potential for major impact in
many fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CCNY-Chicago PREM combines strengths of
CCNY in simulation and modeling with the Chicago expertise in experiments and
theory to develop design principles for next-generation materials. The research
focuses on the dynamics of two key areas, namely heterogeneous and particulate
systems, in which the role of the dynamics in making new material will be
explored. The team will investigate the following topics: 1) dynamics of
droplets during impact, 2) novel assembly techniques using micron sized
particles and bio-molecules, and 3) assemblies of colloidal and granular
particles. The material formation processes in these systems are far from
equilibrium, and for these conditions there is a need for numerical simulation
techniques to provide insight to the phenomena occurring at the small scales
(e.g. of the particles), and their relation to the overall mixture or system
behavior. Such simulation results support development of &lt;br/&gt;models
useful for engineering of materials synthesis processes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developing the human resource base in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) is vital to the mission of the PREM. The
partnership will use the excitement intrinsic to the discovery process to
recruit and train talented students at the high school, undergraduate and
graduate, as well as post-doctoral levels. This will establish CCNY as a leader
not only in the dynamics of heterogeneous and particulate systems, but also in
the development of under-represented talent in STEM. To aid in accomplishing its
goals, this partnership will seek guidance from an advisory committee with broad
representation, including a high school principal, as well as academic and
industrial leaders. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;