* 0934131
* Geomorphic Connectivity in Recently Burned Watersheds
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,02/29/2012
* Thad Wasklewicz, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/29/2012
* USD 81,000.00

Wildfires are a growing global problem that directly impact society. Fire also
is a disturbance mechanism that alters watersheds dynamics through rainfall
interception, runoff, and sediment transport/deposition, thereby promoting
secondary hazards like floods and debris flows. Although researchers generally
concur that debris flows in recently burned basins initiate from progressive-
bulking, a process whereby the flow picks up more and more sediment as it
travels through the watershed, an integrated watershed-scale understanding of
material fluxes in recently burned catchments has not yet been developed. This
research project aims to address this shortcoming by using the conceptual
context of connectivity, examining the transfer of energy and matter between
individual landscape compartments, such as hillslopes, gullies and stream
channels. This one-year study will examine the feasibility of using repeat
terrestrial laser-scanning techniques to capture fine-scale topographic changes
resulting from matter exchange during sediment transport and deposition at the
U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) and National Weather Service (NWS) Intensive
Research Area (IRA) in southern California. Sediment dynamics on an event-by-
event basis will be assessed using 1-cm resolution digital terrain models (DTM).
This will be accomplished analytically by using DTM differencing techniques to
capture the volumetric changes in sediment sources and sinks through space and
time. The variability of erosion and deposition through space and time will be
analyzed with the aid of fine-scale sediment budgets between the various
landscape compartments. The budgets and the DTM difference data will be used to
assess connectivity between the various landscape compartments. These analyses
also will provide insights regarding how to integrate process-oriented data,
such as rainfall amount and intensity, soil moisture, and stream discharge, from
the IRA into future research. The analyses also will inform basic and applied
science whether more field data on process information is required or whether
statistical or numerical models from current data sampling are sufficient for
studies of process-form relations.

Many residents in Southern California are prone to multiple natural hazards. The
USGS is dedicated to assist southern California communities in order to educate
and reduce their risk from these hazards. Results from this project will provide
valuable information for USGS models to predict post-fire debris-flow
probability, magnitude, and potential inundation. Project findings will enhance
efforts to improve the predictive capability of the USGS/NWS Flash Flood and
Debris Flow Early Warning System for communities prone to flooding and debris
flows. The strong connections to the USGS will assure the outcomes are
disseminated to local communities through implementation of research findings
into hazard mitigation programs and public outreach. In addition, this research
will integrate active scientific investigation into the educational experiences
at East Carolina University. Two undergraduate research assistants will be
integrated into all aspects of the project and these students will develop their
own research projects to culminate in honors theses. Furthermore, an interactive
website will discuss the findings and allow rapid updates of the research
progress. The website also will permit private citizens and various local,
state, and federal agencies to engage in two-way dialog with the principal
investigator.