* 0934760
* Collaborative Research: Development and Testing of Presage-Pedagogy-Process-Product Model to Assess the Effectiveness of Case Study Methodology in Achieving Learning Outcomes
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Qiang Le, Hampton University
* Standard Grant
* Donna Riley
* 08/31/2012
* USD 116,011.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This engineering education research
award to Auburn University will develop real world case studies of engineering
problems which are of high current importance, such as energy and the
environment. The case studies will include topics from other disciplines such as
business and ethics, thus making the assignments more like real world
situations. They will be used in a variety of classes and their effectiveness in
enhancing student learning will be measured. All of this will be undertaken in
partnership with Hampton University, a Historically Black institution. The
results in the form of the case studies, instructions on how to use them, and
how to measure their impact on student learning will be packaged and made
available through the instructor support website at litee.auburn.edu/iss. The
results will also be presented at technical conferences and published in
professional journals. The goal is to better prepare students for the practice
of engineering through involvement in real life engineering problems. These
techniques when used in the freshman year are expected to increase student?s
interest in engineering and in subsequent years they will enhance the number of
students who complete engineering degrees and are ready to fill engineering
jobs.