* 0934195
* PENN-UPR Partnership for Research and Education in Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Michael Klein, University of Puerto Rico at Humacao
* Standard Grant
* jose caro
* 08/31/2015
* USD 3,250,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;The Partnerships for Research and Education in
Materials (PREM) program at University of Puerto Rico at Humacao, a primarily
undergraduate institution, involves a successful partnership between the
Humacao, Cayey and RÃ­o Piedras campuses of the University of Puerto Rico (UPR)
and the Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) at University
of Pennsylvania (Penn). Multidisciplinary and multi-institutional teams of
researchers combine mathematical and computational techniques with experiments
to study the properties of materials that include metal oxides and carbon
nanotubes. Applications include the construction of gas sensors and electronic
devices with nanometric (billionth of a meter) dimensions. With smaller sizes
these devices are expected to be more efficient, effective and economical for
applications such as the detection of bacteria in food and water samples.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PREM is committed to increasing the number of minority and
women students in materials research through a well coordinated effort that
begins with outreach activities for the community and which guides talented and
motivated students from elementary to graduate school. A new component supports
a local high school in the integration of materials research contents into the
curricula. PREM will increase interactions with industry and broaden
opportunities for minority students by initiating efforts to foster
entrepreneurship and the development of small businesses based on materials
research. The education and outreach programs include: seminars and
videoconferences, mini-courses on materials, hands on workshops and open houses
for K-12 students and teachers, a summer research program for high school
students, and collaboration with a museum to bring scientific exhibits for the
broader community. Student and faculty exchanges between UPR and Penn include a
Summer Program at Penn for UPR faculty and students, an Annual Research Meeting
and an Annual Research Symposium at UPR.