* 0934004
* Integrated modeling and experimental evaluation of hydrodynamic and microbial controls on DNAPL dissolution and detoxification
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,04/30/2010
* Eric Seagren, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Paul L. Bishop
* 04/30/2010
* USD 376,193.00

0934004&lt;br/&gt;Becker&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In situ bioremediation
based on biological reductive dehalogenation is now an established remediation
approach for sites contaminated with aqueous-phase chlorinated ethenes. However,
the EPA estimates that chlorinated ethenes are present as dense non-aqueous
phase liquids (DNAPLs) at 46,000 contaminated sites in the U.S. The presence of
DNAPL forms of these contaminants, which are known or suspected carcinogens, is
a major obstacle to remediation efforts that has widespread implications for
human and ecological health. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Importantly, abiotic
dissolution of DNAPLs into groundwater is a slow process and may require several
hundred years to deplete the DNAPL source of contamination. Several in situ
DNAPL treatment methods use physicochemical processes to mobilize and
subsequently capture and/or destroy contaminants and thus accelerate the clean-
up process. These methods can be difficult and costly to implement and may
preclude bioremediation of dissolved contaminants by making conditions
inhospitable to microorganisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently, interest has
grown in the use dehalorespiring bacteria to treat DNAPLs through bioenhanced
dissolution, i.e., enhanced mass removal from chlorinated ethene DNAPLs through
reductive dechlorination of dissolved contaminants near the DNAPL-water
interface. This approach is appealing because it does not rely on DNAPL
mobilization and is compatible with the clean-up of dissolved contaminants using
bioremediation. Although bioenhanced dissolution appears promising, the design
of biological DNAPL source treatment measures using a "black box" approach may
not promote and sustain the growth of the populations with the greatest
potential to bioenhance dissolution rates. The proposed project focuses on
understanding the interrelated roles that hydrodynamics and competition among
different dehalorespiring populations, as well as other community members, play
in determining the distribution of dehalorespiring populations in the DNAPL
source zone and dissolved contaminant plume and the resulting impact on the
magnitude of bioenhanced dissolution and the extent of detoxification.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Evaluation of the hydrodynamic and microbial controls on
bioenhanced dissolution and detoxification of chlorinated ethenes will be
accomplished using an integrated modeling and experimental approach that
includes the following key objectives: &lt;br/&gt;(1) Mathematical modeling will
be used to theoretically predict the relationships between microbial
competition, hydrodynamic conditions, and bioenhancement for three model
scenarios and design a micromodel system for studying DNAPL dissolution and
source-zone microbial ecology at the porescale.&lt;br/&gt;(2) The micromodels
will be used to independently estimate key system parameters and test model
predictions for the three scenarios by experimentally evaluating the effects of
microbial competition and hydrodynamics on population distribution, dissolution
bioenhancement and plume detoxification. An innovative fluorescent in situ
hybridization approach will be used to directly visualize and quantify
population distribution in the micromodel. (4) An intermediate-scale flow cell
will be used to test whether the micromodel experiments and mathematical
modeling can predict bioenhancement effects in a scaled up system. (5)
Mathematical modeling will be refined based on the experimental results and used
to predict the effects of microbial competition and hydrodynamics on DNAPL
source zone longevities for four DNAPL configurations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research will advance our understanding of how hydrodynamic conditions
and other factors influence the distribution and outcome of competition among
dehalorespiring and other populations for growth substrates in environments
containing DNAPL and dissolved contaminants. This information will transform how
we interpret the biological and physical phenomena affecting contaminant
behavior at the many sites containing DNAPL source zones and how we direct our
remediation efforts at those sites. Most importantly, it will be used to
determine the conditions under which biological source zone treatment is
appropriate and design treatment systems that optimize bioenhancement of DNAPL
dissolution and the realization of site clean-up
goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participation of underrepresented groups in science
and engineering disciplines will be promoted through research experiences that
partner community college (CC) students at a Minority Serving Institution with
undergraduate students at the University of Maryland and provide training
opportunities for CC faculty. The development of a short course offered through
a major bioremediation conference, as well as an interactive Web-based
simulation tool, will ensure results are broadly disseminated and applied and
promote lifelong learning among bioremediation practitioners.