* 0934110
* East Coast Computer Algebra Day 2009
* CSE,CCF
* 04/15/2009,09/30/2010
* Edmund Lamagna, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Petros Drineas
* 09/30/2010
* USD 12,992.00

PROJECT SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Sixteenth Annual East Coast
Computer Algebra Day (ECCAD?2009) will be held at the University of Rhode Island
in Kingston on Saturday, May 2, 2009. The purpose of the meeting is to stimulate
interest and enhance understanding of the technical and applied aspects of
computer algebra. The conference provides a forum for those interested in
becoming more active in computer algebra to participate, interact, and meet with
others in an inexpensive and easily accessible way. ECCAD is a one-day meeting
that is more informal than other technical conferences in the field, with ample
time for unstructured interaction. Participation by graduate students and junior
faculty is particularly encouraged through special invitation to contribute to
the poster session and software demonstrations, and through travel
support.&lt;br/&gt;The meeting will include presentations by four invited
speakers who have made outstanding contributions in the field of computer
algebra. These speakers will anchor the meeting and help attract participants.
There will also be a special panel on Future Directions in Computer Algebra,
along with the poster and demonstration session. The invited talks, panel, and
poster session are expected to cover the entire range of computer algebra:
algorithms, systems, and applications. The contributed posters and software
demonstrations will enable researchers, especially junior faculty and graduate
students, to publicize their recent findings and to make new
contacts.&lt;br/&gt;This year's ECCAD is only the second to be held in New
England. With many colleges and universities in the area, it is hoped that the
meeting will be able to draw a large number of attendees and to generate new
interest in computer algebra.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;