* 0934313
* Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for Experimental Research in Computer Systems (IUCRCERCS)
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Douglas Blough, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 08/31/2015
* USD 308,000.00

IIP 0934313 Georgia Institute of Technology Schwan

This is a proposal to renew support for the Industry/University Cooperative
Research Center for Experimental Research in Computer Systems (CERCS). The
multi-university center is headquartered at the Georgia Institute of Technology,
with an affiliate group at the Ohio State University. CERCS was established in
2001. The focus of the CERCS faculty at Georgia Institute of Technology is on
the core systems of technologies underlying large scale computing systems-
technology creation.

CERCS will continue to entertain a large number and variety of projects, driven
by faculty interests, industry connection and center capabilities. Three key
domains of interest to CERCS are Enterprise Systems, Scientific Computing, and
Embedded Systems; and, underlying and uniting these domains are four significant
research thrusts. CERCS is committed to fostering interdisciplinary research,
establishing a culture of experimental research reaching out to local and
national industry, and to encourage participation and contribute to the regional
and national economies through the availability of talent and emerging
technologies.

The broader impact of CERCS is on the application of the research results on the
IT producer and consumer companies. CERCS plans to stimulate and ensure
practical research with broad practical impact by collaborating with industry
partners. Work in energy management, multicore software stack, and applications
to scientific computing, enterprise computing, and mobile computing will all
benefit society by reducing costs of computing and allowing society to
efficiently address larger computing problems than currently possible. CERCS
also plans to create broad student community for research and education
activities and to educate qualified students to join the software/computing
industry.