* 0934115
* Wisconsin - Puerto Rico Partnership for Research and Education in Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Juan Lopez-Garriga, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Continuing Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 08/31/2015
* USD 2,028,312.00

The Partnership for Research and Education in Materials (PREM) between the
University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez (UPRM) and the University of Wisconsin (UW)
Materials Research Science and Engineering Center on Nanostructured Interfaces
(MRSEC) and the Nanoscale Science and Engineering Center on Templated Synthesis
and Assembly at the Nanoscale (NSEC) broadens the participation of
underrepresented groups in STEM at all levels. This partnership capitalizes on
past and current synergistic research and education collaborations between UPRM
and the UW. An essential aspect of this project is the combination of experiment
and theory to elucidate and design novel functional materials at the nanoscale.
Four interdisciplinary research teams focus on the development and
characterization of novel materials and processes for innovative applications,
such as beta-peptides and poly-beta-peptides, engineered nanoparticles, liquid
crystals, and multifunctional nanoporous materials. The applications for this
research include development of antimicrobial agents, minimizing the potential
deleterious effects of engineered nanoparticles on the environment, development
of solid-like liquid crystalline elastomers and gels for chemical and biological
sensing and cell-culture applications, and development of nanostructured
materials for chemical transformation of sustainable biological feedstocks into
fuels and specialty chemicals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Educational and outreach
efforts expose K-12 audiences to state-of-the-art materials science through the
use of the Science on Wheels Educational Center (SONWEC), and incorporates
creative and proven college-level programs. A demonstrated mentoring program for
newly hired faculty is utilized which enhances the retention and success rate of
underrepresented minority groups and women engaged at the faculty level. And
with the large number of Hispanic and female undergraduate students in
attendance at UPRM, this partnership further increases the incorporation of
Hispanics and women in the workforce pipeline leading to advanced degrees in
areas related to Materials Science and Engineering and Nanotechnology,
consequently significantly broadening participation and building a diverse
community of materials researchers. This strategic partnership expands and
strengthens UPRM?s educational and outreach innovations to a much broader
audience in the US reaching beyond Wisconsin and Puerto Rico. &lt;br/&gt;