* 0934887
* Texas A&M University AggieTeach Robert Noyce Scholarship Program
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2015
* Timothy Scott, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 06/30/2015
* USD 599,685.00

The AggieTeach Scholarship Program is a Noyce Phase II project that is awarding
47 scholarships to 30 undergraduate STEM majors pursuing teaching careers in
grades 8-12. This program is housed in the Center for Mathematics and Science
Education, a collaborative effort between the Colleges of Science and Education
at the University. The program partners with two local school districts to
provide early field experiences and mentoring for the future teachers. All of
the efforts of AggieTeach address the need for more and better-prepared STEM
teachers. Hallmarks of the program include early identification and recruitment,
tuition waivers for students in the first field base course, centralized
advising to coordinate degree plans and certification requirements, and
mentoring throughout their undergraduate experience in the College of Science.
Through the Noyce scholarship program and corresponding inductee support, the
AggieTeach program is ensuring that the institution will expand its state-wide
effort for the production of highly qualified STEM teachers committed to
teaching in high-need schools. Beyond meeting a critical shortage in the state
and nation, a unique intellectual merit of this particular program is the
assessment that is documenting best practices for teacher training programs at a
large state-supported university, which can lead to a broad impact throughout
the nation. Results are being shared extensively through presentations at
professional conferences and publications in respected refereed journals.