* 0934696
* CMG Research: Impact of Mineral Precipitating Biofilms on the Physical and Chemical Characteristics of Porous Media
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Alfred Cunningham, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2015
* USD 750,002.00

The proposed work will develop laboratory, modeling and computational tools for
the study of the geological impact of mineral precipitating microbial
communities, aiming at elucidating fundamentals and providing quantitative
descriptions of the hydrobiogeochemical conditions and processes in carbonate
mineral precipitating biofilms in porous media. Outcomes will be (1)
characterization of the important physical (e.g. advective and diffusive
transport), chemical (e.g. pH distribution), and biological (e.g. microbial
metabolic activity) phenomena impacting pore systems, and (2) development of
measurement techniques for identified relevant parameters with suitable spatial
and temporal resolution. To accomplish this, models will be constructed that
allow observation and insight into the roles of hydrodynamics, chemistry,
electrochemistry, microbiology, and thermodynamics in the detail that are needed
for description of interaction of biofilms with porous media. Thermodynamic
principles will be used, necessary for improved description of biofilms in their
natural geochemical role as thermodynamic machines. The experimental systems to
be employed will allow spatially and temporally resolved non-destructive
observation of combined biofilm development and mineral precipitation in
capillary and porous media flow reactors. They will aid in closing the existing
gap of knowledge between non-flowing (batch) systems often used to elucidate
biogeochemical processes and the frequently observed influence of hydrodynamics
on biogeochemical processes on the meso- and
macroscale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research focuses on microbially-
induced calcium carbonate mineralization. Calcium carbonate formation is
responsible for the development of features with enormous scales in the shallow
and deep ocean (e.g. reefs and alga and diatom exoskeletons) and in the
terrestrial environment. Carbonate rocks (such as limestone, marble, and chalk)
are probably the single largest reservoir of inorganic carbon on earth
containing approximately 65 million gigatons of carbon. Carbonate mineral
formation and dissolution are important parts of the global carbon cycle, have
the potential to bind or release large amounts of carbon dioxide, and may
therefore affect the global climate.&lt;br/&gt;Additionally, engineered,
microbially mediated carbonate precipitation has been proposed as a strategy to
improve geologic carbon sequestration and to facilitate the precipitation of
heavy metals and radionuclides from contaminated groundwater. The investigators
will develop laboratory and computational tools to better understand the role
and utilize the potential in the environment of microbial communities in all of
these processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;