* 0934095
* Collaborative Research: ETBC: Amazon iNfluence on the Atlantic: CarbOn export from Nitrogen fixation by DiAtom Symbioses (ANACONDAS)
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Patricia Yager, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 09/30/2013
* USD 415,690.00

The investigators hypothesize that large tropical river plumes with low N: P
ratios provide an ideal niche for diatom-diazotroph assemblages (DDAs). They
suggest that the ability of these organisms to fix N2 within the surface ocean
is responsible for significant C export in the Amazon River plume. Their
previous observations in the Amazon River plume helped reveal that blooms
comprised of the endosymbiotic N2-fixing cyanobacterium Richelia and its diatom
hosts (e.g. Hemiaulus) were a significant source of new production and carbon
export. The previous work focused largely on the sensitivity of DDAs to external
forcing from dust and riverine inputs, so the ecology of these organisms and the
fate of their new production were largely unstudied. It is now known that DDAs
are responsible for a significant amount of CO2 drawdown in the Amazon River
plume, and floating sediment traps at 200 m measured 4x higher mass fluxes
beneath the plume than outside the plume. This led the researchers to
hypothesize that this greater export is due either to aggregation and sinking of
DDAs themselves or to grazing of DDAs by zooplankton.

In this study the researchers will undertake a suite of field, satellite and
modeling studies aimed at understanding the ecology and tracing the fate of C
and N fixed by DDAs and other phytoplankton living in the plume. By examining C
and silicate (Si) export from offshore surface waters, through the upper oceanic
food web, the mesopelagic, and down to the deep sea floor, they will quantify
the impact of the Amazon River on biological processes that control C
sequestration and the implications of these regional processes on C, N and Si
budgets. The study will go beyond previous research because they will quantify
1) the distribution, nutrient demands, and activity of DDAs in the context of
phytoplankton species succession, 2) the sensitivity of the CO2 drawdown to the
mix of phytoplankton, 3) the grazing and aggregation processes contributing to
the sinking flux, 4) the composition of this flux, and 5) the proportion of this
material that reaches the seafloor. This effort truly represents a measure of C
sequestration and pump efficiency. Ecological modeling will be used to place
observational results from field studies and satellites into the context of the
larger Atlantic basin with tropical climate variability on interannual and
longer time scales.

Intellectual Merit: The PIs have identified a potentially significant but poorly
understood, ecosystem-controlled, climate-sensitive C sequestration pathway that
seems to violate the expectation of an inefficient open-ocean biological pump.
Since primary production fueled by allochthonous sources of N such as N2
fixation can drive a net, biologically mediated transfer of C from the
atmosphere to the ocean, C sequestration by DDAs in the Amazon River plume is a
regionally significant process. Because DDAs have been found in other tropical
river systems, they may represent a globally significant, yet previously
overlooked biological pump mechanism.

Broader Impacts: The Amazon River has captured the public's imagination more
than any other river. This study aims to take advantage of such high profile
earth science to promote science literacy among all our citizens. This project
will support graduate and postdoctoral education, undergraduates through
training cruises, and ocean science education of K-12 teachers and
undergraduates through the COSEE-West, the Mid Atlantic COSEE and the COSEEOS
programs. The results of this research will be made available to other
scientists through peer reviewed publications, public databases, and an
ANACONDAS website, as well as to the general public through the SFSU RTC-Bay
Area Discovery Museum Program.