* 0934946
* Cal Poly Pomona Teaching Fellow and Master Teaching Fellow Project - Planning Grant
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Donald Straney, Cal Poly Pomona Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Joan T Prival
* 07/31/2011
* USD 62,977.00

This planning grant project at Cal Poly Pomona aims to develop partnerships with
regional school districts and non profit organizations to develop a competitive
grant proposal for submission to the Teaching Fellowships and Master Teaching
Fellowships track of the Noyce Scholarship Program. The dynamic state of
external factors affecting its teacher preparation programs has led Cal Poly
Pomona to seek to build new school partnerships that allow for implementation of
long-term investment strategies in STEM teachers who are trained specifically
for success at low performing schools, and can be responsive to particular
changes affecting districts or the university. As part of the planning process,
a committee composed of administrators and faculty from three colleges at Cal
Poly Pomona (Science, Engineering, and Education and Integrative studies), and
of representatives from new nonprofit and school partners, is articulating a
program for assisting individuals with STEM degrees to earn credentials and
enter the local teaching community. The program is being designed to include
both Teaching Fellows and Master Teaching Fellows components, to integrate into
existing professional development school models, and to incorporate the range of
experiences and support mechanisms needed to foster high teacher retention rates
in the partner schools. To reach high needs schools that have not been easily
served by regional state universities, the planning committee is also exploring
the feasibility of developing a hybrid technology-based program to train and
support new teachers, master teachers, and teacher mentors. The planning period
is expected to result in a full proposal that will expand significantly the
types of students who earn credentials from Cal Poly Pomona in STEM fields, as
well as the number of well prepared and knowledgeable STEM teachers in the
region, with a subsequent impact on curricular design, student support and the
overall intellectual climate for STEM learning in high need urban districts.