* 0934285
* Collaborative Research:  Vertical Heating Structure in Large-Scale Convectively Coupled Tropical Waves
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Xianan Jiang, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Anjuli Bamzai
* 09/30/2013
* USD 260,000.00

Large-scale organized convection, particularly in the form of the Madden-Julian
Oscillation (MJO), exerts significant impacts on a wide range of weather/climate
phenomena. Current general circulation models (GCMs), unfortunately, are
incapable of robustly representing these forms of variability. In particular, a
well-accepted and comprehensive theory for the MJO is still elusive. This
project seeks to address this challenge by fully characterizing the vertical
structures of the MJO and convectively coupled equatorial waves (CCEWs),
particularly diabatic heating, to better constrain theoretical understanding as
well as to provide crucial validation information to the model development
community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the investigators will (i)
characterize the Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission (TRMM) -estimated vertical
latent heating structures associated with the large-scale and low-frequency
CCEWs, including the MJO, and examine them in the context of the TRMM rainfall,
Atmospheric Infrared Sounder (AIRS) temperature and moisture, and CloudSat
cloud-type variations, with a particular focus on describing the spatial
variability, seasonal modulation, event-to-event variability, and implications
for our theoretical understanding; (ii) compare these heating and moist
thermodynamic structures with values from the new reanalysis products to assess
and characterize the uncertainties and shortcomings of both the satellite and
model based products in regards to their representation of CCEWs; (iii) compare
these heating and moist thermodynamic structures with values from a pair of
traditional GCMs and a pair of GCMs utilizing multi-model framework to quantify
the fidelity of the model's representation of CCEWs and provide feedback to the
model development teams; and (iv) examine the dependence of the Rossby Wave
emanation on the location and vertical profiles of the tropical heating
structures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project include
(i) improvements in the mean structure and variability of tropical convective
activity in our global climate/weather models, which will ultimately lead to
improved skill of medium-to-extended range weather and seasonal climate
predictions both in the tropics and extra-tropics, facilitate the development of
the hitherto unexploited forecast potential at the subseasonal time scale, and
reduce uncertainties associated with global model projections of climate change;
(ii) the training of a graduate student in an area that is in high demand.