* 0934159
* Renovation and Expansion of the Kiowa Teaching Laboratory at the University of Colorado Mountain Research Station
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* William Bowman, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Peter H. McCartney
* 08/31/2011
* USD 275,273.00

The University of Colorado, Boulder is awarded a grant to expand and renovate
the Kiowa Laboratory at the Mountain Research Station (MRS). The project will
meet the increasing demands for laboratory and teaching space at the MRS which
are currently at full capacity. Teaching and laboratory space will be increased
by 1055 ft2, or 30% of existing teaching and lab space. The renovated and
expanded Kiowa Laboratory will provide general lab and teaching space for
students and researchers, including flexible space that can be used by
individual researchers for tasks such as sorting and weighing samples,
microscopy, soil preparation, and assembling field equipment. The space will
also be utilized as classrooms for visiting academic-year courses from K-12
schools and the main CU campus, and MRS field courses. The project will
specifically benefit K-12 outreach associated with several programs, including
an ongoing NSF GK12 program from CU, and an elementary school Alpine Ecology
program fun by CU Science Discovery and the MRS that targets inner-city schools
from the Denver Public School system. Research programs that will benefit from
the expansion include the Boulder Creek Crustal Zone Observatory, a NSF REU site
grant, the Niwot Ridge LTER program, NEON (MRS is a core site for the Southern
Rockies/ Colorado Plateau Domain), and numerous individual researchers who use
the MRS as a base for their field work.

The MRS is an interdisciplinary research facility of the University of Colorado
established in 1920, devoted to the advancement of the study of mountain
ecosystems. The mission of the MRS is to facilitate research and education to
better understand the unique patterns and processes of biotic and physical
systems in mountains, and how environmental changes may influence these patterns
and processes. The MRS is located 40 km west of the main CU Boulder campus, at
2900 m in the Front Range of the southern Rocky Mountains, on the 85 ha
Columbine Springs Preserve owned by the University. The property is surrounded
by the Arapaho National Forest, and is within 5 km of the City of Boulder
watershed. There are numerous biological communities in the subalpine zone
surrounding the MRS, including lodgepole pine, spruce-fir, and aspen forests,
subalpine meadows, wetlands, and lakes and streams, reflecting the diverse
topography and disturbance history of the region. Further information about MRS
may be found at http://www.colorado.edu/mrs/.