* 0934758
* Math for America-DC
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2009,07/31/2015
* Maxine Singer, American University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 07/31/2015
* USD 1,498,042.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The Math for America DC program is a collaboration between American University's
(AU) School of Education, Teaching, and Health (SETH) and Department of
Mathematics and Statistics (M/S), Carnegie Institution of Washington's Carnegie
Academy for Science Education (CASE), the DC Public and Public Charter Schools,
and Math for America (MfA). Its goal is to improve secondary school math
teaching in Washington, DC schools by recruiting, training, mentoring, and
retaining 14 Teaching Fellows with strong mathematics backgrounds. In the MfA DC
program, Teaching Fellows obtain certification and teach for four years in
Washington, DC, a high-needs school district, following an intensive 15-month
period in a specially designed academic program that includes classroom
experiences. Throughout the 5-year program, Fellows experience specially
designed professional development, intensive mentoring, and expert support
particularly at induction. The AU-SETH partner provides a Master of Arts in
Teaching in Secondary Education: Mathematics, with emphasis on teaching math and
the challenges of a high needs district. AU-M/S provides graduate level math
courses, including a course focusing on secondary school math content. The AU
program encompasses 18 credits in pedagogy, 15 credits in math content courses,
and 500 hours of teaching and observing in the classrooms of outstanding
secondary school math teachers. CASE is providing fundraising and organizational
efforts (such as recruitment and mentoring and professional development during
the four teaching years), and is coordinating activities with the MfA
organization in New York. The participating district is providing Fellows the
opportunity to observe and teach during their training and teaching years,
cooperating in the certification process, and ensuring access to available
teaching positions after the training year.

The program is serving as a test of the idea that a teacher's deep content
knowledge can enhance secondary school students' understanding and learning of
math. The experiences of the Fellows are contributing important information
concerning the pedagogical training and support needed to make STEM
professionals effective teachers for high needs students. Findings are being
shared with the local and national education communities through presentations
at meetings and scholarly publications. The program goals address the national
need to improve the education of disadvantaged youth so that they can complete
high school, aspire to college and productive employment, and become
contributing citizens. The program's association with the MfA program is, with
other MfA cities, serving to amplify the impact and expand the data that can
inform math education improvement nationwide.