* 0934376
* RAPID:  Comparing Historic and Contemporary Plant-Pollinator Interaction Networks to Investigate the Effects of Climate Change and Invasive Species
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2010
* Tiffany Knight, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 12/31/2010
* USD 74,998.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). Pollination services, important both ecologically and
economically, are responsible for much of the food that we eat. Pollination of
many plant species is currently threatened by anthropogenic forces, including
climate change and invasive species. Climate change may be disrupting the timing
of plant flowering and the activity of pollinators such that they no longer
overlap. Invasive plants may be stealing pollinators away from the native plants
that they usually visit. Testing how pollination is being disrupted by climate
change and invasive species is difficult because historical information on
plant-pollinator interactions is not available in most cases. However, a very
detailed dataset of all of the plant-pollinator interactions that were present
in Carlinville, IL in the late 1880's provides an important and rare opportunity
to compare historic and contemporary patterns. By re-sampling the same areas,
these researchers will better understand how climate warming and invasive
species are affecting pollination. The urgency of the project stems from the
rapid suburban development in this area; the study sites will likely be
converted to housing subdivisions in the near future. This research will
highlight insect species that have maintained important roles as pollinators
through time, despite large changes in the environment, and will show which
species are most vulnerable to climate or invasive species related extinctions.
These results will have important implications for agricultural plant species
that rely on insect pollination as well. The broader impacts of this research
include research and training opportunities for students at the high school,
undergraduate, and graduate levels as well as a research technician and a post-
doctoral associate.