* 0934958
* Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program at California State University, Stanislaus:  Teachers from the Valley, for the Valley
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Donna Andrews, California State University-Stanislaus
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 08/31/2015
* USD 895,946.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
&lt;br/&gt;(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship Program at California State University, Stanislaus (CSU Stanislaus)
is increasing the number of university students preparing to teach science and
mathematics in a six-county service area including California's Northern San
Joaquin Valley and adjacent foothills, one of the fastest growing regions of
California. The goals of the project are to increase the number of STEM students
and professionals pursuing careers in 7th -12th grade mathematics and science
education through scholarships and stipends; to develop cohorts and directed
experiences that make them better prepared for these roles; and to provide them
with resources and a cohort support system that increases retention and success
in the workplace. An interdisciplinary team of faculty from the Colleges of
Natural Sciences and Education provides an enhanced academic experience for the
Noyce Scholars to prepare them in both content understanding and pedagogy.
Students participate in early field experiences and service learning projects in
high need schools. Nineteen undergraduate STEM majors and 15 STEM professionals
(career-changers) are supported through Noyce scholarships and stipends leading
to 34 new science and mathematics teachers. The Northern San Joaquin Valley
region is characterized by limited economic attainment and low educational
achievement. The improvement of the region's economic and educational situation
hinges on sufficient numbers of qualified math and science teachers. The project
includes several partnerships in the area, including the Stanislaus County
Office of Education, the Lodi Unified, Merced City, Modesto City, and Stockton
Unified school districts, as well as several higher education institutions
including the regional community colleges (Columbia College, Merced College,
Modesto Junior College, and San Joaquin Delta College) and the University of
California Merced. The CSU Stanislaus Teacher Credential Program recruits a high
percentage of cultural minority students and focuses on preparing teachers to
work with diverse student populations. This program also recruits more than 90%
of its students from the local region and over 90% of them accept teaching jobs
in the area, enabling the project to recruit the top future Teachers from the
Valley, for the Valley.