* 0934342
* I/UCRC:  Lasers and Plasmas for Advanced Manufacturing
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Jyotirmoy Mazumder, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 07/31/2012
* USD 63,000.00

Center for Lasers and Plasmas for Advanced Manufacturing &lt;br/&gt;IIP- 0934342
&lt;br/&gt;University of Michigan &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a
proposal to renew the University of Michigan's participation in the Lasers and
Plasmas for Advanced Manufacturing center, an I/UCRC center that was created in
2002. The center was initially established as a single university center and
currently has grown to a multi-university center with participation from the
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor and Southern Methodist University. The main
focus of the center's research is in laser applications for advanced
manufacturing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposed work
is to develop atomic level understanding of the laser materials processing
needed for intelligent manufacturing. The knowledge gained will lead to new and
novel materials and manufacturing methodology. In the past four years, the
University of Michigan site has made a big stride in developing and implementing
application-driven basic research for laser-based advanced manufacturing. The
University of Michigan site is working effectively as it is well supported by
industrial members and the projects are challenging and clearly important. The
equipment at the University of Michigan is substantial and the projects
discussed, ranging from laser welding to mathematical modeling of residual
stresses in direct metal deposition, are ambitious and worthwhile.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Laser processing techniques are expected to increase well
beyond the applications of today as research provides improved development of
this important process. The integrated effort of multi-university center for
laser applications provides a great benefit to the society in terms of helping
US industries to be more competitive in advanced manufacturing. The University
of Michigan site will provide education and training to prepare students to meet
future workforce needs. The university will provide a unique experience to
graduate students who can interact and collaborate with industrial researchers
and engineers. The university will continue to involve undergraduate students
through REUs. &lt;br/&gt;