* 0934716
* Robert Noyce Mathematics and Science Teacher (MaST) Scholars Program
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2015
* Daniel Robie, CUNY York College
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 05/31/2015
* USD 899,900.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The Robert Noyce Mathematics and Science Teachers (MaST) Scholars Phase 1
program at York College addresses the critical need for highly qualified
secondary mathematics and science teachers in New York City schools. The primary
objective of this program is thus the development of 50 highly qualified
teachers for these high-need urban schools, through targeted financial and
academic support. The program is being implemented by a team of faculty from the
science, mathematics, and teacher education departments at York College, in
collaboration with representatives of four partnering community colleges:
Borough of Manhattan Community College, Bronx Community College, LaGuardia
Community College, and Queensborough Community College of the City University of
New York. An additional partner is the New York City Department of Education.
Scholars are being recruited from York and the partnering community colleges,
all of which serve underrepresented groups.

For York College students preparing to be teachers, the most significant
financial burden comes during student teaching, which often necessitates their
withdrawal from full time employment. Thus, the scholarships focus on financial
support during this year, with academic support and development programs being
provided from the post-freshman summer through the second year of teaching. The
academic support program includes three critical phases: 1) engagement of
potential Scholars in a Teacher Explorer summer program, 2) support and
development of the Scholars during the completion of their college education and
teacher preparation program, and 3) professional development and support of
teachers during their first two years in the classroom. The MaST program also
involves Scholars and faculty in both STEM and teacher education research: as
part of extensive field experiences, the Scholars create research-based
curriculum for underrepresented urban students, and serve as both subjects and
collaborators in the research about the development of themselves as emerging
teachers. As well as serving to increase the number of highly qualified science
and mathematics teachers for urban, high-needs districts, and striving to
improve the retention of these teachers in urban schools, the program is
contributing to the knowledge base concerning ways to support science and
mathematics secondary education. Results of the program and related research are
being disseminated through journals, conferences, and websites. The Scholars and
new teachers in addition share results of their research within their learning
communities and through their own publications and presentations.