* 0934451
* Collaborative Research: Behavioral and Genetic Mechanisms for Frequency-Dependent Survival and Mating Advantage in Guppies
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2009,04/30/2015
* Kimberly Hughes, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* emilia martins
* 04/30/2015
* USD 319,423.00

Behavioral and Genetic Mechanisms for Frequency-Dependent Survival and Mating
Advantage in Guppies&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IOB-0743990&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Anne
Houde &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the genomic era, it has become increasingly
obvious that most traits that are relevant to the health, longevity, and
fertility of organisms (including humans) are influenced by genetic variation
(polymorphism). Despite intense interest in mapping and characterizing the
responsible genes, the processes responsible for maintaining genetic variation
are generally unknown. One reason is that direct experimental investigations are
impossible in humans and difficult and expensive in most model organisms. More
tractable species that can be studied in both natural and laboratory settings
are needed to address this question. Wild guppies exhibit one of the most
striking examples of polymorphism among animals (male color pattern variation),
thought to be maintained by mating and survival advantages to rare or uncommon
color types. Mating advantage appears result from female sexual responses to
unusual males, and survival advantage appears to result from selective predation
on common color types. This project will elucidate behavioral and genetic
mechanisms underlying these patterns. Studies will examine (1) behavioral
mechanisms leading to mating advantage for rare types, (2) behavioral responses
of a predatory killifish to rare vs. common types and (3) brain gene expression
changes that occur when guppies respond to novel sexual and environmental
stimuli. Specific outcomes include determining (1) if female guppies have a
specific preference for rare male types, (2) if prior experience with color
types affects the predator's behavior and (3) which genes change their levels of
expression in response to novel stimuli. This work will provide a clear picture
of how behavioral and genetic processes contribute to genetic variation, and
will also provide a model system for understanding response to novelty as a
general phenomenon. Broader impacts of the project will include training of
undergraduate and graduate students and further development of the guppy model
system as a well-known exemplar for broad understanding of evolution.&lt;br/&gt;