* 0934641
* NAD Metabolism and Signaling FASEB Conference June 21-26, 2009 in Carefree, Arizona
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2010
* John Denu, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 05/31/2010
* USD 15,000.00

The first FASEB Conference on NAD Metabolism and Signaling will be held on June
21-26th, 2009, in Carefree, Arizona. Beyond its well known functions, recent
discoveries have demonstrated that nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) is
consumed in a wide variety of regulatory pathways, synthesized from
unanticipated vitamins and intermediates, and processed to novel regulatory
metabolites with unanticipated activities. This meeting is the first of its kind
to bring together the numerous scientists from diverse areas of NAD controlled
enzymatic processes. Over 100 scientists will participate in this conference.
Recent discoveries have made clear the need to understand the complete
metabolome of NAD. This conference will assemble diverse investigators from all
areas of biology and biological chemistry that address this important field,
providing a comprehensive platform for exchange of ideas and establishment of
collaborations. Topic areas include biochemical/cellular pathways of enzymes
including sirtuins, glycohydrolases, ADP-ribosyl cyclases, and NAD kinases. The
meeting will provide fundamental and interdisciplinary background and training
in areas including metabolism, enzymology, signaling, cell biology, and
physiology. The invited speakers are recognized for their scientific excellence
and contributions to cutting-edge discovery. Sessions include some content
overlap to encourage attendance throughout the meeting. Discussions will
emphasize integration of current knowledge to develop an overarching systems
biology view of the NAD metabolome. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed conference brings together experts from a wide
variety of disciplines and backgrounds. Genuine efforts have been made to be
inclusive of women and underrepresented groups. Five of the nine sessions are
chaired by women scientists who are also well represented among the speakers. A
dedicated effort has been made to provide opportunities for young investigators
to network and present their work, including the selection of several to
highlight in 15 minute talks. NSF Funding will be used to support young
investigators.