* 0934829
* Pathways to Science
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2009,09/30/2015
* Andre Green, University of South Alabama
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 09/30/2015
* USD 899,962.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of South Alabama (USA)
College Of Education is collaborating with the College of Arts and Sciences and
the Mobile County Public School System (MCPSS) to prepare 24 science teachers
over a five year period who are highly qualified to teach chemistry, physics,
biology, or general science. The Pathways to Science (PTS) project recruits
senior science majors to participate in a semester-long internship to inform
their career decision about entering the education profession. Up to 40
internships are being provided over the five year period of the grant. During
the internship, the students work with a master science teacher in a high needs
school district, with science specialists, and university science professors to
design curriculum. If they still want to become teachers after they graduate,
the students are recruited into graduate science education through a content
rich alternative certification curriculum that culminates in a master's degree
in secondary science education. As part of this program, students are required
to intern and participate in three sets of field experiences; middle school,
high school, and a student teaching experience at the level of their choice.
After obtaining their degree, the new teachers are hired by the partnering
school district. Induction support includes a one year membership to the Alabama
Science Teachers Association, the National Science Teachers Association, and
mentoring for two years by a master science teacher in the school district. Many
of these master teachers are graduates of the teacher training program at USA.