* 0934200
* Cultivating Participation of Underrepresented Institutions and Students in NEON Science and Education
* BIO,EF
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2012
* Wendy Gram, Ecological Society of America
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 05/31/2012
* USD 207,283.00

The National Ecological Observatory Network is a research platform to enable
research and education in understanding the consequences of climate, landuse,
and invasive species changes on the biosphere at regional to continental scale.
This cyber-enabled platform will provide an exciting opportunity to address many
ecological challenges that society faces. Addressing the complex ecological
challenges of tomorrow require a diversity of approaches and a diversity of
human backgrounds. NEON?s education and outreach mission is to enable society
and the scientific community to use ecological information and forecasts to
understand and effectively address critical ecological questions and issues.
NEON?s vision is for a broad spectrum of society to be engaged in NEON science
with the ability to use data, information and forecasts to address the critical
environmental challenges of our time. This award is a collaboration of two
organizations (Science and Engineering Alliance - SEA, and the NEON, Inc.) and a
professional society (Ecological Society of America -ESA) with extensive
experience in working with under-represented groups and institutions. Three
activities will be conducted: a workshop for college students to explore the use
of integrated social media applications for NEON, four educational webinars, and
a series of College Speaking Tours to 17 Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCUs) and Minority-Serving Institutions (MSIs). These activities
are intended to build the foundations for participation of under-represented
minority institutions and students in the science and education necessary to
address the ecological challenges, issues, and research of the future.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;