* 0934100
* Collaborative Research/Planning Grant: Center for Integrative Materials Joining Science for Energy Applications
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Xiaochun Li, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 06/30/2010
* USD 10,000.00

Planning Grant for an I/UCRC for Integrative Materials Joining Science for
Energy Applications

0934093 Ohio State University; Sudarsanam Babu 0934100 University of Wisconsin-
Madison; Sindo Kou 0934116 Lehigh University; John DuPont 0934129 Colorado
School of Mines; Stephen Liu The Center for Integrative Materials Joining
Science for Energy Applications will focus on the diverse need for materials in
energy industries, and on developing scientific methodologies to join these
materials and predict their lifetime. Ohio State University, University of
Wisconsin-Madison, Lehigh University and Colorado School of Mines are
collaborating to establish the proposed center, with Ohio State University as
the lead institution.

The proposed Center is geared toward the development of joining methodologies
for advanced materials that are being used/ developed for energy applications.
The focus of the proposed center is to develop a better understanding of the key
problems that have limited the use of these materials and develop scientific
methodologies to overcome the problems. In addition to the scientific and
technological issues, the Center will also address a critical issue threatening
the manufacturing sector. With the declining workforce involved in welding and
joining technology in the last decade, the potential member companies of this
Center have shown interest in funding the Center activities, as a way of
training future workforce with state-of-the-art characterization and modeling
tools. The PIs are well-qualified and have adequate resources to conduct the
proposed research. All four institutions in this Center plan to use the NSF
planning grant fund to hold a meeting with prospective industrial partners to
establish the proposed Center's organizational framework, and to establish
research projects of greatest relevance.

The proposed center will focus on developing joining methodologies that will
eventually become core components of the curriculum within welding and joining
engineering programs. The proposed Center will also offer mentoring programs for
students from different ethnic backgrounds and underrepresented groups. If
successful, the scientific methodologies will be used to develop state-of-the-
art simulation tools that could benefit several industries.