* 0935336
* EAGER: Developing a high-resolution late Holocene sediment record of rapid Arctic climate change from the Colville delta and adjacent Beaufort Sea inner shelf
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Mead Allison, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 12/31/2012
* USD 299,930.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project
Summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs propose to develop a new, high-resolution
(annual to sub-decadal) paleoclimate record (0-1,000 y) from sediment cores
taken on the Arctic inner continental shelf. The proposal is a follow-up to a
regular Arctic Natural Sciences panel submission that was criticized during
review due to 1) absence of adequate data to substantiate a high-quality
paleoclimate record in this setting, and 2) questions about the logistical
success in light of the absence of UNOLS vessels to work in the high Arctic.
Neither issue can be addressed without a proof of concept study such as proposed
here. The PIs will collect sediment cores from the inner shelf on one cruise of
the R/V Annika Marie, a local and privately chartered research vessel, presently
scheduled for late September 2009 (ice free period) adjacent to the Colville
delta on the Beaufort Sea coast of Alaska. Ancillary seismic transect data (sub-
bottom CHIRP and side-scan sonar) will be collected prior to coring to locate
the best preserved record of depositionally laminated sediments of this time
interval. About 5 to 15 sites will be occupied on the shelf and adjacent Simpson
Lagoon. All cores will be diver-collected in less than 8 m water depth: short
push cores will be used to retrieve the high-porosity recent sediment layers,
and longer cores (up to 5 m) will be collected with a submersible portable
vibracorer. All cores will be analyzed for stratigraphy (x-radiography), bulk
organic and mineral content, and geochronology of the last 100 to 200 y (using
210Pb and 137Cs radiotracers). Two cores will be selected from these for
detailed analysis of paleoclimate proxies: the age-depth relationship for the
deeper part of these cores will be determined using AMS radiocarbon dating of
benthic foraminifera (5/core). Climate indicators that will be applied are
organic biomarkers (ligninphenols, plant pigments, and Ã¤13C) and mineral tracers
(clay mineralogy, heavy mineral assemblages, granulometry, event layer
stratigraphy).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs? central hypothesis is that the
Colville inner shelf contains a high quality sediment record, that, if
exploited, will dramatically improve knowledge of high Arctic paleoclimate over
the last centuries to a millennia. They believe this deltaic region has
sufficiently high linear sediment accumulation rates (&gt;1 cm/y) to preserve a
seasonal and interannual record of climate change-induced mineral and
particulate organic carbon (POC) flux variations to the seafloor from three
distinct sources. These are 1) rivers that drain the Brooks Range and the Arctic
Coastal Plain (ACP), 2) coastal erosion of ACP permafrost deposits and 3) marine
primary production by phytoplankton, ice algae, and benthos. After an initial
micro-scale examination of recent event layer (annual and storm deposits)
mineral and POC succession, necessary to interpret paleoclimate-induced
fluctuations in composition, they propose to examine the downcore record of
temporal variations in layers, comparing the two selected sites to decouple
spatial changes in sources. Since the three end-member sources have distinct
mineral/POC composition, temporal variations will provide proxy information
about climate changes that influence their flux magnitude including 1) landfast
ice extent, 2) river sediment supply from glacial (meltwater) and coastal plain
(permafrost thawing) input, 3) summer-fall storminess and 4) primary
productivity of the coastal zone.&lt;br/&gt;