* 0935049
* Bio-Organic Reaction Animations
* EHR,DUE
* 02/19/2009,09/30/2013
* Steven Fleming, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 09/30/2013
* USD 401,356.00

Chemistry (12) This project continues development of a biochemistry oriented
visualization program, Bio-organic Reaction Animations (Bio-ORA). As a result of
the proof-of-concept phase of its development, Bio-ORA currently has animations
of three enzymatic processes. The next level of development includes a total of
15 enzymes represented in the final product. Other bio-molecules being targeted
in this project are sugars (the conversion of Fischer projections into 3D
structures, mutarotation, disaccharides, oligosaccharides), amino acids
(secondary structure, alpha helix, beta turns and sheets), nucleosides (DNA
formation, hydrogen-bonding in duplex, major/minor groove, intercalation), and
lipids (micelle formation, lipid bilayer, steroidal structure, lipophilic
interactions). The product is designed for students learning bio-organic
chemistry in organic and biochemistry classes. The evaluation of the project is
intended to guide development of Bio-ORA and to establish the value of using
this visualization program. The recommendations of the users are being used to
improve the content and delivery of the material. The dissemination of Bio-ORA
is via web access and perhaps ultimately through a publishing company. This
teaching tool is being presented at professional meetings, and the evaluation
results will be published. Intellectual Merit: For students to be able to
appreciate and contribute to the understanding of biological processes, it is
essential that they learn the chemistry that governs biology. The Bio-ORA
products facilitate both teaching and learning of biochemical processes at the
molecular level by providing a means of visualizing biochemical reactions and
structures in a three-dimensional format. Use of the software provides
instructors with additional means of presenting complex concepts to students,
and encourages instructors to focus on helping students to understand
biochemical processes rather than to memorize names of structures and compounds.
As students learn the principles that govern representative biochemical
processes, they are better prepared to understand unfamiliar biochemical
transformations. This process not only facilitates learning but likely improves
the students' perception and understanding of the biological sciences in
general. The impact that this software has on student learning and perception is
being carefully measured. Information from these studies is providing an
increased understanding of the role 3D technology can play in the learning
process, and is helping to improve the product. Broader Impacts: The goal of
this project is to reach an international audience and to have an impact on the
teaching of bio-organic chemistry worldwide. This outreach naturally includes
students of diverse cultures, diverse learning styles, and diverse educational
backgrounds. Current partners include instructors at small colleges, including
Southern Utah University, Pennsylvania State University-Schuylkill, Brigham
Young University-Idaho, and Brigham Young University-Hawaii, which has >50% non-
white enrollment. Another impact of the project is the improvement of the use of
3D technology. Applications for Chime, Java3D, Cult3D, VRML, and Viewpoint that
allow for visualization of 3D images are likely to be appreciated by future
software developers.