* 0935014
* Soldier to Engineer: Planning VCU's Pathway
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Stephanie Adams, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Cheville
* 08/31/2011
* USD 108,115.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This engineering education research
award to Virginia Commonwealth University will employ researchers to design a
system for evaluating military training, coursework and occupational specialty
in efforts to reduce the number of additional credits needed to complete an
undergraduate degree in one of its six programs. This project aims to reduce the
time to degree by working with service branches to identify equivalency credits
for on-the-job training and military courses with corresponding engineering
courses. As such, it will be a tremendous asset to all of the approximately 360
engineering schools and the almost 2 million post 9/11 veterans. The processes
and equivalencies to be identified could well become readymade programs that
will serve as a model for other institutions. Many veterans have specialized
training and experience with the practical application of a wide array of
technologies. However most colleges of engineering are not well positioned to
recruit and retain this unique cohort. This project is expected to change this
state of affairs by developing processes that transform the engineering
curricula into a more plausible pathway for veterans. The results will advance
understanding of how to modify the engineering education pipeline to allow
veterans to enter and efficiently progress through the program so that they can
fill engineering jobs.