* 0935988
* Biological Science for Tribal Colleges Conference Sisseton Wahpeton College NSF/TCUs Conference; Arlington, VA; May 20-22, 2009
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2009,03/31/2010
* Scott Morgan, Sisseton Wahpeton Community College
* Standard Grant
* James Deshler
* 03/31/2010
* USD 109,579.00

The central component of this project is a face to face meeting between the
National Science Foundation (NSF) Program Directors and key personnel from each
of the Tribal Colleges and Universities (TCUs). This event is an important step
toward designing and implementing better strategies to achieve the common goal
of improving STEM opportunities for all Americans. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
educational needs on Indian reservations pose unique challenges. It is important
for the TCUs, as the experts in the field, to frame the problem and articulate
solutions to these challenges. By engaging the National Science Foundation at an
earlier, deeper level, a positive impact on the design of programs targeting
STEM education on the reservations can occur. As a mutual effort, it is
important that the aspirations, resources, and limitations of all the
participants are understood by both NSF and the TCUs. This meeting would further
the development of active partnership on a broader scale than previously
attempted. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;One of the
outcomes of the meeting will be the identification of the needs, resources, and
aspirations of the TCUs in their efforts to improve STEM education.
Additionally, it will be important to identify the needs of the communities
served by the tribal colleges, allowing the TCUs to design sustainable programs
that address these needs. NSF will gain valuable insights on what type of
programs and resources are needed to ensure successful implementation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;The BIO Directorate at the
National Science Foundation is an ideal partner for this project. Every tribal
college has academic programs which target STEM careers needed by the tribal
communities. Furthermore, this conference will serve as a future model for other
directorates and federal agencies. The selection of the TCU participants will be
determined by the individual tribal college presidents. The event organizers
will suggest the inclusion of both STEM faculty and sponsored program officers
to broaden the conversations at the meeting itself, and at the TCUs
afterwards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;