* 0935830
* Phenomenological and Predictability Studies of Western North Pacific Tropical Cyclones in Relation to the Pacific Jet Stream
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2014
* Lance Bosart, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Anjuli Bamzai
* 12/31/2014
* USD 650,999.00

This project will investigate tropical cyclones (TCs) over the western North
Pacific with emphasis on TC life cycle, track, and structure; TC interaction
with the North Pacific jet stream; and high-impact weather events over the
eastern North Pacific and North America that are linked dynamically to western
North Pacific TCs. Atmospheric predictability will be addressed in terms of
conventional statistical measures of model forecast skill, and will be assessed
in the context of episodes of individual western North Pacific TCs and
downstream high-impact weather events. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These project goals
will be accomplished through an analysis of recurving and transitioning TCs,
including those TCs that undergo extratropical transition (ET) and subsequent
reintensification as extratropical cyclones (ECs), over the western North
Pacific from July through December. The analysis will address the ability of
operational numerical weather prediction models to forecast episodes of western
North Pacific TCs and associated high-impact weather events occurring downstream
over the eastern North Pacific and North America; the behavior of large-scale
flow regimes in which these episodes occur; and the transitions between large-
scale flow regimes that take place in conjunction with these episodes.
Multiscale investigations of interactions involving TCs and the North Pacific
jet stream and the ET/EC of western North Pacific TCs will be conducted to
understand how initial-analysis and model-physics errors limit predictability,
and will be accomplished through the synoptic evaluation of the skill of the
operational National Centers for Environmental Prediction (NCEP) Global Forecast
System for projections out to two weeks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project may
be expected to advance scientific understanding by isolating factors that limit
predictability for episodes of western North Pacific TCs and associated
downstream high-impact weather events over the eastern North Pacific and North
America, establishing the relative levels of predictability for the large-scale
flow regimes and regime transitions in which these episodes occur, and
increasing understanding of the mechanisms that govern the predictive skill of
high-impact weather events. The anticipated advances in scientific understanding
may be expected to translate into improved forecasts of high-impact weather
events over the eastern North Pacific and North America that are challenging to
predict, thereby benefiting operational forecasting practice in the
U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;