* 0935238
* Fourth Biennial Symposium on "Current and Future Challenges in Mechanics and Materials", to be held at Univ. of Colorado, Boulder, August 3-6,2009
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2010
* Martin Dunn, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Glaucio H. Paulino
* 04/30/2010
* USD 20,000.00

The fourth biennial symposium on Current and Future Challenges in Mechanics and
Materials at the University of Colorado at Boulder, in August 2009. Researchers
from the US and abroad will participate, representing the scientific forefront
in areas of mechanics/materials including theory, experiment, and simulation.
The four-day symposium will focus on intersections of Mechanics and Materials
with contemporary issues in a) Biotechnology/biomedical, b) Nanotechnology, and
c) Energy. The symposium will involve 50 minute presentations, followed by
extensive discussion of modern issues and emerging challenges in research as
well as in graduate education.

The symposium will provide an excellent environment for the thoughtful exchange
of ideas and open discussions that allow for the presentation of the state-of-
the-art in various areas of mechanics and materials. Additionally, it will
permit in-depth discussion of current and future challenges that will help
advance research and graduate education frontiers in the field, with a view
toward identifying activities that can maximize societal impact. The symposium
will serve as an opportunity to showcase research performed at universities and
national laboratories in the Rocky Mountain region and will permit valuable
interactions among regional students and leading researchers in the field. The
interactions among researchers and students at the symposium are expected to
lead to future collaborations in mechanics and materials research and education.