* 0935247
* Integrating Energy Sustainability into Engineering Curricula using Cyberinfrastructure
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Stuart Bowden, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Donna Riley
* 08/31/2012
* USD 150,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This engineering education research
award to Arizona State University will employ researchers to develop cyber
infrastructure to infuse sustainability concepts into electrical engineering
courses. A central challenge in incorporating sustainability in a greater range
of engineering courses is the need to develop effective multidisciplinary and
broad systems-based education models. In this research a gaming environment will
be created as a learning tool to help students understand the complex
interactions of multidisciplinary sustainability concepts. The research will
also improve the process of on-line self-assessment through cognitive load
theory and develop a problem-based learning database. This project has the
potential to serve as a transformative educational model, offering a realistic
mechanism by which sustainability can be included in a wide range of engineering
classes. This research will increase student motivation, reduce barriers to
collaborative multidisciplinary learning, and improve student learning outcomes.
Sustainability is an increasingly significant societal issue, and it is
important that engineering graduates understand and are able to apply
sustainability principles in their engineering jobs.