* 0935979
* U.S.-Poland Workshop on Nanoscale Phenomena in Materials and at Interfaces: June 7-10, 2010 in Krakow, Poland
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Peter Monson, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Eddie Chang
* 08/31/2012
* USD 69,430.00

0935979 Monson

This award provides group travel support for a workshop on "Nanoscale Phenomena
in Materials and at Interfaces," to be held in Krakow, Poland on June 7-10,
2010. The location is the Polish Academy of Arts and Sciences in Krakow. The
Workshop is a follow-up to and builds upon two earlier and successful Workshops
held in Poznan (2006) and Gdansk (2008).

Intellectual Merit. The purpose of the proposed Workshop is to encourage closer
scientific contacts and longer term scientific collaboration between researchers
in this area from the U.S. and Poland. The Workshop will involve approximately
15-16 participants from the U.S. and 15-20 from Poland, with a balance between
junior, midcareer, and senior researchers, and with similar or complementary
research interests on the two sides. The workshop participants will represent a
broad spectrum of research interests, for example, soft and hard materials, bio-
materials, polymers, polymerization, self assembly, complex fluids,
microemulsions, surface science, interfacial phenomena, catalysis, colloids,
adsorption, adhesion, rheology, computational nanoscience, and thin films. Young
researchers in these areas from Poland will attend the meeting, present poster
papers, and interact with the senior participants throughout the meeting.

Broader Impact. The proposed workshop is expected to initiate individual and
institutional collaboration among the participants. The previous workshops
proved highly successful and led to numerous research contacts and
collaborations between U.S. and Polish participants, and it is anticipated that
this workshop will be equally successful in this regard. The participation of
young Polish researchers at the Workshop will offer the U.S. participants a much
broader view of research in this area in Poland.

The project budget also includes funds to support visits to U.S. laboratories by
some of these young workers in the year following the workshop. U.S.
participants will visit other institutions in Poland after the Workshop, to
learn more about research activities and to explore further possibilities for
research cooperation between the two countries. Such research cooperation will
enrich the research and education infrastructure of both countries.