* 0935908
* Field study of nutritional information and consumer behavior
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Andrea Garber, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 06/30/2010
* USD 76,884.00

In the last 25 years, obesity rates in the United States have more than doubled,
with nearly two-thirds (63%) of Americans being overweight (37%) or obese (26%).
One possible factor contributing to rising obesity levels in recent decades is
an increase in restaurant dining, because meals prepared and consumed outside
the home tend to contain more calories and to have a higher percentage of fat
and saturated fat than those consumed in the home. Fast food consumption may
play a particularly important role given its association with higher Body Mass
Index (BMI) and weight gain. Recently, California enacted a law requiring
certain kinds of restaurants to post nutritional information at point-of-
purchase locations, beginning on July 1, 2009.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent
research, we found that the effects of providing calorie information in fast
food restaurants appear to vary depending on underlying characteristics of the
population, including individual differences and prior beliefs or behaviors.
Notably, the posting of calorie information had a beneficial effect only where
consumers were eating an inappropriately large number of calories and severely
underestimating their intake. Arguably, this population is at greatest need for
behavior change. However, the limited data from our previous research cannot
definitively isolate the predictors of behavior change. We plan to test this and
related hypotheses using California?s impending legislation change as a natural
experiment. We will construct our sample in order to ensure the appropriate
amount of variance on several key dimensions that we expect to moderate the
impact of legislation on consumer behavior, and have identified multiple
locations of McDonald?s and Burger King chain restaurants in neighborhoods
varying along these important demographic factors. We will explore the
translation of nutrition information into behavior change overall and in
relation to factors such as people?s beliefs about how many calories they should
eat and how many calories are in their food, personal goals (e.g., dieting), and
current health status as reflected in present BMI. Including employment status
as a predictor will offer additional insights into possible effects of economic
hardship. The answers to these questions will contribute to the ongoing debate
on the power of education and transparency of information to change behavior.
California?s new legislation relies on the premise that providing such
information will lead people to eat healthier meals, an assumption that remains
largely untested. Our findings will inform policy makers about the effectiveness
of the current policy as well as how future policies might be refined to better
achieve their ends.