* 0935263
* Effects of Cloud and Radiation Processes on the Global Water and Energy Cycle
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2015
* Xiaoqing Wu, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Anjuli Bamzai
* 08/31/2015
* USD 308,331.00

Cloud, radiation and precipitation processes are key components of the global
water and energy cycle and operate on a wide range of time and space scales.
Uncertainties in representing these processes and inadequate understanding of
water and energy cycle have been long standing problems for most general
circulation models (GCMs). This project aims to investigate the role of cloud,
radiation and precipitation processes in the improved climate simulations of
global water and energy cycle. The investigator will (a) evaluate modeled
dynamic and thermodynamic fields against observations in diurnal and seasonal
aspects of temperature, water vapor, cloud amount, liquid and ice water,
radiative fluxes, precipitation and surface evaporation, (b) examine the impacts
of revised convection closure assumption, triggering mechanism, convective
momentum transport and subgrid cloud distribution on the simulations of climate
mean state and variability, and (c) assess the water vapor budget and the top of
the atmosphere and surface energy budgets during the El Niño and La Niña events
in comparison with those under the normal climate
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this work are educational
and in improving understanding of physical processes for water and energy cycle
in the climate system and representations of cloud and radiation processes in
GCMs, which will enhance the credibility of climate prediction and climate
change projections made by GCMs and thus benefit society.