* 0935316
* Collaborative Research: University Program of Detector Research for the ILD Detector Concept at the ILC (T-TPC)
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Daniel Peterson, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Saul Gonzalez
* 08/31/2013
* USD 225,000.00

This proposal will fund the R&amp;D needed for future lepton collider detector
and in particular the International Large Detector (ILD) detector concept. The
R&amp;D projects will address critical issues related to the design of the ILD
concept and associated beam instrumentation. The future lepton collider is
expected to be a frontier scientific facility, exploring the interactions of
electrons and positrons at energy scales of up to about 1 TeV. To fully exploit
the physics opportunities of such an accelerator, it is essential to design a
particle physics detector of unprecedented granularity, robustness and
precision, and demonstrate that its feasibility. ILD is based around particle
flow, a paradigm which aims for reconstruction of individual particles, using a
highly robust tracking system centered on a time projection chamber supplemented
with silicon tracking, and high granularity "camera-like" electro-magnetic and
hadronic calorimetry suited to separation of individual energy deposits.
Particle Flow calorimeters offer an exciting new approach to achieve significant
better energy resolution needed by the new physics. If proven to work they could
be useful for many future applications in High energy and Nuclear Physics
experiments. This proposal will support the development and validation of
Particle Flow Algorithms using test beam data. The detector projects address
complementary aspects associated with advancing the design of the ILD detector
with projects focused on tracking, calorimetry as well as beam instrumentation.
This proposal will support the development of Low mass TPC endplates and
luminosity monitoring system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal will have
broader impact in that a number of the R&amp;D projects utilize a significant
numbers of undergraduate students who are highly integrated into the planned
research. The university groups have a strong track record of encouraging the
participation of under-represented groups in their research and this will
continue to be emphasized. Many of the detector R&amp;D projects have potential
to lead to applications in areas such as medical imaging, and will lead to a
cadre of scientists well trained in the art of experimentation and detector
technologies.