* 0935010
* CAREER: Perovskite Buffer Layers for Compound Semiconductor-Silicon Heteroepitaxy
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2009,01/31/2010
* Brian Willis, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* George J. Antos
* 01/31/2010
* USD 29,162.00

This research program will investigate the use of perovskite buffer layers for
compound semiconductor-on-silicon heteroepitaxy. Perovskite buffer layers offer
potential solutions to lattice mismatch challenges in heteroepitaxy. During the
growth of perovskite films on silicon, oxygen diffuses to the interface and
creates an amorphous SiOx region that separates the perovskite epitaxial layer
from the silicon substrate. The perovskite layer can then act as a template for
subsequent epitaxial layers such as compound semiconductors. The research
program will determine if the amorphous SiOx interface sufficiently relieves the
lattice mismatch strain generated in the epitaxial layers and also traps
dislocation defects at the interface. Perovskite "buffer" layers may therefore
enable low defect density heteroepitaxy on silicon substrates. The technology
has enormous potential to create new designs that integrate optically active
devices with the power of silicon CMOS logic. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
research will provide new scientific understanding of metalorganic chemical
vapor deposition and atomic layer deposition methods to be used for the growth
of strontium nucleation layers and SrTiO3 buffer layers. Experimental
investigations will develop the chemistry and reaction engineering fundamentals
necessary for successful growth of high quality epitaxial perovskite layers on
silicon. The perovskite buffer layers will be used as substrates for
III-V/silicon heteroepitaxy. Investigations will analyze the gas phase and
surface reaction chemistry of the strontium and titanium organometallic
precursors. Research efforts will optimize the materials quality through reactor
design and operation. Special challenges include controlling precursor transport
to the reaction zone, avoiding premature adduct formation and/or decomposition,
and achieving high quality monocrystalline, epitaxial layers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;