* 0935613
* Congruences between automorphic forms and lower bounds on Selmer group
* MPS,DMS
* 02/15/2009,06/30/2009
* Joel Bellaiche, Brandeis University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2009
* USD 4,562.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study of the absolute Galois group of a number field F
or, from a &lt;br/&gt;Tannakian point of view, of its abelian category of
continuous finite &lt;br/&gt;dimensional representations (let us say over a
p-adic field) has long been &lt;br/&gt;recognized as one of important challenge
in pure mathematics. Among &lt;br/&gt;those representations, the ones that are
geometric, in the sense of Fontaine &lt;br/&gt;and Mazur, are especially of
arithmetic significance, and their category&lt;br/&gt;should be equivalent to
the (still conjectural) category of mixed motives &lt;br/&gt;over F. It is
important to understand the first Ext groups in that category&lt;br/&gt;(higher
Ext groups should be zero) and Bloch and Kato have made precise
&lt;br/&gt;conjectures relating the dimension of those groups to the order of
&lt;br/&gt;L-functions at integers values of the variable. The project aims to
construct &lt;br/&gt;as much extensions as possible in those Ext groups
(hopefully as much as &lt;br/&gt;predicted by the conjecture, in the case
corresponding to the center of the &lt;br/&gt;functional equation of the
L-function) using p-adic deformations of &lt;br/&gt;non-tempered automorphic
forms. An important step should be the study of &lt;br/&gt;the local geometry of
the "moduli space of p-adic automorphic forms" called &lt;br/&gt;Eigenvarieties
around the non-tempered automorphic forms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many
old problems in arithmetic, some of them going back as far as
&lt;br/&gt;Diophantes, as well as some new ones, fit well in the framework of
Galois &lt;br/&gt;theory: they often can be translated into questions about
existence, or &lt;br/&gt;non-existence, of certain Galois representations (that
is representations of the &lt;br/&gt;absolute Galois group G of the field Q of
rational numbers, or of some open &lt;br/&gt;subgroups of G) with prescribed
properties. And then, sometimes, they can &lt;br/&gt;be proven, as was Fermat's
Last Theorem by Wiles. The study of Galois &lt;br/&gt;representations splits up
into two parts : finding irreducible Galois &lt;br/&gt;representations, and then
determining extensions between them. Even if the &lt;br/&gt;first problem is far
from being solved, precise conjectures about the second &lt;br/&gt;one were made
by Bloch and Kato. The projects aims to give partial answers &lt;br/&gt;to those
conjectures, by constructing some interesting extensions. The method
&lt;br/&gt;uses the theory of automorphic forms, which was once quite a
different topic, &lt;br/&gt;but which is now strongly tied to the theory of
Galois representations by the&lt;br/&gt;Langland's program. The idea is that one
can obtain interesting extensions of &lt;br/&gt;Galois representations by
looking at (p-adic) deformations of some very &lt;br/&gt;special automorphic
forms, the so-called non tempered forms. The more &lt;br/&gt;deformations there
are, the more extensions one should be able to construct. &lt;br/&gt;Those
deformations are encoded in the geometry of a (p-adic) variety, known
&lt;br/&gt;as the Eigenvariety, and developing tools to study that geometry is
an important &lt;br/&gt;part in the project. &lt;br/&gt;