* 0935550
* 2009 Polymers Gordon Research Conference (GRC) and Graduate Research Seminar (GRS), June 20-26, 2009, South Hadley, MA
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2010
* Timothy Long, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 04/30/2010
* USD 5,000.00

Technical Merit: The Polymers Gordon Research Conference (GRC), which will focus
on responsive and multifunctional polymers enabling emerging technologies, will
provide an exciting forum for leading scientists and engineers from academia,
industry, and government to discuss emerging multidisciplinary technologies that
bridge traditional boundaries between polymer science and engineering. The GRC
is a premiere interdisciplinary conference (typical attendance ranges from
125-170) for the polymer science and engineering community and is offered every
two years in the summer. The 2009 GRC is envisioned as an integrated educational
forum for the most recent advances in polymer science and engineering, and the
meeting subtitle is intentionally broad to bring together experts in diverse
fields to address advanced technologies over a wide range disciplines. Such an
educational forum is needed at this time to facilitate the collaborations and
mutual understanding necessary to catalyze breakthrough polymer-based material
solutions from the molecular to the device level. The objectives of the 2009 GRC
include (1) dissemination of the most recent advances in polymer science and
engineering, (2) education across multiple disciplines, (3) cultivation of
collaborations across diverse disciplines, and (4) formation of professional
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2009 GRS will consist of "mini-symposia"
sessions on polymer innovation in biomacromolecules, nanotechnology, catalysis,
sustainable polymer chemistry, renewable technologies, rheology and processing,
modeling, and electronic, optical, stimuli-responsive, and biomedical materials
and devices.&lt;br/&gt;Each mini-session will include a discussion leader and
2-3 invited research lectures in the discipline. The invited speakers are widely
recognized as leaders in their fields and will deliver focused lectures with
broad scientific appeal. Special attention was devoted to the development of a
diverse program including under-represented groups, leading universities from
across the nation, international participation, and demonstrated innovation
across disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: A Graduate Research
Seminar (GRC) will precede the GRC for the first time in an attempt to more
significantly impact the graduate student community. The preceding two-day
conference will include only graduate student oral presentations, anad studens
will be invited to remain for the subsequent GRC. A majority of the graduate
students are expected to participate in the subsequent GRC. This forum will
provide networking opportunities for some of our nation's top graduate student
researchers, including the cultivation of research collaborations and networks
for subsequent careers. Broader impact will also involve outreach to industry
and national laboratories. international participants will provide opportunities
for impact on the international level and the cultivation of bridges to
international reseach groups. Special attention was devoted to the formation of
a diverse attendance in terms of race and gender. A key metric for success will
be the formation of a diverse program and the impact on diverse groups of
scientists and engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;