* 0935165
* SOLAR:  Programming the Self-Assembly of Matter for Solar Energy Conversion
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Charles Epstein, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,661,471.00

The grand challenge in efficiently harvesting and converting solar radiation
into electricity lies in engineering materials on multiple length scales with
architectures that direct the flow of energy and the transfer and transport of
charge, as in naturally occurring light harvesting systems. Organic-inorganic
hybrids, prepared from functional, electro-active organic and nanostructured
inorganic materials, combine desirable and tunable chemical and physical
properties of the constituent organic and inorganic building blocks in a single
composite, making them promising systems for solar technologies. Hybrid
materials incorporate the low-cost, large-area processing and high absorbance
and quantum efficiencies of organic materials with the adjustable optical
properties, high carrier conductivities, and good photostability of inorganic
nanostructures. Solar photovoltaic and luminescent solar concentrator
technologies will be dramatically advanced if the organic and inorganic building
blocks of hybrid structures can be positioned and oriented on the nanometer
scale to regulate the competitive processes of charge transfer and transport,
emission, and energy transfer. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hybrid organic-inorganic
materials promise one of the best architectures for ultra-low-cost photovoltaic
devices. Currently, the efficiency of hybrid photovoltaic devices is limited by
the availability of red-absorbing, high-mobility organic and inorganic
components (to match the solar spectrum and efficiently collect charge) and of
composites with structures that achieve high surface area junctions, yet form
well-connected organic and inorganic pathways. This project aims to produce
significantly improved hybrid structures for photovoltaics. Improved hybrid
materials may also enable creation of high-efficiency luminescent solar
concentrators, which currently are limited in performance by materials
challenges; organic and inorganic materials alone have not been found to satisfy
the broad-spectrum collection, near-unity photoluminescence efficiency, low re-
absorption, and good photostability required. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
brings together advances in chemical synthesis, mathematical modeling, and self-
organization to control the position and orientation of organic and inorganic
building blocks, exploiting advances at the frontier of chemistry, materials
science, and mathematics. We will combine precisely controlled 1) molecular and
supramolecular dendrimeric systems tailored to assemble with different
structural motifs and 2) nanocrystals of tunable size, shape, and composition
that self-assemble into single and multi-component superlattices. Structural,
optical, and electrical probes will be combined with mathematical modeling of
the effects of interface geometry to optimize charge transfer and transport,
emission, and energy transfer. The results will enable engineering of organic-
inorganic materials that will be integrated in photovoltaic devices and
luminescent solar concentrators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More broadly, the research
program will develop new synthetic methods and mathematical formalisms for the
self-assembly of hybrid materials with tailored architectures that is important
to provide materials with superior structural, electronic, and optical
properties. These materials have applications in imaging, therapeutics, and
information technology, in addition to energy harvesting. The project's emphasis
on mathematical techniques for engineered self-assembling systems offers the
potential for impact in robotics and biological systems. The project will also
electronically and optically probe and establish mathematical models of the
behavior of organic-inorganic heterojunctions key to their application in a
range of electronic and optical devices. &lt;br/&gt;