* 0935270
* Targeted environmental probing: Linking microorganisms with biogeochemical function at Fe- and Mn-rich, diffuse hydrothermal vents
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Suzanna Brauer, Appalachian State University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Midson
* 08/31/2010
* USD 64,188.00

The primary objective of this project is to determine which microorganisms are
involved in CO2 fixation and Mn oxidation in hydrothermal vent systems. The
researchers will employ biogeochemical, microbiological, and molecular
biological methods to gain a more complete understanding of the microbial
communities that are coupling metal oxidation to carbon fixation, thus driving
basalt weathering and sustaining ecosystems in the deep-sea. Their strategy
includes 1) culture-based methods to isolate more ecologically significant
strains and to determine whether Mn-oxidizing bacteria may play a role in
fixation of inorganic carbon into organic carbon in mixed or pure cultures, 2)
culture-independent methods to identify the key chemolithoautotrophic organisms
responsible for carbon fixation in the environment, and 3) peptide probes to
physically separate Mn oxides and associated microorganisms from other particles
and microbes; analysis of macromolecules (DNA and/or lipids) of the Mn oxide-
associated microorganisms will provide the first direct phylogenetic
identification of the organisms responsible for Mn oxide biomineralization in
environmental samples.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;Isolating
autotrophic Mn(II)-oxidizing bacteria from hydrothermal fields, the main
objective of this project, will have a broad impact on understanding the
manganese cycle. The postdoctoral candidate has already a great track record of
outreach and education activities during her Ph.D. studies, and the proposed
collaboration with high school students is a great value to the broad impact of
this work.