* 0935009
* Tunneling Spectroscopy for Nanofabricated Biochemical Sensors
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2009,05/31/2011
* Brian Willis, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* GEORGE HADDAD
* 05/31/2011
* USD 97,832.00

0601269&lt;br/&gt;Willis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
integrative systems proposal focuses on the science and engineering of
nanofabricated molecular tunnel junctions to create novel chemical-biological
sensors. The cross-departmental, interdisciplinary research program addresses
the need for new concepts in low cost, portable sensing devices that can protect
against environmental hazards and toxic chemical-biological agents. The research
will investigate nanofabricated tunnel junctions and inelastic electron
tunneling spectroscopy (IETS) for solid state sensor devices. The advantages of
this work over existing concepts include: (1) sensitivity down to the single
molecule level, (2) all solid state construction that allows integration into
complex hybrid systems, (3) a device design that is conducive to low cost
manufacturing, and (4) spectral identification of unknown molecular agents. The
research will investigate a novel combination of nanofabrication techniques with
atomic layer chemistry to engineer 1-2 nm spaced metal-molecule-metal tunnel
junctions that will be doped with model compounds and investigated with IETS for
spectral identification. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits of the
research program are the underlying science of molecular devices, including the
understanding of molecule-electrode chemical interactions and charge transport
through single molecule devices. In particular, there is a need for experimental
data to connect physical properties and electrical measurements in single
molecule tunnel junctions. IETS provides a probe of molecular structure in
nanofabricated junctions that will advance the science and engineering of
molecule-based devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the
research program are significant for future technologies based on molecular
devices that enable low cost, ubiquitous sensors that protect the public from
environmental hazards and toxic chemical-biological agents. In addition, the
research program will interact with the general public through a multimedia
presentation to demonstrate a concrete example of nanotechnology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;