* 0935625
* Quantifying the Role of Mixing Interfaces in Biogeochemical Cycling in a Contaminated Aquifer-Wetland   System: Linking Hydrogeological, Microbiological and Geochemical Processes
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2008,09/30/2010
* Jennifer McGuire, University of St. Thomas
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 09/30/2010
* USD 236,176.00

0418488 McGuire

Quantifying the coupled hydrogeological, microbiological, and geochemical
processes that control redox potential is a fundamental issue in understanding
the fate and transport of nutrients and contaminants in subsurface systems and
thus in protecting drinking water and ecosystem health. In subsurface systems,
changes in redox state are often controlled by shifts in the terminal electron
accepting processes (TEAPs) of microorganisms, initi-ated by the delivery of
limiting terminal electron acceptors such as oxygen, nitrate, or sul-fate. Thus,
mixing interfaces between reduced aqueous systems and more oxic "re-charge"
water, are zones of increased TEAP dynamics. Despite the well-recognized im-
portance of mixing interfaces, few field investigations have targeted these
small-scale, transient zones due to difficulties in obtaining hydrologic,
geochemical and microbial measurements at relevant spatial and temporal scales.
This interdisciplinary study seeks to quantify the solute transport,
geochemical, kinetic, and microbiological controls on TEAPs at mixing interfaces
within a contami-nated aquifer-wetland system. High-resolution numerical models
will be developed to integrate observations, test hypotheses regarding the role
of interfaces on the overall re-ducing capabilities of the system, understand
processes and guide field/laboratory ex-periments, and evaluate the potential
effects of changing hydrologic conditions on the fate and transport of nutrients
and organic contaminants. To accomplish this and test the central hypothesis
that maximum TEAP dynamics, including microbial activity and transformation
rates, are observed at interfaces due to the delivery of limiting electron
acceptors or donors we will perform the following tasks: 1) map and quantify the
distri-bution of TEAPs across significant mixing interfaces during various
hydrologic condi-tions; 2) conduct in-situ kinetic studies of electron acceptor
utilization rates at induced mixing interfaces; 3) identify in-situ changes in
microbial community directly related to changes in water chemistry; and 4)
integrate measured controls using numerical models and test hypotheses regarding
the impact of mixing-interface zones on biogeochemical cycling during variable
hydrologic conditions. Our novel application of existing and re-cently developed
tools will make it possible to quantify the complex linkages between small-scale
changes in microbial community structure and activity and the corresponding
geochemistry. New and fundamental knowledge of the controls on TEAPs at mixing
in-terfaces is expected to improve our understanding of the fate and transport
of redox-sensitive species including nutrients and anthropogenic contaminants
and thereby im-prove our ability to assess risk and protect drinking water and
ecosystem function. The findings of this research are expected to be of great
value not only to scien-tists searching for improved ways to measure and
interpret complex, coupled earth sys-tem processes but also to industry,
regulatory agencies, and the general public. To ensure the broader impacts of
this research are widely disseminated we have developed strate-gies to 1)
involve students (K-12, undergraduate and graduate) through direct employ-ment,
course development, and educator training; 2) attract researchers from other
fields through workshops, meetings, and peer reviewed publications; 3) educate
the public through widely distributed fact sheets, research site tours and web
page design; and 4) increase diversity by encouraging the participation of
underrepresented groups.