* 0935168
* Inspiring Innovation: Merging Pedagogical Paradigms from Engineering and Architecture:
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Samuel Clemence, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Donna Riley
* 09/30/2013
* USD 390,772.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This engineering education research
award to Syracuse University will employ researchers from the College of
Engineering and Computer Science as well as College of Architecture to
investigate new approaches to improved creative problem solving. They will
jointly plan, deliver, evaluate, and refine two undergraduate courses: a Statics
class for undergraduate engineers and a fourth year technical elective design
course for engineers which will be paired with a fourth year studio course for
architecture students. One of the key aims of the project is to test the
hypothesis of whether the melding of the architectural teaching paradigm and the
engineering teaching paradigm will result in engineering students who are more
confident in their ability to solve problems and are more creative in doing so.
This project addresses ways to encourage the creation of innovative technologies
and innovative ways of viewing the future. The new courses address the often
heard criticism that engineers have too little hands-on training, especially
early in their undergraduate years, and this situation is believed to negatively
affect retention rates. Increasing the number of engineering graduates with
creative problem solving abilities would supply needed talent to fill
engineering jobs.&lt;br/&gt;