* 0935491
* HOMINID:   Assessing the Faunal and Lithic Assemblages and Chronology of the Smugglers' Cave Site
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,10/31/2012
* Harold Dibble, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Tran
* 10/31/2012
* USD 154,990.00

This award is for a pilot project to conduct archaeological field work at the
Moroccan site of Smugglers' Cave. Smugglers' Cave is one of the most important
Mousterian/Aterian sites in Morocco and has served as a major reference site for
archaeologists' understanding of the Mousterian and Aterian stone tool
industries. This site was first excavated in the 1950s and recent excavations
were started anew in the 1990s. In addition to numerous stone tools and non-
human fossils, Smugglers' Cave has also yielded a number of significant Middle
Paleolithic hominin remains. The researchers intend to develop a more accurate
understanding of the site's true chronological and paleoenvironmental setting,
its stratigraphic sequence and formation, and its fossil animal and tool
assemblages. These data will allow them to better understand the behavior of
fossil hominins and to get at answers to the question, "At what point did we
become fully modern?"

In terms of excavation, the work will focus on the interior of the cave. The
research team will analyze stone materials using a combination of earlier
published methodology and also newer techniques. The team will also study the
faunal collections. Together, these studies will provide preliminary results to
allow the researchers to interpret the subsistence strategies and patterns of
spatial organization of the early hominins. With respect to the geology and
chronology, the team will study the stratigraphy and site formation processes
using both optically stimulated luminescence and thermoluminescence dating
techniques. The hominin remains from the site, including a newly discovered
skull of a child in the Mousterian levels, will be analyzed through anatomical
description and isotope studies.

This work has important broader impacts in that it will provide intensive
training opportunities for both undergraduate and graduate students, including
underrepresented students from the United States and other countries.