* 0935208
* Collaborative Research: Develop Next Generation Unified Framework for Remote Laboratory Experiments
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Gangbing Song, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Donna Riley
* 08/31/2013
* USD 149,652.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This engineering education
research award to the University of Houston in collaboration with Texas Southern
University will employ researchers to develop a general framework for remote
laboratory experiments with the goal of making access and use independent of the
computer platform, operating system, and browser. Barriers to access to remote
experiments would be reduced through the use of a web page interface. Existing
experiments will be used to test and evaluate the remote laboratory framework,
and this framework will be integrated into a number of courses. The unified
framework will reduce the need for special computer expertise by faculty wishing
to use remote laboratory experiments, so a larger pool of faculty can take
advantage of these resources in laboratories and classrooms. This project will
allow much wider use of physical laboratory work in educational environments
which have limited space and physical resources. The project can also
potentially increase the utilization of physical resources through scheduling of
off-site users, thus making laboratory equipment more cost effective. Hands-on
laboratory experience is an essential part of undergraduate engineering
education, and this research will advance understanding of how to broadening
access to remote laboratory experiments and improve engineering education to
prepare students for engineering jobs.