* 0935103
* Building New Engineering EducationTheory and Practice for Interdisciplinary Pervasive Computing Design
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* ELOISE COUPEY, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Donna Riley
* 08/31/2013
* USD 396,180.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This engineering education research
award to Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University will employ
researchers to develop, assess, and disseminate a process model for teaching
students how to collaborate in learning environments with multiple disciplines.
A theory-driven model of design thinking will be developed, implemented, and
tested. The research is theoretically informed by work on interdisciplinarity as
an individual skill and interdisciplinary collaboration as an interactive
process between two or more people from different disciplines. A mixed-methods
case study approach will be used to assess pedagogical approaches to
interdisciplinary teaming, construction of learning environments, and
integrated, interdisciplinary design processes. The results of this research
will contribute to theoretical and applied work on the nature of
interdisciplinary collaboration and how it is taught to engineers. Producing
more engineering graduates who are well prepared for interdisciplinary
collaboration is necessary for a competitive workforce in the global economy.
The process and products of the student collaborations in this research will
advance the field of pervasive computing, both through design methods and
technical innovations.&lt;br/&gt;