* 0935984
* Photodegradation of Plant Litter in Grassland Ecosystems: A Mechanism for Uncoupling C and N Biogeochemistry
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Jennifer King, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 08/31/2012
* USD 224,645.00

Decomposition is the basic ecosystem process by which carbon and nutrients in
dead organic matter are recycled, yet knowledge of this process is incomplete,
as evidenced by the fact that current biogeochemical models of carbon and
nutrient cycling cannot reliably estimate rates of decomposition.
Photodegradation, the photochemical oxidation of organic matter by ultraviolet
radiation, may play an important role in determining rates of decomposition in
highly exposed areas such as grassland systems. This project will address the
current lack of understanding about the contribution of photodegradation to
decomposition rates. A multi-year, multi-site field decomposition experiment and
a series of laboratory studies will be used to measure the direct and indirect
effects of photodegradation on overall element cycling. These results will be
integrated into a biogeochemical model that can be applied more generally.

This study addresses the complexity of decomposition as a process controlled by
both biological and non-biological factors. The results will enable better
estimates of carbon and nitrogen cycling rates as well as improved ability to
predict how cycling rates may change under differing environmental conditions.
The project will have far-reaching impact through collaboration between three
LTER sites and integration of research and educational opportunities for
undergraduates, graduate students, and the general public.