* 0935816
* Scale up of math and science K-12 education reform in a large urban district
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Stacy Wenzel, Loyola University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Julio Lopez-Ferrao
* 08/31/2010
* USD 197,133.00

The University of Illinois at Chicago exploratory proposal builds on major
accomplishments of the Chicago Math and Science Initiative (CMSI), and on a
previously NSF/Educational System Reform-funded project. Its overarching goal is
to contribute to the capacity of urban school districts and educational
researchers to work collaboratively in the effective planning, implementation,
scale-up, adaptation, documentation, and evaluation of systemic reform in
mathematics and science education. Specifically, the proposal aims at (1)
producing new knowledge that (a) contributes to current understanding of the
mechanisms involved in reforming mathematics and science education
systematically in the context of a large urban district, (b) elaborates a model
for effective communicating and collaboration among key stakeholders, and (c)
bridges the practice/research divide in mathematics and science educational
reform; (2) sharing and communication findings that have relevance and utility
to those engaged with policy and practice, such as educational planners,
administrators, educational researchers, and evaluators; and (3) leveraging
future collaborations and communication among those engaged in practice, policy,
and research on mathematics and science education. In order to accomplish these
goals and objectives, the proposal will conduct a multidimensional study that
draws on a body of high-quality, quantitative and qualitative longitudinal
empirical data documenting systemic reform efforts over five years of the
Chicago Public Schools' efforts to reform K-12 STEM education from the stages of
design, planning, and initial implementation through scale-up and adaptation
(e.g., from district policy level to implementation of curricular materials in
classrooms).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is based on a four-
dimensional model of issues critical to STEM systemic reform: (1) levels of
reform and systems approach (district, school, teachers, and students), (2)
scaling-up (depth, spread, and ownership), (3) maintenance across time (context,
flexibility, and sustainability), and (4) cross-cutting issues related to
challenges and supports for changing practices (accountability/controls,
participation/motivation, learning/sense making, relations/trust, and
allocation/equity). Longitudinal data inventories addressing these constructs
are: (1) system and district level (staff and instructional leader interviews
and focus groups), (2) school level (longitudinal in-depth case studies, studies
of curricula implementation, principals' interviews), (3) teacher level (surveys
and classroom observations), and (4) student level (classroom observations, logs
of instructional practice, and district student achievement records). Data
analysis will look at both impact of the reform and processes by which
innovations are brought to scale. &lt;br/&gt;