* 0935239
* Transforming Statics Instruction through the Creation and Evaluation of Efficient and Effective Practice Experiences
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Robert Calfee, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Donna Riley
* 09/30/2013
* USD 399,695.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This engineering education research
award to the University of California-Riverside will employ researchers to
systematically explore how students learn problem solving skills and advance
beyond superficial understanding. It will develop well-defined principles for
designing efficient and effective practices for the development of expertise in
engineering statics, a fundamental engineering course. The project begins with
an in-depth analysis of the background and preparation of a diverse student
population. The team will conduct continued formative assessment with
inexpensive pen-based technology to capture student answers to a problem, as
well as the dynamic process by which the solutions were obtained to gain
important insights into students' thought processes. A course in statics is
often the most substantial introduction to engineering for engineering students,
especially for those who ultimately pursue a civil or mechanical engineering
major. Problem solving methods learned in this course influence success in more
advanced courses, and this can have a strong impact on student retention. The
results of this innovative research will advance general understanding of how
students learn to solve complex problems and will lead to better preparation of
engineering students for engineering jobs after graduation.