* 0935899
* Mid-infrared Semiconductor Lasers Based on Intersubband Transitions in the Valence Band of GaAs/AlAs Quantum Cascade Nanostructures
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Oana Malis, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 07/31/2011
* USD 253,448.00

ECCS-0725384 O. Malis, SUNY Binghamton

Intellectual merit: This project will investigate a new class of mid-infrared
quantum cascade lasers based on Carbon-doped GaAs/AlAs nanostructures. Unlike
traditional quantum cascade lasers, the proposed devices utilize hole transport
and intra-valence band transitions. The major objective is to exploit the unique
optical properties of hole intersubband transitions to demonstrate surface-
emitting lasing in the 5-10 um range. The approach will be multi-pronged,
experimental and theoretical. Hole cascaded structures will be designed, grown,
and characterized. The project will focus on enhancing the understanding of the
physics of hole intersubband transitions and of ultrafast hole relaxation
processes in the context of a well developed semiconductor system where material
quality issues are minimized. Nevertheless, the acquired knowledge will also
provide invaluable insights into the prospects of infrared laser light emission
in other material systems, most notably in Si/SiGe, GaN, and ZnSe. This
investigation will also advance the understanding of basic mechanisms involved
in molecular beam epitaxy of nanostructures and in growth of high-purity Carbon-
doped GaAs.

Broader Impact: The proposed new device concept for mid-infrared laser emission
is expected to significantly impact spectroscopic techniques for in-situ and
remote trace gas sensing. Mid-infrared surface emitting lasers would enable
integration of several sensors on a single chip for simultaneous detection of
several gasses with immediate benefits for applications in air quality control,
health monitoring, or explosive detection. This project will also offer graduate
and undergraduate students at SUNY-Binghamton unique opportunities to integrate
education, training and research in both the academic and industrial research
environments. Particular attention will be given to enhancing the opportunities
of under-represented groups in science and engineering. The faculty and graduate
students will engage in outreach activities targeted at introducing material
science and technology to high-school and non-science major students, as well as
to the general public. A hands-on lab-based course on the fundamental and
practical aspects of nanoscale science and engineering will be developed.