* 0935331
* Video and Audio Streaming of the RESNA 2009 Student Design Competition
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2010
* Nell Bailey, Rehabilitation Engineering and Assistive Tech Society of NA
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 04/30/2010
* USD 27,893.00

This is funding to support the Student Design Competition (SDC), which will be
part of the 2009 annual RESNA conference to be held June 23-27 in New Orleans.
Today, between 40 million and 56 million people in the United States report some
type of disability, and this number will likely grow in the coming years as the
baby boom generation enters late life. RESNA is the one organization with an
international focus that is devoted solely to technology for individuals with
disabilities. Comprised of over 1,000 individual and institutional members
(researchers, clinicians, manufacturers, suppliers, professionals and end-users
of technology devices and equipment), the organization has as its purpose to
improve the health and participation of people with disabilities in mainstream
society. To this end, RESNA supports individuals engaged in research,
development, education, advocacy and the provision of technology through a
number of programs and activities, which in addition to the annual conference
include a credentialing program for assistive technology practitioners,
suppliers and rehabilitation engineering technologists, as well as sponsored
projects. RESNA's Technical Standards Board is the U.S. Technical Advisory Group
to ANSI, the official U.S. representative to the International Organization for
Standardization (ISO), for the development of ISO standards pertaining to
assistive technology and other products for persons with disabilities.

The RESNA Student Design Competition fosters innovation and creativity with the
ultimate goal of producing technology that can contribute to the independence of
individuals with disabilities. The first SDC was held in 1980 as part of the
inaugural RESNA conference. Since then, over 200 designs have been identified as
winning entries, chosen from more than 600 submissions by students from over 115
different universities. SDC entries are required to represent the work of
students ONLY, including the design documentation; both undergraduates and
graduates are eligible to take part. Many past participants in the event are now
leaders in service, research, and educational areas related to technology for
people with disabilities. Some past student designs have been patented and are
now available commercially. NSF has been a supporter since 2005. This year's
funding will enable the SDC to be further expanded and enhanced, so as to
include more entries and support for more design teams, especially from
minorities, women, and individuals with disabilities. A call for participation
has been posted on the conference website, and also distributed electronically
to a large number of colleges and universities with engineering and design
schools. A team of 5 judges will pre-select entries from up to 10 teams, from
which two members each will be invited to attend the conference supported with
travel and hotel funds as well as complimentary registration. During a half-day
session in which the teams will make presentations before the judges and public
audience at the conference, 5 teams will ultimately be selected as the final
winners. Judges will have an opportunity to ask questions and make suggestions
and recommendations to the design teams. A platform session will be held this
year for the second time as part of the SDC, in which the 5 finalists will make
presentations to the general conference attendees. All SDC teams invited to the
conference will have an opportunity to present their projects in a poster
session during the general conference time. More information is available online
at http://www.resna.org/conference/index.php.

Broader Impacts: The annual RESNA Conference and the Student Design Competition
combine to create a forum for interaction between working and experienced
rehabilitation engineers and students who are about to enter the field. Unique
in its primary focus on undergraduates, the event will provide participants with
experience and skills that assist them to be successful in their engineering and
design careers, and will further encourage, support and mentor students in
various disciplines to become involved in the assistive technology and
rehabilitation engineering fields. In an effort to help communicate and
disseminate information about this important opportunity to impact the lives of
individuals with disabilities, and to increase participant diversity even
further both with respect to individuals and universities, NSF funding will be
used in part this year for the second time to provide video and audio streaming
of the SDC activities that can then be made into podcasts or videos for the
RESNA website.