* 0935972
* RAPID Environmental Effects of the Coal Ash Spill and Remediation at Kingston Tennessee
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2010
* Gary Dwyer, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 05/31/2010
* USD 105,393.00

Numerous studies have shown that coal ash contains high levels of trace metals
such as arsenic, boron, and mercury that can potentially harm the environment.
The December 22, 2008 coal ash spill at Kingston coal-burning power plant of
Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA) Plant has provided a unique opportunity to
study different environmental impacts of coal-ash derived metals on a regional
scale. A preliminary investigation by Duke team has revealed that trace metals
such as arsenic, strontium, and boron are easily mobilized from coal ash sludge
and dissolved in ambient surface water. Furthermore, it was found that mercury
is enriched in the downstream river sediments, reflecting transport and mixing
of the ash sludge with river sediments. This RAPID proposal seeks to further
investigate the environmental impacts of the coal ash spill and the remediation
activities (e.g., sludge dredging) proposed by TVA. In particular, this study
will focus on: (1) the critical water/sediment ratio at which the content trace
metals from ash leaching begin to impact water quality; (2) the transport and
accumulation of ash in downstream river sediments; (3) the potential of sulfate-
reducing bacteria to generate methylmercury in the downstream anaerobic river
sediments; and (4) the suitability of boron and strontium isotopes as
geochemical tools for elucidating coal ash metals in aquatic
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential impact of coal ash storage on the
environment is an emerging issue due to the magnitude of the problem. Currently
about five hundred power plants in the USA generate approximately 130 million
tons of coal ash, of which more than half is stored in landfills and ponds, such
as in the Kingston coal plant. One of the major potential hazards of coal ash
storage in ponds is the continuous leaching of contaminants and their transport
to the hydrological system. Yet, the impact of this continuous leaching on water
and ecological quality is unknown. As such, the TVA coal ash spill provides an
?opportunity? to investigate these processes on a larger scale and to define
biogeochemical tools for investigating the impact of coal ash on the
environment. This project will form the basis for two PhD theses at Division of
Earth and Ocean Sciences and Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering
at Duke University.&lt;br/&gt;