* 0935327
* Collaborative Research: Integrated Modeling and Experimental Assessment of Chimpanzee and Hominin Locomotion
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2015
* Brian Umberger, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/2015
* USD 593,504.00

Habitual upright bipedalism - walking exclusively on two straight legs - is one
of the key evolutionary adaptations that sets modern humans apart from other
primates. In contrast, the crouched form of bipedalism used by our nearest
relatives, chimpanzees, represents the best available example of how our early
bipedal ancestors would have walked. Therefore, advancing our understanding of
bipedal locomotion in chimpanzees is central to understanding the evolution of
locomotion in humans.

In this project, an interdisciplinary team of scientists will use state-of-the-
art computer modeling and lab-based experimental techniques to study the
mechanics, energetics, and control of bipedal locomotion in chimpanzees.
Specifically, the researchers will develop a computer model of the chimpanzee
musculoskeletal system that will be used to generate simulations of bipedal
walking. The musculoskeletal model will be used to evaluate the impact of
specific morphological adaptations that have been proposed to play a role in the
evolution of human bipedalism. The computer model will be complemented by a
detailed set of empirically derived locomotor data that will be collected on
chimpanzee subjects. These data will fully document bipedal locomotion in
chimpanzees, and will aid in generating and validating the bipedal walking
simulations. Together, these modeling and experimental investigations will be
used to reconstruct the most likely manner in which the australopithecine
ancestors of humans walked on two legs, and by so doing, determine if
australopithecine bipedality was transitional between that of apes and humans.

The broader impacts of this research will target both scientific and educational
domains. The researchers plan to make the computer simulation models and
corresponding experimental data widely and freely available to other scientists,
and develop a learning module based on the models that can be used in teaching
functional morphology and biomechanics. Moreover, this project will support the
research of two successful female scientists, and the mentoring of postdoctoral
fellows and both graduate and undergraduate students. By training the next
generation of scientists and creating freely-available model and data resources,
this project will facilitate discoveries in the evolution of human locomotion
that go far beyond the present project.