* 0935115
* Glacial water mass geometry in the South Atlantic: testing neodymium isotopes versus benthic carbon isotopes as paleo-water mass tracers
* GEO,OCE
* 12/15/2008,08/31/2011
* Katharina Pahnke, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 08/31/2011
* USD 326,129.00

Glacial water mass geometry in the South Atlantic: testing neodymium isotopes
versus benthic carbon isotopes as paleo-water mass tracers

Katharina Pahnke Lamont Doherty Earth Observatory

Abstract

The proposed study is designed to conduct a large-scale survey of the Holocene
and Last Glacial Maximum (LGM) distribution of epsilon-Neodymium (Nd) isotopes
in the South Atlantic, an area particularly sensitive to changes in the export
flux of North Atlantic Deep Water, on samples used previously to generate the
water mass geometry using carbon isotopes in benthic foraminifera. The project
will evaluate epsilon-Nd isotopes from cores that cover a range of water depths
and locations in the South Atlantic in order to develop time slice maps for the
LGM and Holocene. These data will largely complement an existing database of
carbon isotope data. In addition, the PI plans to put together a record of
secular variations for the past ~30 ky from a core on the Ceara Rise, along the
east coast of South America. All of the data will be derived from authigenic
ferromanganese oxide precipitate. The data produced will provide an improved
basis for the reconstruction of glacial age ocean circulation and for the linked
interpretation of Late Quaternary epsilon-Nd and benthic carbon isotope records.

Broader Impacts The broader impacts of this project are strong. The project will
support a promising early-career woman scientist and includes funds for an
undergraduate in the research. The mentoring by senior scientists as well the
opportunity for the junior scientist to supervise and mentor an undergraduate
are recognized as important in postdoctoral training.