* 0935758
* CAREER: Experimental Investigation of Mechanical Properties of Nanoporous Thin Films
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/2009,12/31/2013
* Junlan Wang, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 12/31/2013
* USD 326,578.00

This Faculty Early Development (CAREER) Program grant provides funding for the
development of an integrated research and education program to investigate the
microstructural and mechanical properties of nanoporous thin films. The
integrated, multiscale experimental approach including nanoindentation, laser-
induced surface acoustic waves (LiSAW), laser-induced thin film spallation
(LiTFS), and ultrasonic holography based digital image correlation (UHDIC) will
be used to determine the microstructure-mechanical property relationship of
nanoporous thin films. In particular, the study will focus on the effect of
porosity, pore structure, and crystallinity etc on the bulk, surface and
interface properties of nanoporous thin films, and their deformation,
delamination, damage and densification mechanisms under various loading
conditions. Due to their ordered pore structure, crystalline framework and
dominating role in nanoporous materials market, nanoporous zeolite thin films
will be the initial focus of this research while the fundamental knowledge and
the established techniques will be transferable to many other ordered and non-
ordered nanoporous materials.

If successful, the results of this research will lead to: 1) improved science-
based understanding of the process-microstructure-mechanical property
relationship of nanoporous thin films; 2) a set of innovative experimental tools
that can be used to study a wide variety of nanoporous materials; 3) promotion
of processing and application of nanoporous thin films in a wide range of fields
such as microelectronics, energy materials, and films and coatings; 4) the
involvement of more underrepresented undergraduate students, women and
minorities in science and engineering; 5) more outreach opportunities to local
high school students and teachers, especially to those economically or
educationally disadvantaged students; 6) a larger and more diverse science and
technology workforce in the under developed regions at the Inland Empire of
Southern California served by UC Riverside.