* 0935847
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:    Investigating the Material Dimensions of Colonialism: The Impact of the Roman State in Southern Gaul
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2011
* Michael Dietler, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2011
* USD 14,400.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Michael Dietler (University of Chicago), Benjamin
Luley will investigate the changes in daily life that occurred for the Celtic-
speaking peoples of what is today southern France at the archaeological sites of
Lattes, Nages, Ambrussum, NÃ®mes, and Narbonne after the Roman conquest. The
first four sites were indigenous, densely-settled fortified cities with
populations of several thousand inhabitants, whereas the site of Narbonne was an
old and very important Roman colony. The region of southern France came under
Roman control after 121 B.C., and scholars have often assumed that the peoples
of this region willingly and consciously adopted Roman practices and values in a
process referred to as 'Romanization'. However, very few studies have
investigated the ways in which daily life changed for the native populations of
the conquered Roman provinces. As a result, archaeologists have been unable to
address the specific ways in which the Roman state impacted indigenous life and
the ways in which the indigenous peoples of the provinces became integrated into
the Roman Empire and participated in imperial society. This research will
involve a new synthesis of the results from excavations at the five sites
combined with a residue analysis of sample ceramics, as well as participation in
the ongoing excavations at Lattes. This approach breaks with more traditional
attempts at investigating the Roman provinces that have largely ignored the
daily, domestic aspects of life. In particular, no residue analysis has ever
been performed on ceramics from this region, and this project will allow
archaeologists to better understand what local peoples were consuming and how
these practices changed over time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a post-colonial
world, the effects of modern colonialism are still emphatically present
throughout the globe. However, there is a general lacuna in knowledge about the
role of daily material life in the changes associated with colonialism.
Furthermore, the majority of studies of colonialism have focused on the
expansion of modern world powers since the growth of capitalism, primarily
through the literary and ethnographic record. This research will therefore
provide a needed material perspective for broader comparative studies on
colonialism by using a notably rich and well-documented record of colonial
interaction in southern France that spanned several centuries. Through a focus
on the material dimensions of daily life, the research will address this notable
lacuna and allow for an understanding of how the material world functions in
colonial transformations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will foster
interaction between French, Spanish, Catalonian, and American archaeologists at
one of the most important international archaeological sites in Western Europe
and contribute to deeper collaborative efforts between the French Centre
national de la Recherche scientifique (CNRS) and the University of Chicago.