* 0935305
* Optimization Over Positive or Sum-of-Square Functions with Applications to Constrained Approximation and Shape Constrained Learning
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Farid Alizadeh, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Sheldon Jacobson
* 07/31/2013
* USD 325,000.00

The main focus of this project will be on applications of modern and
sophisticated optimization theory to the problems of statistical learning,
regression, and density estimation, with constraints. Classes of functional
constraints to be investigated will all involve nonnegativity over a domain of
the underlying function or some linear functional of it. Both univariate and
multivariate cases will be thoroughly investigated. The research in onstrained
estimation problems will be carried out in several functional spaces including
polynomials, polynomial splines, wavelets, and more general Chebychev systems,
for the univariate case, and polynomials, wavelets, and splines for ultivariate
case. In particular various strategies for approximation of nonnegativity
constraints will be explored. The main tool for such problems is general convex
conic optimization models such as semidefinite and second order cone
programming. The shape and nonnegativity constraints will be formulated as conic
optimization problems, and when possible, tailor made efficient interior point
algorithms with good theoretical and numerical properties will be developed. In
the multivariate case, Nesterov's semidefinite programming characterization of
sum-of-squares functions will be used as a foundation to build methods for
multivariate estimation and learning problems. Observing that the explicit
problems above in the most abstract form amount to searching in the cone of
nonnegative functions in some well-defined closed linear function space such as
Sobolev-Hilbert spaces with an explicit orthonormal basis, and starting from a
finite subset of such basis, the approximations are refined successively by
adding more elements of the basis until the desired accuracy is achieved.
However, the question of which sequence of nonnegative cones within each
approximating finite dimensional space should be chosen is of fundamental
importance, and will be thoroughly investigated. Two interesting theoretical
questions are related to the research on constrained learning and estimation
problems which will be investigated in this project. One is the question of
which cones have bilinear complementarity conditions. The question of existence
of such cones beyond the class of symmetric cones (which include positive
semidefinite matrices and second order cones) will be investigated. The second
theoretical question which arises from this project is the question of
characterizing vector valued functions which are required to be in a given
convex cone, for example, polynomials with symmetric matrices as coefficients
which are required to be positive semidefinite. Such problems have applications
in multivariate shape onstrained problems. The characterization, as well as
design of efficient optimization algorithms for them will be investigated.
Successful completion of the goals of this project will create strong synergy
between statistical learning theory and modern conic optimization problems.
Through statistical learning, it is expected that new algorithmic methods impact
fields as diverse as biology, econometrics, finance and management science,
among others. All such fields have numerous problems where regression, density
estimation or classification has to be carried out with one or many shape and
nonnegativity constraints. Any useful software developed for this project will
be made available to the community in the open source format. Both C and C++
libraries, as well as MATLAB-like and R based software will be created and
published in open source format. The main educational impact of this project
will be training and development of graduate students with expertise in
multitudes of disciplines, including mathematical programming, statistical
learning, signal processing, data visualization and software engineering. It is
expected that the graduate students work will culminate in PhD degrees in
operations research.