* 0935157
* Using SI  and SCCT to explore MIDFIELD
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Demetra Evangelou, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Donna Riley
* 08/31/2012
* USD 395,439.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)

This engineering education research award to Purdue University will study the
progression of students through their choice of engineering major. In particular
the study will address why students choose to enroll in one engineering
discipline rather that another and what factors influence their decision to stay
in that discipline, move to another or to leave engineering. The results will
offer constructive information on the complex issue of recruitment to and
retention in engineering. The study will take place at Purdue University,
Department of Engineering Education using the existing MIDFIELD data base of
student records from ten universities. This will be augmented with in depth
surveys of Purdue students. The research team is well positioned to address the
multidisciplinary nature of the research, comprised of experts in both
engineering education and psychology. The findings of the study will be
significant in terms of understanding the decision-making processes of all
engineering students and in particular of women and minority students. The goal
is to better prepare students for the practice of engineering through more
effective development of their careers. The results will improve efforts to
recruit students to engineering, and will enhance the number of students who
complete engineering degrees and are ready to fill engineering jobs.