* 0935725
* Collaborative Research:  Continued Development of Global Positioning System (GPS) as an Instrument for a Continental-Scale Soil Moisture Network
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2013
* Kristine Larson, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Anjuli Bamzai
* 02/28/2013
* USD 643,633.00

This project aims to further develop and refine a method to extract near-surface
soil moisture estimates from Global Positioning System (GPS) receivers as a
continental-scale soil moisture network and to evaluate errors to establish the
underlying uncertainty in the estimates. Specifically, the investigators will
(a) quantify how various aspects of the physical environment influence soil
moisture estimates, including (i) vertical profiles of soil moisture and
texture; (ii) vegetation amount and structure; and (iii) topography and surface
roughness, and evaluate the physical environment around each of the Earthscope
Plate Boundary Observatory (PBO) sites for suitability for the GPS soil moisture
technique; (b) evaluate how antenna and receiver design/performance and
satellite signals influence the soil moisture content time series derived from
GPS signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) data, and evaluate the equipment used by PBO
because its network is large, homogeneous, and well-
maintained.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a collaboration between
hydrologists, climate scientists, electrical engineers, and GPS geodesists. A
broad range of data will be collected from seven field sites, including GPS, in
situ soil moisture, meteorological, and vegetation information. The different
data types will be combined using an integrated modeling system designed to
understand how the physical environment and antenna/receiver design influence
GPS SNR data. This will yield a retrieval algorithm for soil moisture from GPS
SNR data that is guided by physical principles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will benefit society by providing important new soil moisture data for
hydrological and climate studies and weather forecasting. Two graduate students
will be supported and trained in a interdisciplinary educational program
including hydrology, remote sensing, and GPS geodesy.