* 0935683
* US-Pakistan Workshop on Applications of Nanotechnology, Karachi and Islamabad, Pakistan, January 2010
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2012
* Massimo Bertino, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 12/31/2012
* USD 59,225.00

0935683 &lt;br/&gt;Bertino&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is to support a
?US- Pakistan Workshop on Applications of Nanotechnology, Karachi, Pakistan
January 3-9, 2010. The U.S. organizer is Dr. Massimo Bertino, Physics
Department, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia. The foreign
organizers are Drs. Sayed Hasanain and Arif Mumtaz, Physics Department at Quaid
Azam University, Islamabad, and Dr. Raza Shah, HEJ Chemistry Institute,
University of Karachi, Pakistan. The project will support 12 U.S. scientists who
will travel to Karachi and Islamabad for two workshops, one in each site,
jointly with Pakistani scientists. The workshops will focus on nano-
biotechnology and nanomagnetism which are the most developed areas of the
Pakistani nanotechnology effort and therefore the most likely areas where
collaborations can be developed. To maximize the number of new collaborations US
participants are being chosen who have never visited Pakistan or do not have on-
going collaborations with Pakistan. The first activity will focus on chemical
aspects of nanotechnology and it will be hosted in Karachi. The second activity
will focus on physics and materials science aspects of nanotechnology and it
will be hosted in Islamabad. This separation has logistic and scientific
reasons. Logistic reasons, because the two locations are geographically apart
from each other and this will allow US researchers to visit and interact with a
larger number of research centers. Karachi is in the South of the country and it
hosts several major universities and research centers. Islamabad is in the
center/north, is home to several Universities and research centers and it is
also within driving distance from two other major cities, Lahore and Peshawar,
which also host a number of research centers. Scientific reasons, because
Karachi is particularly renowned for its chemical institutes, while in Islamabad
more emphasis is placed on magnetism and materials
research.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The proposed topics are in a good
scientific area and the activities are well-arranged. The teams are highly
productive, and they will address fundamental and practical areas in
nanotechnology, where new technologies may be generated. The PI has identified a
very strong team of scientists in Pakistan to work with U.S. researchers in
areas including synthetic nanoscale materials, magnetic properties of
nanoparticles and bio-nanotechnology. The techniques, physics and chemistry that
are learned can be transferred to the US. Each of the participants brings a
significant area of expertise. The project has the potential of having a large
impact on Pakistani science, by creating collaborations between US and Pakistani
scientists that can directly impact US research, and by encouraging Pakistani
students and postdoc to study in US universities. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The
US researchers will gain a new perspective on the state-of-research in a foreign
country that is much different than in the US. By visiting Pakistan, they will
learn how to design an effective collaboration between the two countries.
Interactions between the US and Pakistani scientists is important in mutual
understanding of the two cultures and in bridging the gap in scientific
knowledge. Scientists in Pakistan will have access to state-of-the-art
facilities in the U.S. and scientists from the U.S. will have access to work
with highly skilled and talented researchers from Pakistan. Dissemination of the
workshop will be done by posting videos of the lectures on a website and
publishing proceedings of the workshop in open access journals. Follow-up
activities are planned in form of visits of small teams of US faculty and
students following the workshop. The workshop intends also to generate
collaborations focusing on characterization. The characterization of materials
developed in Pakistan requires highly specialized facilities such as high
resolution mass spectrometers and synchrotrons. These facilities are not
available in Pakistan and samples are currently being sent mostly to Europe.
Thus, the conference will likely increase the user base of US advanced
characterization facilities. &lt;br/&gt;