* 0935333
* EAGER:   A Subtractive EST Approach to the Phylogenetics of Endosymbiotic Foraminifera
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2014
* Megan Cevasco, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* David Mindell
* 05/31/2014
* USD 39,772.00

Coral reefs are home to many species of single celled organisms known as
Foraminifera, each of which contains within it multiple tiny single-celled
algae. The presence of the algae has made it difficult to determine which genes
are present in the foraminiferans because the algal genomes are hard to separate
from those of their hosts. This research applies recent advances in genomic
sequencing technology to overcome this problem by producing thousands of DNA
sequences for the mixture of the foraminiferan (host) and the microalga
(symbiont) together. Then the microalga will be grown separately and DNA
sequences will be generated for it. Using a computer, the set of microalgal
sequences can be subtracted from the set of foraminiferan sequences. The
subtracted sequence data can then be used to determine the evolution of the two
organisms in the symbiosis.

Foraminifera are bioindicators of global climate change, and maintaining their
symbiosis with algae is critical to survival of the reef ecosystem. This
research will help conservation of coral reefs by helping to identify genes
associated with maintenance of the endosymbiotic condition. In addition, the
symbiosis between foraminiferans and microalgae provides a model single-cell
system to investigate basic biological phenomena such as cell-to-cell
recognition. The project will also provide student training opportunities
through the mentoring program at the American Museum of Natural History.