* 0935967
* Conferences/Workshops on Partial Differential Equations and Related Analysis and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2011
* Joseph Jerome, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2011
* USD 48,000.00

This award provides support for travel and local expenses for participants in
three meetings during the 2009-2010 academic year at Northwestern
University:&lt;br/&gt;(A) Conference/Workshop on Complex Geometry and Partial
Differential Equations (October 24-27, 2009);&lt;br/&gt; (B) International
Conference on Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations and Related Analysis and
Applications (March 20-24, 2010);&lt;br/&gt;(C) Workshop on Local and Global
Analysis of Eigenfunctions (June 3-7, 2010).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The meetings
are part of an "Emphasis Year in Partial Differential Equations and Related
Analysis and Applications" to be held at the university. The goal of this
program is to develop new connections between analysis of partial differential
equations and their application in other science and engineering
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The meetings will provide opportunities for
researchers in applied analysis, including senior investigators, graduate
students, and recent Ph.D. recipients, to develop working relationships with one
another, and the emphasis year is likely to catalyze new interdisciplinary
research projects. The meetings encourage participation by, and provide support
for, members of groups underrepresented in the mathematical sciences.
Dissemination of the activities via web postings and published conference
proceedings is planned.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For additional information,
see:&lt;br/&gt;http://www.math.northwestern.edu/news/conferences.html&lt;br/&gt;