* 0935936
* Exploring the Foundations of Diversity:   A Trans-Cultural Learning Lodge for National Science Foundation Program Directors
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Rose von Thater-Braan, Silver Buffalo Consulting
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2013
* USD 402,611.00

Proposal #: 09-35936 PI(s): von Thater-Braan, Rose Institution: Silver Buffalo
C. Pt. Richmond, CA 94801-0000 Title: SpProj.: Exploring the Foundations of
Diversity: A Trans-Cultural Learning Lodge

Project Proposed: This very non-traditional project for a relatively focused
audience, aiming to teach, train, and learn, takes place across the larger
academic environment, particularly within the Native American (NA) communities.
To augment the more formal methodologies of conferences, papers, and lecture-
based learning, the project intends to enhance understanding for the scientific
community on a more personal network level. Using the Socratic method combined
with the dialog processes should encourage a renewed focus on people-to-people,
face-to-face learning beyond iPhone, Facebook, texting, and internet-based tools
more commonly used in today's world. The work enables broader dissemination of
results through selected workshops for the wider NA community, and even diverse
groups across the university community and government agencies. The proposal
states: 'Trans-cultural learning is rigorous primarily because it requires
suspension of unexamined assumptions and reveals the cultural lens through which
we view one another.' Thus, the work constitutes an educational policy effort,
offering several 'convenings' focused on science, engineering, and educational
policies and strategies. The basic concept of the 'convenings,' a Native
American Concept, uses a forum, a lodge, or a wide-area discussion at which all
aspects of the topic area are discussed and heard before any decisions or
dissentions are admitted. Since this idea is used in places like Mongolia and
Central Asia (e.g., the lawya jurga of Afghanistan), the concept may well be
Asian in origin. The NA form of such meetings is couched in the form of 'lodges'
in the project. The work has the potential for creating a broader understanding
of a more informal technology known as 'talking circles' in 'Indian Country.' By
its very nature, the proposed meetings are diverse and open to all subject areas
within the umbrella of science, engineering, and education. Various events will
be held to which NSF personnel and some PIs will be invited and at which Native
scientists, scholars, educators, and traditional knowledge holders would attend
with the purpose of exposing the attendees to the Native learning processes,
culture, and knowledge, thus opening new ways of thinking and other cultures
that approach knowledge and life in different ways. The project encourages
diversity in science endeavors, both among the people involved in science and in
the approaches to scientific research. The work enables understanding
alternative sources of knowledge and generates 'shared perspectives from which
radical new approaches may address commonly held goals.'

Broader Impacts: This project is all about broader impact. In the past three
years the American Society of Engineering Education (www.asee.org) has focused
on a similar 'year of dialog' approach with excellent results in increased
informal networking among the members and has established several Special
Interest Groups (SIGs) within the Corporate Member Council. The Learning Lodge
exhibits the same potential for success via outreach encompassing diversity,
K-12, and life-long learning forums.