* 0935066
* IEECI: Assessing Sustainability Knowledge (ASK): Development of a Framework to Assess Undergraduate Students' Knowledge of Sustainability Concepts
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Matthew Ohland, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Richard N. Smith
* 09/30/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This engineering education research
award to Purdue University will employ researchers to develop a conceptual
framework for assessing sustainability knowledge gained by undergraduate
engineering students and to explore elements of a sustainability concept
inventory. Although plans to integrate sustainability throughout engineering
curricula are widely supported, there are few resources available to measure the
efficacy of such efforts. The field and practice of engineering education will
benefit from the development of a rigorous conceptual framework to allow for
grounded assessment of burgeoning sustainability curriculum initiatives. The
bridging of expert and novice perspectives on sustainability will inform the
creative investigation of both, i.e., it will refine expert conceptions and
clarify novice misconceptions. By highlighting the explicit link between
engineering, sustainability and society, this work will serve to highlight the
broader dimensions of the engineering profession. As a result, if engineering
becomes more attractive to a wider fraction of the population, there would be an
expected increase in number of engineering graduates prepared for challenging
work in sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;