* 0935407
* RAPID: Acquisition of Zinacantec Family Homesign in the Only Second Generation Speaker
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2012
* John Haviland, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 05/31/2012
* USD 55,793.00

Spontaneously created sign languages provide a natural laboratory for exploring
the human language capacity, allowing a glimpse into how language is created
without direct "linguistic input". Such a miniature "speech community" exists in
Chiapas, Mexico, where Zinacantec Family Homesign (hereafter ZFHS), a manual
communication system used by three deaf siblings and two hearing age-mates, is
being created. There is also a hearing infant, now nearing two years of age, who
is simultaneously learning ZFHS and the local indigenous language, Tzotzil
(Mayan). This research documents this child's bilingual acquisition of Tzotzil
and ZFHS and will involve weekly video recordings of the child over the next
twelve months. It will also use spontaneous interaction and semi-structured
experimental techniques to document the linguistic abilities of the caregiver,
in both ZFHS and spoken Tzotzil. Such situations provide an opportunity to
explore questions about the nature, origins, and evolution of language. They
give insight into how and why particular words come into existence, what sorts
of paradigmatic semantic and pragmatic categories accrue to systems of
linguistic communication, and how syntax, morphology, and phonology emerge.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Opportunities for research on the languages of the deaf as
they evolve in "natural" conditions are rare. Most sign language research works
with languages which are either well-established or which have come to the
attention of researchers only after the first generation of speakers has
disappeared. This research will probe the processes of creation, innovation, and
change at the beginning of a language's evolution, working together with the
full universe of its speakers. Understanding the potential and expressive
capacity of a spontaneously created language like ZFHS, especially in the
context of an underrepresented minority populations like Mayan Indians, will
impact not only people with communicational disadvantages but, indeed, speakers
of minority languages in general, whose communicative abilities are often under-
appreciated or recast as direct liabilities to their social and economic lives.
Most broadly of all, this research will make a direct contribution to a
perennial question: how is human language created, and how does it evolve and
structure itself over the time course of successive human generations.