* 0935538
* Assessing Atmospheric Predictability with a Global Analysis-Forecast System
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2012
* Istvan Szunyogh, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 01/31/2012
* USD 223,163.00

The focus of this research is on atmospheric predictability at the upper ranges
of deterministic forecasting (up to about two weeks). The study will use data
assimilation based on the Local Ensemble Transform Kalman Filter method to
examine the impact of observations on forecasts, and in particular to determine
a priori the most needed locations for specific measurements ("targeted
observations") to improve forecasts. This research extends previous work in
perfect model scenarios (comparing models to models) to more realistic
applications (forcast models versus real world). The study will also examine the
predictability time limits for different circulation regimes, investigate
seasonal effects on predictability, and assess the impacts of observations
collected in the upcoming THORPEX Pacific Asian Regional Campaign (T-PARC) on
forecasts. The study will use a recent operational version of the Global
Forecast System model of the National Centers for Environmental Prediction. The
fruits of the research have the possibility to improve forecasting by
pinpointing where additional observations are most useful, thereby optimizing
deployable resources. The use of an operational forecast model should ease the
transition of knowledge from the basic research phase to operations. A graduate
student will be supported and involved in the research.