* 0935995
* EAGER: Bioinspired Electrets for Solar-Energy-Conversion Applications
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Valentine Vullev, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Ram Gupta
* 06/30/2012
* USD 104,500.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0935995&lt;br/&gt;Vullev&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will undertake basic research aimed at controlling how electrical charge
moves through photovoltaic devices. The objective is to produce synthetic
electrets - non-conductive materials that are the electrostatic equivalent of
magnets. Electrets can be designed to improve the flow of charges, and thus make
solar cells more efficient and, therefore, cost-effective.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Through this EAGER exploratory project, we will
adopt a new way of designing molecular electrets. The designs will be based on
molecules found in nature, but the synthetic electrets will have superior
electronic properties, in comparison with their biological counterparts. As
such, they will prove immensely beneficial for solar-energy-conversion
applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experimental and computational investigation
of a series of newly designed electrets will reveal their electronic properties.
Ultrafast time-resolved spectroscopic studies will allow us to characterize how
well they control the movement and direction of electrons. We will select the
molecular electrets with the most promising performance and implement them into
devices. Comparative studies of such devices will allow us to determine the
feasibility of the synthetic electrets for solar-cell applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the past, researchers have attempted to manufacture
electrets by mimicking biological processes. This project represents a shift
from such biomimetic approaches to bio-inspired synthesis. This bioengineering
approach to the need for better electrets represents the transformative nature
of the project, and the significance it can have on the development of
affordable and efficient photovoltaic energy sources.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The project will advance the state of
technology in solar-to-electrical energy conversion. The findings from the work
on bioinspired electrets as rectifying nanosystems will broaden the development
not only of photovoltaic devices, but also of novel types of organic electronics
essential for energy-conversion applications. &lt;br/&gt;This project will
support one graduate student, and it will provide a research basis for
undergraduate student participation via an NSF-funded program (DBI 0731660).
Using our experience with outreach and educational activities with local high
schools and middle schools, we will involve a high-school student and a science
teacher in summer research. Solar-energy-conversion topics that provide liaison
between basic science and applied engineering are immensely instrumental for
recruiting and training students with diverse background and interests.