* 0935347
* Microbes, Diet, and Hominin Evolution: Comparative and Metagenomic Approaches
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2018
* Bryan White, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2018
* USD 2,449,417.00

This research will explore microbial communities residing in human and nonhuman
primate gastrointestinal tracts in order to understand the roles microbes have
played in the evolution of humans, human ancestors, and related species. This
project represents the first large-scale comparative research project centered
on the roles of microbes in human evolution. With data collected as part of this
project, the researchers will be able to assess whether changes in microbial
communities influenced human evolution or whether humans evolved largely
independently of microbial metabolism, where cultural or other innovations have
played a larger role.

The research will use two complementary data sets to investigate the
significance of microbiomes in human and nonhuman primate diets. First, the
taxonomic composition of microbes residing in twenty-four nonhuman primate
species, including humans, will be described. Second, the metabolic processes
undertaken by microbes in ten primate species, including humans, will be
analyzed. These lines of evidence will be evaluated in light of dietary
information for each species, with all major primate dietary categories
represented. A broad taxonomic range of primates will be analyzed, and
information about dietary changes during human evolution will be utilized. The
genetic analyses of microbial samples will involve advanced and emerging
sequencing and metagenomic techniques focused on two types of microbe: bacteria
and archaea, a group of single-celled microorganisms that were once grouped with
bacteria, but are now considered to be an evolutionarily distinct group.

The main intellectual contribution of this study will be to understand the
evolutionary dynamics of primate hosts and commensal microbes, particularly to
determine if microbes provide benefits that hosts could not have evolved on
their own.

With respect to broader impacts, this research will establish an evolutionary
baseline for assessing human microbial diseases. This will complement ongoing
research through the Human Microbiome Project. The findings are expected to
provide insights into a wide range of human gastrointestinal diseases. In
addition, the project will train and develop the research capabilities of
students and researchers, including those from underrepresented groups.