* 0935276
* Student Travel Support for 2009-2011 ASME Student Mechanism and Robot Design Competitions
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,09/30/2013
* David Cappelleri, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Paul Collopy
* 09/30/2013
* USD 45,000.00

The goal of this award is to obtain travel funding for students (undergraduate
and graduate) participating as finalists in the 2009, 2010, and 2011 ASME
Student Mechanism Design Competition. The competition is featured at the
Mechanisms and Robotics Conferences, which is part of the ASME International
Design Engineering Technical Conferences (IDETC) &amp; Computers and Information
in Engineering Conference (CIE). ASME IDETC/CIE is the premier international
meeting in the fields of Design Engineering and Computers and Information in
Engineering. This event is designed to showcase cutting edge research and
accomplishments, and to enrich the educational experience in these fields. The
purpose of the Mechanisms and Robotics conference is to advance the
understanding of the base of knowledge in mechanism design and robotics that all
researchers and educators will collectively draw upon in the years ahead to meet
the challenges and realize the opportunities of a globally competitive economy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A mechanism is defined as any device that transmits a
force or a motion in a deterministic way in order to perform a mechanical task.
Mechanisms are the skeleton of more complex machine systems. Mechanism design
has been and will continue be one of the fundamental techniques that are widely
used and needed in industry. The objective of the ASME Student Mechanism Design
Competition is (1) to stimulate students' interests in mechanism design and
research and (2) to promote advances in research and education in the theory,
design and application of mechanisms. Finalists are invited to present their
work at IDETC each of the years of this grant. Finalists are judged on the basis
of creativity, practicality, integrity of analysis and design methodology,
quality of the fabricated prototype, quality of the final report and the
conference presentation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The competition is highly related
to the NSF Division of Civil, Mechanical and&lt;br/&gt;Manufacturing Innovation
(CMMI), more specifically the Engineering Design and Innovation (EDI) program
which sponsors basic research in engineering design to advance the understanding
of the fundamentals of the product realization process. The research of the
mechanism community covers a wide range of stages of product realization
process, from conceptual design (topological and dimensional synthesis) to
optimal design and prototype fabrication. Furthermore, the EDI program is one of
the major funding sources for mechanism science research.