* 0935452
* Planning Grant: Developing a plan for a Watershed Education and Research Center
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2015
* Michael Vanni, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 01/31/2015
* USD 24,990.00

Miami University is awarded a grant which will enable its Ecology Research
Center (ERC) to collaborate with a local natural area, the Hueston Woods State
Park (HWSP), in the development of a plan for a Watershed Education and Research
Center. Miami ecologists have developed a unique understanding of the ecological
processes operating in the watershed that drains into the HWSP reservoir and the
impact regional landscape changes have on the aquatic environment. Formalizing
this relationship between the ERC and HWSP will make this watershed research
accessible to a broader audience. The project includes: (1) focus groups
targeting varied stakeholder communities (including boaters, vacationers, local
residents, area farmers, researchers, educators, and others) to gather ideas for
the center, (2) an interdisciplinary team of faculty and students from the Miami
Design Collaborative (MDC), which includes marketers, psychologists, graphics
designers and architects, to develop a plan for the graphical, virtual, and
physical layout of the center, and (3) researchers, university administrators,
state and federal legislators, private foundations, and granting agencies to
create a plan for funding the center. The vision is for a center that enables
visitors to interact with researchers and participate in realtime data
collection and hypothesis testing through both virtual and hands-on
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Soliciting the input of varied stakeholder
communities in the planning process, including explicitly seeking input from
minority communities in nearby urban areas, is likely to ensure their support
for the collaboration. Involving a truly interdisciplinary team in the planning
process will result in a dynamic plan that incorporates the interests of that
broad audience. In the long-term, generations of students, researchers,
teachers, fishermen, boaters, and others will experience first-hand the
challenges of interpreting data, the intricacies of designing experiments, and
thrill of discovery.