* 0935834
* Student Support for the 3L International Summer School in Language Documentation and Description
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2010
* Edward Garrett, Eastern Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 07/31/2010
* USD 14,799.00

This project provides funding for students to attend the 3L International Summer
School in Language Documentation and Description (3LSS) from June 23 - July 3,
2009 at the School of Oriental and African Studies in London. It also provides
support for American Sign Language interpretation so that Deaf students may
attend and fully participate in the school. 3LSS 2009 offers a range of
lectures, tutorials and courses on topics including areal linguistics,
sociolinguistics of language endangerment, technology for language
documentation, sign language documentation, and audio and video recording. 3LSS
will train the next generation of field linguists in how to produce language
documentation materials. These materials will help to counteract the cultural
and scientific loss resulting from the rapid disappearance of many of the
world's languages.

Affordable technology combined with a climate of awareness and concern for the
rights and interests of indigenous peoples around the world has brought the
field of linguistics to the point where large scale collaborative language
documentation efforts are particularly timely. Many known languages are in
danger of disappearing soon, and other languages - including rural sign
languages - remain to be identified and classified. The use and structure of
these languages may provide important insight into the human language faculty,
and may also embed significant social and cultural knowledge that might
otherwise be lost. By providing training in language documentation and
description, 3LSS is directly responding to these scientific and cultural
challenges.

