* 0935086
* Fluvial Dynamics of Large River Secondary Channels: Hydraulic Habitat, Channel Morphology, and Potential for Restoration
* NONE,NONE
* 08/10/2008,08/31/2010
* Melinda Daniels, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas J. Baerwald
* 08/31/2010
* USD 27,261.00

Large rivers have been dramatically altered by modifications driven by socio-
economic needs. River managers and communities are seeking restoration
alternatives that accommodate significant human impacts while also establishing
sustainable, morphologically and hydraulically varied river systems that are
capable of supporting healthy ecosystems. Secondary channels, or side channels,
represent an opportunity to restore ecosystem functionality to large river
systems without seriously affecting floodplain land uses, but restoration of
secondary channels is hampered by a lack of knowledge about their geomorphic and
hydraulic dynamics. The goal of this research is to advance the understanding of
the geomorphic structure and function of large river secondary channels,
satisfying the critical need for scientific inquiry to inform the design of
secondary channel restoration projects. This will be accomplished by exploring
topographic and three-dimensional flow structures present in secondary channels
on the Housatonic River in southwestern Massachusetts. This research will: 1)
quantify three-dimensional flow structure and channel morphology in secondary
and main channel environments using Acoustic Doppler flow meters, 2) evaluate
how fluvial processes and forms in secondary channels differ from those in the
main channel using hydraulic and topographic metrics, 3) quantitatively identify
linkages between morphologic form and functional processes in secondary
channels, and 4) inform a new conceptual model for rivers with secondary
channels. This work will contribute significantly to theoretical research on the
long-recognized, but poorly understood, three-dimensionality of flow in rivers.
It will be one of the first studies to directly measure three-dimensional flow
structure in unmodified "natural" secondary channels, greatly contribute to our
understanding of how channel morphology influence hydraulic habitat variability,
and will expand the theoretical understanding of river geomorphological dynamics
in the lateral dimension.

The results of this study will fill significant gaps in our understanding of how
secondary river channels function while at the same time providing extraordinary
learning and training opportunities for both graduate and undergraduate
students, particularly women. The enhanced scientific understanding of large
river secondary channels produced by this project will impact river management
throughout the country and beyond by providing a strong basis for evaluating the
benefits, costs, and performance of side-channel restoration projects on large,
multi-purpose rivers. A better understanding of large-river secondary channels
will serve to more efficiently focus river restoration and rehabilitation
efforts and resources in the areas of large river systems that can provide the
greatest benefits without compromising main channel and floodplain utilization.