* 0935321
* Collaborative Research:  Integrated Modeling and Experimental Assessment of Chimpanzee and Hominin Locomotion
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2016
* Jack Stern, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/2016
* USD 1,875,760.00

Habitual upright bipedalism - walking exclusively on two straight legs - is one
of the key evolutionary adaptations that sets modern humans apart from other
primates. In contrast, the crouched form of bipedalism used by our nearest
relatives, chimpanzees, represents the best available example of how our early
bipedal ancestors would have walked. Therefore, advancing our understanding of
bipedal locomotion in chimpanzees is central to understanding the evolution of
locomotion in humans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, an interdisciplinary
team of scientists will use state-of-the-art computer modeling and lab-based
experimental techniques to study the mechanics, energetics, and control of
bipedal locomotion in chimpanzees. Specifically, the researchers will develop a
computer model of the chimpanzee musculoskeletal system that will be used to
generate simulations of bipedal walking. The musculoskeletal model will be used
to evaluate the impact of specific morphological adaptations that have been
proposed to play a role in the evolution of human bipedalism. The computer model
will be complemented by a detailed set of empirically derived locomotor data
that will be collected on chimpanzee subjects. These data will fully document
bipedal locomotion in chimpanzees, and will aid in generating and validating the
bipedal walking simulations. Together, these modeling and experimental
investigations will be used to reconstruct the most likely manner in which the
australopithecine ancestors of humans walked on two legs, and by so doing,
determine if australopithecine bipedality was transitional between that of apes
and humans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this research will
target both scientific and educational domains. The researchers plan to make the
computer simulation models and corresponding experimental data widely and freely
available to other scientists, and develop a learning module based on the models
that can be used in teaching functional morphology and biomechanics. Moreover,
this project will support the research of two successful female scientists, and
the mentoring of postdoctoral fellows and both graduate and undergraduate
students. By training the next generation of scientists and creating freely-
available model and data resources, this project will facilitate discoveries in
the evolution of human locomotion that go far beyond the present project.