* 0935384
* Workshop- Mechanics of Research Grant Proposal Development Workshops for Minority-Serving Institutions (MSIs) Atlanta, GA
* BIO,EF
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2013
* Don Bowie, Science and Engineering Alliance Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 05/31/2013
* USD 244,120.00

The full and effective engagement of junior faculty at minority-serving
institutions in NSF funded research remains a challenge. As NSF moves forward
with development and deployment of environmental observing system
infrastructure, the need and opportunity for such faculty participation is
increased. This award will provide a multifaceted approach to effective and
ongoing education and mentoring of junior faculty (five years or less at these
institutions), to assist them in remaining competitive and productive
researchers and assure they are fully aware of NSF funding opportunities,
proposal and review processes, and education and training opportunities.
Building on its previous successful workshops for engaging junior faculty at
historically black colleges and universities (HBCUs), Hispanic Serving
Institutions (HSIs) and Tribal Colleges and Universities (TCUs), the Science and
Engineering Alliance, Inc., (SEA) will conduct a series of grant proposal
development workshops for junior faculty at minority-serving institutions (MSIs)
to enhance their knowledge of NSF's proposal, review, and award processes. A
unique aspect of the award is the establishment of campus communities of
scholars, each of which is to be composed of established researchers,
experienced administrators, institutional points of contact (POCs) and workshop
participants to provide a support network within and among institutions to
nurture and mentor the young faculty. Additional communication, mentoring
support and follow up with attendees will be provided through project email and
a project website.