* 0936055
* Wireless Summer School Workshop
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2010
* Nitin Vaidya, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Sajal Das
* 05/31/2010
* USD 49,000.00

A wireless summer school workshop is to be held on the campus of the University
of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (UIUC) for one week in August 2009. Wireless
communications and networking has been a topic of intense research activity in
recent years. There is a general consensus that cross-layer design of protocols
would help improve wireless network performance. With the goal of facilitating
cross-layer research, the topics of the lectures at the summer school workshop
are chosen to provide the attendees exposure to developments in theory,
practice, physical layer, and higher layers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The summer
school workshop will provide an opportunity for undergraduate and graduate
students to gain a better understanding of a broad range of issues that affect
the design of wireless systems. Attendance at the workshop by women and minority
students will be encouraged. It is expected that the summer school workshop will
improve the quality of future research output by the graduate students.
Attendance at the summer school will also help the
undergraduate&lt;br/&gt;students gain a better understanding of the research
challenges in the area of wireless systems and to motivate them for higher
studies. The interactions between the attendees at the symposium may also lead
to future collaborations between different attendees.