* 0936672
* GSE/RES: Red Light, Green Light Signals? Defining Family and School Influences on Rural, American Indian Girls' Early STEM Interests
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Julie Thomas, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 08/31/2013
* USD 499,945.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;A team of multidisciplinary researchers at Oklahoma
State University (OSU), in collaboration with local public school officials,
will measure changes in young students' STEM interests, achievement, and
attitudes over three years and relate these changes to identifiable
parent/teacher influences. The research goal is to determine significant
predictors of low-income, rural Native American boys' and girls' early interests
in science and mathematics that can provide guidance for classroom practices
that encourage young girls' STEM interests. Specifically, this research will (1)
determine and examine family and school influences related to changes in
students' science and math interests and achievement from 3rd - 5th grade among
rural, largely Native American populations in Oklahoma and (2) generate case
studies that illustrate influences on girls' STEM interests within this special
population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The targeted school region includes large
numbers of low, socio-economic status (SES) students (those eligible for free
and reduced-price meals) and Native Americans. The 35 schools in this study are
(1) small, rural schools within the Cherokee, Pawnee and Osage Indian Nations
and (2) located near the research base. The study includes 800 students (with
approximately 45% Native American students) in grades 3 - 5 with similar numbers
of girls and boys at each level. A Native American Advisory Board will provide
guidance to assure cultural awareness and sensitivity informs methodology and
analysis. Methods include observation protocols, survey instruments, focus
groups, and student test scores.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Research results and new strategies will be widely
disseminated at national conferences, in professional publications, and to
tribal groups and policy makers. This study will break ground as the first
research-based research of home and school influences on STEM interests among
rural, Native American populations. Educational infrastructure will be enhanced
by providing research opportunities for diverse students, creating new
partnerships with rural schools, and expanding the network of educators prepared
to address gender and minority equity issues in STEM. Long-term, innovative
changes will be measured in the determination of pedagogical teaching practices
that encourage STEM interests of young Native American women. This research has
implications for improving opportunities for a larger and more diverse domestic
science and engineering workforce. Oklahoma State University is strongly
committed to faculty and student diversity, actively recruiting among many
traditionally underrepresented groups. It should be noted that OSU has the
highest enrollment of Native American college students in the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the EPSCoR and the
Research on Gender in Science and Engineering programs.