* 0936980
* Travel Support for an ACS PMSE Symposium "Functional Polymer Nanocomposites for Energy Storage and Conversion", March 22-26, 2009, Salt Lake City, UT
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2009,11/30/2009
* Lei Zhu, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 11/30/2009
* USD 4,000.00

Travel Support for an ACS PMSE Symposium ?Functional Polymer Nanocomposites for
Energy Storage and Conversion?, March 22-26, 2009, Salt Lake City, UT A.
Proposal Summary This proposal seeks funding from the Polymer Program, Division
of Materials Research,to support travels for invited speakers and presenters in
a symposium entitled ?Functional Polymer Nanocomposites for Energy Storage and
Conversion? to be held at the 237th ACS national meeting, Salt Lake City, UT in
March 22-26, 2009. This symposium is sponsored by the Division of Polymeric
Materials: Science and Engineering (PMSE). The co-organizers of this symposium
are the PI and Prof. Qing Wang at Department of Materials Science and
Engineering, Pennsylvania State University. With the soaring of global oil
prices and global warming, energy crisis has become a pressing issue that
challenges everyone?s standards of life, societal security, and economy.
Advanced functional materials including polymers start to play an unprecedented
role in our ultimate objective of sustainable and clean energy production,
energy transportation & storage, and end uses. As a timely symposium on the
energy issues, this symposium focuses on applications of advanced polymer
nanocomposites in electric energy storage, polyelectrolyte membrane (PEM) fuel
cells, and organic photovoltaics. Three objectives are aimed: 1) This symposium
is going to highlight the frontier scientific research and technologies in
advanced polymer nanocomposites for energy storage and conversion by invited
presentations from international and the U.S. academic institutions and
industries; 2) It is also going to shine lights for the future directions of
polymer nanocomposites for energy storage and conversion applications. 3)
Educational efforts will be endeavored to enhance the national awareness of the
feasibility and importance of polymer nanocomposites for energy storage and
conversion. Although the past ACS symposiums have highlighted polymer
nanocomposites, this symposium is the first one in ACS to emphasize their
applications in energy storage and conversion. Intellectual Merit This symposium
will provide a forum for researchers from interdisciplinary fields to present
and exchange their cutting edge and/or unpublished results of functional polymer
nanocomposites for capacitors, PEM fuel cells, and solar cells. It also provides
an excellent opportunity for graduate students and postdoctoral fellows to learn
from the invited talks and from one another by participating in oral and poster
presentations. Broad Impact due to the timely energy focus, this symposium will
receive significant attention from a broad range of chemistry, physics, and
materials researchers in the U.S. and world wide. Preprints of all invited
talks, contributed talks, and posters will be published in the Spring 2009
volume of the PMSE Preprint. This symposium encourages participation of
young/starting investigators, female researchers, graduate students and postdocs
from both academic and industries. A certain amount of the requested fund will
also be used to support travels of graduate students and postdocs with an
emphasis on female, minority, and underrepresented groups.