* 0936503
* NEESR-CR:  Design of Soil and Structure Compatible Yielding to Improve System Performance
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Bruce Kutter, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Richard J. Fragaszy
* 09/30/2013
* USD 781,998.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This award is an outcome of the NSF 09-524 program solicitation ''George E.
Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES) Research
(NEESR)'' competition and includes the University of California, Davis (lead
institution) and Santa Clara University (subaward), and the University of
California, San Diego (subaward). This project will utilize the NEES equipment
site at the University of California, Davis.

Hundreds of billions of dollars and thousands of lives are at risk when a major
earthquake shakes a metropolitan area. Building damage or collapse is one of the
primary contributors to the risk. Huge investments are being made to improve
performance of new and old structures by including structural or mechanical
energy dissipation devices such as dampers (huge shock absorbers) and even
complex computer controlled actuators to counteract effects of earthquake
shaking. Geotechnical and structural engineers, however, generally understand
that a lot of the damaging shaking energy can be effectively dissipated just by
allowing the foundations to absorb the energy. Energy that would otherwise
damage a building can be dissipated through friction at the soil-foundation
interface as well as by radiation back into the ground. Civil engineers
understand this today, but they are reluctant to design buildings with
foundations that rock (just a little) due to: (i) the understandable perception
that geotechnical material properties are less certain than structural material
properties and (ii) the partition between structural and geotechnical
responsibility in our traditional engineering design process. (Presently,
structural engineers design the part of the building above the ground and
geotechnical engineers design the foundations, and there is minimal interaction
between the two.)

While it is clear that the bearing capacity of shallow foundations is very
sensitive to uncertain soil properties, the moment capacity of typical shallow
foundations is much more predictable than the bearing capacity. Rocking has the
added benefit of introducing a natural self-centering tendency; imagine tilting
a refrigerator a few degrees, and then letting go ? the refrigerator will rock
back and forth a little, but it will eventually end up standing vertical (this
is what we mean by ?self-centering?. Geotechnical and structural engineers would
need to work together to ensure that rocking movement of a foundation, for
example, is compatible with the movement of the rest of the building. This work
will bring together leaders in structural and geotechnical engineering from
universities and private engineering firms to figure out how to perform the
collaborative holistic building design that allows us to design buildings that
can move with a rocking foundation and hence allow us to take advantage of cost
effective energy dissipation in the foundation. A strong technology transfer
team that includes practicing engineers will work with the academics in this
project to help ensure that innovative concepts are not impractical. Teaming
with construction and practicing engineers actively involved in building code
revision will also help speed our results toward adoption by the profession.

Avoiding over-designed, over-conservative footings and reducing requirements for
energy dissipation mechanisms within the superstructure will save construction
costs and can improve performance. There is almost no experimental data
available to indicate how rocking foundations will dynamically interact with a
yielding structural system. This proposal will fill this gap by performing
experiments on a NEES centrifuge facility. Computer simulations validated by
experiments will be used to generalize findings over a larger range of prototype
situations.

Although our work focuses on buildings, the use of inelastic soil-foundation
behavior incorporating energy dissipating and self-centering is applicable to a
large array of bridges, towers, and taller buildings. Improved performance will
lead to a reduction in economic and human losses associated with earthquakes. An
effort to recruit new engineers by inviting groups of students in MESA (an
organization that helps educationally disadvantaged students succeed in Math,
Engineering, and Science) programs at local community colleges learn about civil
engineering will help grow a diverse engineering workforce. Data from this
project will be archived and made available to the public through the NEES data
repository.