* 0936879
* Impact of African Dust on Clouds and Precipitation in a Caribbean Tropical Montane Cloud Forest
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Kimberly Prather, University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 09/30/2013
* USD 300,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will combine field and
modeling investigations to address how the physico-chemical properties of long
range transported African dust (LRTAD) aerosol influence Caribbean cloud
properties and precipitation levels in a unique Puerto Rican tropical mountain
cloud forest (TMCF). TMCFs occur globally in the Americas, Africa, and Asia and
represent a primary source of drinking water. Three major hypotheses will be
tested: 1) are cloud properties in the TMCF different during intense LRTAD
periods; 2) Does LRTAD have unique chemical and physical properties which
influence cloud properties and processes; 3) what is the correlation between
precipitation patterns and LRTAD events? The study will be performed in Puerto
Rico (PR), at Pico del Este (PE) and Cape San Juan (CSJ) stations. PE is in a
TMCF with an elevation of 1051m asl which is at/above the cloud condensation
level. This location facilitates the study of clouds without the need for
aircraft studies which reduces the overall complexity and costs while allowing
longer term observations within a single cloud. CSJ is a near sea level regional
station of the Global Atmosphere Watch, upwind from PE, and is the first contact
point for the trade wind air masses in PR. This station allows the sampling of
the properties of the aerosol that enter the cloud (below-cloud aerosol). Data
on the chemical and physical properties of aerosols, clouds, and rainwater
samples will be collected via long term measurements and during an intensive
field campaign in year 2. Using these results in conjunction with existing data
sets of precipitation, cloud cover, temperature and humidity profiles and
surface energy budgets, the sensitivity of precipitation distribution to LRTAD
events will be investigated, particularly focusing on the length and intensity
of the summer dry season in the Caribbean.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Underrepresented student groups will interact with scientists and
state-of-the-art instrumentation and be exposed to unique research
opportunities. The regional capacity to cope with AD and climate change will be
strengthened. Project results will be used in educational materials for students
and communities over a range of educational levels. The "Program of Intensive
Short Courses in Atmospheric Sciences", where CoPIs/collaborators will offer a
short course at the University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras (UPR-RP), as well as
the exchange of students among participating institutions will compensate for
the non-existent curricula in atmospheric sciences at the UPR-RP.