* 0936178
* Assembling the viral tree of life
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Mark Young, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 09/30/2013
* USD 1,377,273.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent years it has become evident
that viruses play a major role in controlling and shaping all ecosystems.
However, there is only a limited knowledge of the diversity and types of viruses
that are found in all environments. It is estimated that less than 0.01 to 0.1 %
of viruses have been discovered. The goal of the grant is to begin to overcome
this deficiency by the development and implementation of tools to discover and
characterize previously unknown viruses. This project will develop high
throughput DNA sequencing technology of environmental samples to accomplish the
overall research goals. This research meets NSF DEB goals by expanding our
knowledge about the dimensions of biodiversity on the planet, and the goals of
the Recovery Act to fund high risk, high return research and create and retain
jobs in the scientific workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader significance
and scientific importance of this project is to train the next generation of
scientists in virology, while significantly contributing to the understanding of
the diversity and function of life on earth. This project will train
undergraduate and graduate students as well as postdoctoral scholars at the
cutting edge of the life sciences. It is fully anticipated that as a result of
this training these individuals will become significant future contributors to
the US scientific endeavor. &lt;br/&gt;