* 0936648
* Renewing Small Telescopes for Astronomical Research (ReSTAR) Phase 1
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2010,06/30/2015
* William Smith, Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy, Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Vernon Pankonin
* 06/30/2015
* USD 3,900,000.00

This award supports the second year of a three year effort for the first phase
(of a projected three phases) of a program to increase community access to
optical and infrared telescopes and instrumentation of small and medium aperture
telescopes (smaller than 6-meters). The motivation for this program comes from
the report of the 2006 AST Senior Review that identified important scientific
issues that could, and should, be best addressed with modest telescopes. A
ReSTAR (Renewing Small Telescopes for Astronomical Research) committee was
formed to formulate a path for responding to the report of the Senior Review.
This committee conducted a community science survey and capabilities assessment.
Their report made several recommendations including the addition of moderate
resolution spectrographs designed to operate in the optical and infrared regions
of the electromagnetic spectrum. This award specifically supports the
development and installation of two new spectrographs on the Blanco 4-meter
telescope at Cerro Tololo Inter-American Observatory (CTIO) in Chile, bringing
much-needed new instrumentation to this NSF funded southern observatory. One of
these spectrographs - COSMOS (CTIO Ohio State Multi Object Spectrograph) - will
support moderate resolution multi-object spectroscopy in the optical band. The
other - TripleSpec - will offer moderate resolution spectroscopy in the near
infrared. The science applications are many and varied and are given in detail
in the ReSTAR Committee Report. The broader impacts of these two new instruments
are very significant as they will add much needed new capabilities to a
telescope that is available to the U.S. and international astronomy communities
via competitive merit review.