* 0936633
* NEESR-CR: Collapse Simulation of Multi-Story Buildings through Hybrid Testing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Gilberto Mosqueda, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,185,690.00

This award is an outcome of the NSF 09-524 program solicitation "George E.
Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES) Research
(NEESR)" competition and includes Stanford University (lead institution),
University of New Hampshire (subaward), University at Buffalo, The State
University of New York, (subaward), and California State University, Sacramento
(subaward). This project will utilize the NEES equipment sites at the University
at Buffalo and the University of California at Berkeley.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The primary goal of earthquake
resistant design is to protect life safety by preventing the collapse of the
structure. Uncertainties in ground motion and in structural response to ground
motion, together with economic constraints, impose the acceptance of a small
probability of collapse. Assessment of this small probability of collapse
requires the ability to predict, with sufficient confidence, the response of
structures through collapse. This aspect of performance-based earthquake
engineering poses major challenges, many of which have been addressed and
partially solved through recent research. But what is lacking is experimental
data of structures collapsing and confidence in analytical component and
structure response predictions, which need to be fostered through evidence
provided by careful validation using results from experimental studies. To
validate collapse predictions and to evaluate phenomena that are not represented
adequately in component tests, experimental tests at the structure level are
needed. Shaking table (earthquake simulator) testing represents an excellent
option. However, shaking table testing to collapse is very complex, very
expensive, and potentially dangerous. Hybrid testing is becoming an attractive
alternative because it can provide information on the response of the entire
structure without having to physically test all the structure. This makes hybrid
testing a versatile and cost-effective testing approach. This research will
advance knowledge to improve our understanding of the response of structures as
they approach collapse. The specific objectives are to: (1) conduct a
comprehensive validation of hybrid simulation techniques to collapse, which
includes tests with various collapse modes (e.g., ratchetting behavior-lateral
deformations accumulating progressively in one direction); (2) significantly
expand substructuring techniques used in distributed hybrid simulation to
capture the effects of time-varying boundary conditions; (3) significantly
expand the capabilities and reliability of hybrid simulation by developing and
incorporating adaptive analytical models; (4) understand and identify the most
important structural and ground motion parameters that cause ratchetting
behavior leading to collapse; and (5) develop and implement innovative
education, outreach, and technology transfer mechanisms to disseminate knowledge
on structural responses to collapse. The successful completion of this study
will transform the way in which collapse simulation of multi-story buildings is
conducted through the development and validation of hybrid testing procedures
that provide a more efficient and reliable quantification of the collapse
potential of buildings. The main research contribution will be the creation and
integration of new physical testing approaches and analytical simulation methods
to develop a more in-depth understanding of the structural properties and ground
motion characteristics that lead to collapse of structural systems. This
research integrates multidisciplinary knowledge from the fields of earthquake
engineering, structural dynamics, systems control, and information technology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This research will improve the ability to
reliably estimate collapse probabilities, which will help minimize casualties,
economic losses, and enhance the resiliency of buildings subjected to seismic
events. Innovative testing methods and data will be made available to the
earthquake engineering community through their implementation in the NEES shared
use equipment, software, and data repository and through publications and
presentations. An integrated outreach plan includes partnerships with schools
and undergraduate institutions located in the east and west coasts of the United
States, as well as innovative outreach activities to actively engage
underrepresented students in engineering and research. Data from this project
will be archived and made available to the public through the NEES data
repository.