* 0936143
* Carbon Flux Explorer Development
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2014
* James Bishop, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 09/30/2014
* USD 1,819,156.00

The PIs request funding to complete the development of the Carbon Flux Explorer
(CFE), a fully autonomous and free robotic system designed to measure and relay
in real time via Iridium satellite link the hourly/diurnal variations of
particulate organic carbon (POC) and particulate inorganic carbon (PIC) flux at
various depths in the upper kilometer of the ocean for seasons to year-long time
scales. CFEs are the successful integration of the Sounding Oceanographic
Lagrangian Observer (SOLO) float (developed at Scripps) and LBNL/UC Berkeley?s
imaging Optical Sediment Trap (OST). The first prototype CFE was successfully
tested at sea for 2 days to 800 m in June 2007. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed new work will refine and challenge the CFE design with successively
longer deployments in coastal and California Current waters to evaluate and
address real world issues such as biofouling and animal invasions. At the same
time, engineering refinements will improve power budget and solve multiple minor
system issues. On-board image processing/data reduction software will be fully
established. Calibration samples (POC and PIC flux) will be obtained
concurrently with CFE testing using a buoy tethered twinned OST system operating
at similar depths. At the end of this project, three fully developed Carbon Flux
Explorers (CFEs) will be deployed (and recovered if possible) in the open ocean
for at least 3-6 months in the subarctic N Pacific.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Carbon
sedimentation via the bio-carbon pump of the ocean is important to the
regulation of atmospheric CO2. Due to limitations of current observational
methodology (moorings/ships), carbon export (or sedimentation) is poorly
observed in space and time and therefore is poorly understood and parameterized
in carbon cycle simulations. CFE deployments in the world?s ocean have the
potential to lead to fundamentally new insights into the biology/biogeochemistry
of carbon sedimentation.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential benefits to society due to the proposed
activities are important. These actives will help improve confidence in future
carbon cycle predictions. The results could maybe a key to helping society deal
with the potentially economically and environmentally hazardous consequences due
to climate change. Through education, the proposed activities and technologies
developed will make the ocean more accessible to the public in general. An
improved understanding of the ocean by the public will help protect the ocean's
environment. The real-time observations offered by the proposed activities will
help bring about such an understanding and diminish the perceived remoteness of
the ocean. The proposed activities will advance ocean related scientific
teaching and education. The technology in development will help enliven the
ocean in the classroom, moving from textbook knowledge to real-time
interactions. The proposed activities will allow students to become more
connected to the global environment. The technology will help educate the public
in manner needed if society is to overcome the environmental problems humanity
currently faces.&lt;br/&gt;