* 0936684
* Sahaptian and the Evolution of Hierarchical Systems
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2009,01/31/2015
* Spike Gildea, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 01/31/2015
* USD 260,251.00

This research project, directed by Spike Gildea, is the US portion of a larger
international collaboration that was conceived under the European Science
Foundation's EUROCORES Programme, EuroBABEL. The full EuroBABEL project,
entitled Referential Hierarchies in Morphosyntax: description, typology,
diachrony, is a collaboration of researchers from 4 countries, including the US,
the UK, Germany and Switzerland. This particular project focuses on the
evolution of hierarchical grammatical systems in Sahaptian.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In some languages, speakers use a different kind of
sentence to say "I hit him" (Direct) as opposed to "He hit me" (Inverse), or
"The man saw a cat" (Direct) versus "The cat scratched the man" (Inverse). In
some languages, the verb agrees with first and second persons (me/you), but not
with third persons (him/her/it). Looking at examples like these, a hierarchy in
the minds of speakers steers choices about how to present descriptions of
events: me = you &gt; him/her/it &gt; humans (a man) &gt; animals (a cat) &gt;
inanimate things (a rock). In other languages, low-ranking subjects or high-
ranking objects get special grammatical marking. Speakers of such languages
communicate who does what to whom, but instead of using grammatical functions
like "subject" and "object" as in English, they use the grammar of "higher" and
"lower" participants in the hierarchy. Many of these languages are gravely
endangered, with only a few (usually elderly) speakers remaining. In
collaboration with their European partners, the researchers have three goals:
(i) To verify whether all languages are sensitive to the same hierarchy, they
are collecting two large databases to compare hierarchical grammar from
languages all over the world. (ii) To explore why speakers choose one
construction over another when participants are equal on the hierarchy ("He hit
him"), they are annotating large collections of actual speech in four languages,
coding for factors like animacy, number, and topicality. (iii) To help
understand how hierarchical grammar gets started in the first place, they are
reconstructing the sources of these grammatical systems in at least three
language families and one linguistic isolate. In this project, the research team
will annotate a Sahaptin database and will collaborate on reconstructions. The
collaborative project seeks to better understand both the minds and the cultures
of peoples who speak such languages.