* 0936075
* GOALI/Collaborative Research:  Integrated Sensing System for Stamping Monitoring and Control
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Robert Gao, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 08/31/2011
* USD 57,926.00

The objective of this Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry
(GOALI) Collaborative Research project is to invent a new sensing system
integrated with stamping press to significantly improve the observability and
controllability of the stamping process. The objective will be achieved by
investigating the geometrical scalability of draw-in sensors that are based on
the principal of mutual electrical inductance, and wireless pressure sensors
that communicate with remote ultrasound receivers through acoustic waves. The
new sensors will be embedded within the stamping tooling without interfering
with high-rate operations, thus providing an enabling tool that is not yet
existent in the state-of-the-art stamping industry within or outside of the US.
The intellectual contribution of this project will be extending fundamental laws
of physics on electromagnetic coupling and acoustic telemetry to guide the
functional and parametric design of the envisioned sensors such that they can
accurately and reliably measure the required process parameters, given the
significant impact forces and interferences typically associated with the
stamping operation, thus advancing the science base for stamping process
monitoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this research includes
creating means for direct comparison between physical measurements and numerical
simulations through tooling-embedded sensors, such that monitoring and control
of the process are integrated with, and therefore, taking advantage of, the
advancement in numerical tools. Research results will be shared with both the
academic and industrial communities through open-house demos and a short course.
Joint seminar series and student exchange are also planned.