* 0936385
* Paleoanthropological Investigations in Northern Armenia
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Charles Egeland, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2011
* USD 24,329.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Charles Egeland and an
international team of colleagues will conduct one field season of
paleoanthropological research in northern Armenia. This research brings together
U.S. and Armenian specialists in archaeology, geology, geographic information
systems, and human paleontology in an attempt to identify the earliest human
occupations in west-central Asia. The initial dispersal of early human
populations from Africa and into the wider reaches of Eurasia during the late
Pliocene and early Pleistocene (between 2 and 1.7 million years ago) reflects an
ability to adapt to novel environments and thus marks a true watershed in human
evolution. The presence of early humans at the well-known site of Dmanisi in the
Republic of Georgia, which is dated to 1.8 million years ago and lies just 30km
north of the project area, indicates that northern Armenia probably served as a
major corridor for expanding early human populations. However, the nature and
timing of these dispersals remain poorly understood, largely because of a
paucity of Eurasian Plio-Pleistocene sites. The ultimate goal of this research
is to identify large, well-preserved Plio-Pleistocene sites to develop a more
nuanced understanding of how biology, technology, culture, and changing
environments influenced when and how early humans initially left Africa.

The nature of the research questions requires basic site survey to be carried
out to identify areas with evidence of early human occupation (fossilized bones
and/or stone tools). Once sites are identified, more detailed excavations can be
conducted to reconstruct aspects of site formation and paleoenvironment, early
human diet and biology, site use, and stone tool technology. Specific tasks are
(1) map geological sections in the Debed and Pambak river valleys; (2) complete
extensive survey and collection of surface materials at identified sites; (3)
conduct test excavations at sites to assess their integrity and potential; (4)
build a GIS-based mapping and excavation protocol; (5) to analyze all collected
artifacts.

The timing and nature of the initial human dispersals from Africa are issues of
critical importance to paleoanthropology. Although compelling models have been
advanced to explain movements of early humans out of Africa, there are too few
Eurasian sites of the right age to adequately test them. The intellectual merit
of the research will be to identify new sites to permit a more comprehensive
understanding of early human dispersal capability and its relationship to
biology, culture, and environmental change.

The implementation of modern-style paleoanthropological research is still in its
infancy in Armenia, and much of the previous work carried out in the country is
not well-known to Western scholars. In helping to disseminate information to a
wider audience, the broader impacts of this study will be to establish an
international collaboration with the National Academy of Sciences of Armenia,
which is one of the country's most prestigious scientific organizations. Once
established, the project will open opportunities to train a new generation of
undergraduate and graduate students in Armenia and abroad. Ultimately, the
project team will publish a website geared towards public interpretation that
will detail and update the results of the project and highlight its
international collaborative nature.