* 0936710
* Collaborative Research: CRI: IAD: Research/Education Infrastructure Based on Modular Miniature Robot Teams
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2008,01/31/2013
* Ibrahim Isler, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Voyles
* 01/31/2013
* USD 354,715.00

Proposal #: CNS 07-07939 07-08344&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Isler, Ibrahim V.
Papanikolopoulos, Nikolaos&lt;br/&gt; Drineas, Petros; Trinkle, Jeffrey He,
Tian&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute University of
Minnesota - Twin Cities&lt;br/&gt; Troy, NY 12180-3522 Minneapolis, MN
55455-5200&lt;br/&gt;Title: IAD: Collab Rsch: Research/Education Infrastructure
Based on Modular Miniature Robot Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project
Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project, developing a modular hardware
and software infrastructure (miniature robots with the pertinent software), aims
to identify minimum capabilities required for accomplishing tasks which are
crucial for most robotics-sensor applications. The work involves investigating
the relationship between the capabilities of individual units and the collective
capabilities of the entire robotic team. The major innovation lies in the
creation of a flexible design spectrum for both research and education based on
the capabilities of the individual units. On the lower end of the spectrum, the
basic design "Explorer," a robot based on a Gumstix unit and earlier robot
designs from one of the institutions, provides an inexpensive and yet
significantly powerful solution. On the higher end, the platform "MicroVision,"
a robot based on the Intel Pentium M processor and RoboAudioStix board, provides
real-time video streaming and processing using standard off-the-shelf hardware
and open-source video algorithms. The modularity of both designs allows the
addition of special hardware capabilities. The infrastructure aims at low-cost,
easy-to-use platforms that support research and can be adopted into courses.
Specifically, this development enables design of robotics sensor-network systems
that can&lt;br/&gt;. Communicate reliably and efficiently via multi-hop in the
presence of frequent network topology changes;&lt;br/&gt;. Identify relative
positions among members of a robotic team promptly and accurately for effective
coordination;&lt;br/&gt;. Enable energy-efficient marsupial
maneuvering;&lt;br/&gt;. Provide collaborative sensing with spatial, temporal,
and spatiotemporal coverage guarantees; and&lt;br/&gt;. Interact with
environments through grasping and manipulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: This infrastructure will be used for senior theses and K-12 students
will be engaged via school visits and science field days. An annual Robot Camp
will be held. The activities will be helped by the National Center for
Engineering and Technology Education (NCETE). Coordination with Berea and Smith
College, as well as UVA ascertains exchange among undergraduate- and minority-
serving institutions.&lt;br/&gt;