* 0936047
* Conference on Categorical Methods in Topology and Quantum Geometry; Fall 2009, Dallas, Texas
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2010
* Dagan Karp, Harvey Mudd College
* Standard Grant
* Yongwu  J. Rong
* 05/31/2010
* USD 23,850.00

A scientific symposium titled "Categorical Methods in Topology and Quantum
Geometry" will take place at the National Meeting of the Society for Advancement
of Chicano and Native Americans in Science&lt;br/&gt;(SACNAS) in Dallas, Texas,
October 15-18, 2009. The two a priori disparate fields of low dimensional
topology and quantum geometry have recently been related through the involvement
of categorical methods. &lt;br/&gt;Exciting progress has been recently made in
each of these subjects independently, including the Weinstein conjecture in
dimension three and Donaldson-Thomas/Gromov-Witten duality for all toric
threefolds. &lt;br/&gt;Important open questions motivate continued study; these
include the general Weinstein conjecture, and the trilogy of equivalences
between Gromov-Witten theory, Donaldson-Thomas theory and Pandharipande-Thomas
theory. Central to our symposium, these fields have recently been related
through their use of derived categories and categorification. &lt;br/&gt;This
includes the categorification of Khovanov and its many generalizations, the
categorification of Donaldson-Thomas theory by Behrend and Joyce-Song and the
derived categories of Pandharipande- Thomas theory. In addition, the program of
Cautis and Kamnitzer shows categorification results in topology may be recast in
some instances as isomorphisms of derived categories in algebraic geometry. The
speakers at this symposium will announce accomplishments and also discuss new
directions of research. Specifically, Renzo Cavalieri will discuss derived
categories in GW and DT theories, Emille Davie will discuss applications to low
dimensional topology, and Juan Ortiz- Navaro will discuss categorification,
Khovanov homology and its generalizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This symposium
will enable and encourage students and other scientists to pursue research in
areas related to the interaction of quantum geometry and topology, provide the
opportunity for scientists to interact and foster collaboration and new
research, and disseminate knowledge to a wide and extraordinarily diverse
audience. While the reasons for organizing a scienti&amp;#64257;c symposium on
topology and quantum geometry are many, there is additionally an acute need to
do so for an audience of underrepresented minorities. There is at this time
signi&amp;#64257;cant underrepresentation of minorities in the mathematical
sciences; this underrepresentation is evidently severe in both topology and
quantum geometry and certainly the intersection of these subjects. There are
very important questions that need to be addressed in these subjects, and it is
necessary to attract a broad and diverse audience to work on these problems.
Gromov-Witten theory and related fields have been extremely successful in
solving outstanding problems, some over 100 years old, in several branches of
mathematics and physics. Low dimensional topology is not only of basic
importance in geometry and topology, but in several areas of applied mathematics
as well, as highlighted in this symposium. It is predicted that underrepresented
minorities will become the majority of United States Citizens in the not so
distant future; as such, it is in the long term interest of topology and quantum
geometry to have increased participation from members of these groups. Moreover,
given the importance of these subjects to mathematics and science in general, it
is in our national interest to work against the underrepresentation of
minorities conducting research in these &amp;#64257;elds.&lt;br/&gt;