* 0936144
* Student Travel Support for the Special Interest Group on Data Communication 2009 Conference
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Athina Markopoulou, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2010
* USD 24,825.00

SIGCOMM is the flagship annual conference of the Special Interest Group on Data
Communications, a special interest group of the Association for Computing
Machinery. This award assists approximately 12 graduate students and 3
postdoctoral students from US institutions to attend this conference.
Participation in conferences such as SIGCOMM is an extremely important part of
the graduate school experience, provides students with an opportunity to
interact with more senior researchers and exposes them to leading edge research
in the field. The support requested in this proposal will enable people in the
above categories to attend the main SIGCOMM 2009 conference, who would be
otherwise unable to do so. The travel grant chairs are committed to encouraging
the participation of women and under-represented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This project proposes to
provide travel support for US-based graduate and postdoctoral students to attend
the main SIGCOMM 2009 conference. SIGCOMM is the flagship conference in the
networking community and a highly competitive venue (with acceptance rate around
10%). Its rich program exposes participants to new ideas and cutting-edge
research and allows for interaction between researchers from all over the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: First, this project integrates
research and education of students through exposure to a premier technical
meeting in computer networks and communications. Students will have the
opportunity to observe high-quality presentations and interact with senior
researchers in the field. The proposed student participation is expected to have
a positive impact on the students? research interests and quality. Second, the
project will promote diversity by encouraging and enabling women and other
under-represented minorities to participate. Furthermore, the truly
international flavor of SIGCOMM 2009 cultivates international research
interactions and presents a tremendous opportunity to students to increase their
breadth of ideas, research approaches, and technical perspectives. &lt;br/&gt;