* 0936085
* The History and the Structure of Black American Sign Language (ASL): Materials for Building Community Awareness
* EDU,DRL
* 01/15/2010,02/28/2013
* Ceil Lucas, Gallaudet University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia James
* 02/28/2013
* USD 74,949.00

&lt;br/&gt;Award Number: 0936085&lt;br/&gt;Title: STARS: The History and the
Structure of Black American Sign Language (ASL): Materials for Building
Community Awareness&lt;br/&gt;Start/End Dates: December 2009-December
2011&lt;br/&gt;Program Officer: Monya Ruffin&lt;br/&gt;PI: Ceil
Lucas&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Gallaudet University&lt;br/&gt;Program: Informal
Science Education (ISE)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Purpose, Context, and
Partnering Organizations&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Situated within the framework of
their NSF funded sociolinguistic research, partnering institutions, Gallaudet
University and the University of California-Davis, will develop and broadly
disseminate a 2-hour DVD that builds knowledge and fosters community awareness,
among informal and formal audiences, about the scientific structure and history
of American Sign Language (ASL), with an emphasis on Black American Sign
Language. Through this Communicating Research to Public Audiences (CRPA) grant,
the DVD and its existing companion guidebook will: (a) link ASL to current
empirical research; (b) describe the complexities of the science of language
development (written and spoken); (c) detail the evolution of Black American
Sign Language; (d) provide strong evidence that sociolinguistic variations and
dialects are not unique to spoken languages; and (e) foster related discussions
in formal and informal settings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participants and
Settings&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will involve ASL interpreters and
hearing, hearing impaired and deaf local community members, students, and
teachers; ranging in age (adolescents to seniors), geographic location within
the United States, and socio-economic and ethnic backgrounds. Informal settings
such as local community, resource and cultural centers will participate in
project dissemination efforts and activities. Formal settings such as
postsecondary linguistics courses, deaf studies courses, interpreter training
courses, and professional workshops will also serve as secondary venues for
project dissemination activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Design and
Deliverables&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research design, videotaped data clips and
findings from the seminal sociolinguistic research involving data from 22 study
groups at six different sites will be encapsulated and made accessible via the
primary deliverable, a 2 hour DVD. Designed for various audiences, the DVD will
present the socio-historical significance of the research, data collection and
methods employed, and data clips of participants narrating their life
experiences. Phonological variables, syntactic &amp; discourse variables,
contact phenomena, and lexical variations will also be discussed and illustrated
in the DVD. Targeted public and professional audiences will be recruited to
receive the DVD, the companion guide book, and other project resources. Project
deliverables include a 2 hour DVD, training materials, workshops, and web site
enhancements. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Outcomes, Impacts, and
Evaluation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through active dissemination efforts, the
project intends to reach approximately 29,000 people. The project should: (a)
increase knowledge and awareness about the scientific structure and history of
ASL, and (b) provide greater access to content- including STEM content-through a
broader understanding of geographical and social factors that influence non-
spoken language variations, particularly Black ASL.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A mixed
methods evaluation study will be employed to monitor all aspects of the DVD and
training materials development, refinement, and implementation. Focus groups
will be conducted and questionnaires will be distributed to collect data and
determine the extent to which the project has effectively met its primary goal
to share and disseminate its research findings more broadly to public audiences,
with a special emphasis on informal audiences and organizations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Significance and
Importance&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will address a need in the field for
research about the scientific structure, history, and socio-cultural factors
influencing variations in non-spoken languages, particularly in Black ASL. Broad
dissemination of this research could raise public awareness about ASL variations
thereby, providing interpreters and a sizable portion of the deaf and hearing
communities with valuable insights on ASL that could improve content
accessibility among deaf and hearing impaired individuals. The project also
highlights an important, overlooked component of American history. In addition,
this project would further the ISE program's efforts to diversify its portfolio
with respect to content (science of language; linguistics) and target
populations (deaf, African-American). The original NSF funded scientific
research project and the proposed dissemination efforts, also support ISE's
commitment to fund projects with an aim to communicate NSF funded research to
informal audiences and within informal settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With an
anticipated reach of 29,000 people, the project?s website, local community
events, and linkages with ISE organizations such as The Department of African
American Studies Afro-American Studies Resource Center at Howard University in
Washington, DC; The Stiles African American Heritage Center in Denver; and The
Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture in Harlem, NY and professional
organizations such as the Gallaudet University Press and the National
Association of Black Deaf Advocates (NBDA); will provide multiple opportunities
for public engagement in the research and cross-disciplinary, cultural
discussions about this work within the context of informal and formal education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;