* 0936924
* Chemically Tunable Graphene-Based Polymer Nanocomposites as Electrode Materials for Safe, High-Performance Lithium-Ion Batteries
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Owen Compton, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 08/31/2011
* USD 200,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Chemistry supports Owen
C. Compton of Northwestern University as an American Competitiveness in
Chemistry Fellow. Dr. Compton will investigate the use of chemically-modified,
graphene-based materials as electrodes in Lithium ion batteries. Specifically,
he will develop graphene-based polymer nanocomposites and tune their electrical
potentials, storage capacities, and cyclabilities through chemical modification.
Dr. Compton will collaborate with scientists at Northwestern University as well
as at Argonne National Laboratory. For his plan for broadening participation,
Dr. Compton will work with partners on the Northwestern campus to develop hands-
on activities for young people in the greater Chicago area to illustrate the
impact that the chemical sciences can have on energy efficiency, public safety
and the environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research like that of Dr. Compton is
aimed at developing new materials for better (safer, lower-cost and more robust)
Lithium ion batteries. The ultimate goal of research like this is to develop
improved technology for the storage and use electrical energy -- an important
piece of any viable strategy for energy independence. The efforts at broadening
participation being pursued by Dr. Compton are aimed at increasing the
participation of young people from underrepresented groups in the sciences.