* 0936988
* Photoinduced Charge Separation in Reticular Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Eric Spitler, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 08/31/2011
* USD 200,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The Division of Chemistry supports Eric Spitler of Cornell University as an
American Competitiveness in Chemistry Fellow. Dr. Spitler will investigate the
potential for covalent organic frameworks (COFs) to efficiently generate and
separate electron-hole pairs in photovoltaic devices. Dr. Spitler will
synthesize the COFs with aromatic pi electron donors and acceptors. Dr. Spitler
will work in collaboration with scientists at Argonne National Laboratory to do
cutting-edge time-resolved spectroscopic experiments to characterize the charge-
separation and transport properties in these new materials. In his plan for
broadening participation, Dr. Spitler will work with middle school students and
teachers at a KIPP school in the South Bronx, New York City, as well as members
of the Cornell Center for Materials Research. Materials developed through this
partnership will draw upon content expertise of Dr. Spitler and his research
colleagues but will also be designed to align with New York State standards for
science curricula.

Research like that of Dr. Spitler is aimed at developing cheaper photovoltaic
materials with improved properties. The efforts at broadening participation
being pursued by Dr. Spitler are aimed at increasing the participation of young
people from underrepresented groups in the sciences.