* 0936865
* Developing an On-line Resource for Ethics Education in Science and Engineering
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2009,10/31/2011
* Rachelle Hollander, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Kelly Moore
* 10/31/2011
* USD 274,968.00

This project has short-term and long-term goals. In the short term, the Center
for Engineering, Ethics, and Society (CEES) at the National Academy of
Engineering (NAE) will modify and provide site enhancements to the NAE CEES
Online Ethics Center (OEC), found at www.onlineethics.org. These enhanced
features will help principal investigators and institutions respond
knowledgeably to NSF requirements for ethics education instituted as part of the
America COMPETES Act of 2007. In the long term, the project will improve the
ability of the OEC to serve Academy members and others who wish to enhance
excellence in research and research ethics, and to build trustworthy research
communities responsive to democratic concerns. The OEC Advisory Group and its
members will help to develop, test, modify, and evaluate OEC site enhancements,
and to host activities to gather information about the utility of the site for
the research communities for whom assistance should be provided. In addition,
the Center for the Study of Ethics in the Professions (CSEP) librarian at the
Illinois Institute of Technology (IIT) will develop and conduct user needs
assessments of administrators and faculty at IIT and other nearby institutions.
CSEP will use the results to inform the identification and development of
materials, and the design of interfaces and databases for the CSEP home page as
well as the OEC. The Usability Testing and Evaluation Center at IIT will assess
the sites at the end of the project. These procedures allow for a degree of
independent evaluation of the utility of these sites. The field of Science and
Technology Studies has expertise in evaluating process and results in digital
resource development, and a project consultant will be used for this purpose
also. Results will include research findings, pedagogical materials, and
promising practices in education for the ethical and responsible conduct of
research in science and engineering and for development of trustworthy research
in democratic societies. These results will be available to a National digital
library that NSF intends to support. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from this
project will make good practices and materials widely available and accessible
and help the development of a broad-based, knowledgeable social network in
ethics education in science and engineering. Special attention will be paid to
resources by and for populations that are underrepresented in science and
engineering, and to issues that arise for them and from the increasingly
globalized and interdisciplinary nature of research. Publicity about the project
will be disseminated broadly, through National Academies? press releases,
websites, and publications, and at relevant meetings of professional societies
and academic organizations, including those of special relevance to
underrepresented populations.