* 0936519
* NEESR-CR:  Assessment of Punching Shear Vulnerability of Slab-Column Connections with Shear Stud Reinforcement
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* James Wight, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 08/31/2013
* USD 340,000.00

This award is an outcome of the NSF 09-524 program solicitation "George E.
Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES) Research
(NEESR)" competition and includes the University of Michigan (lead institution),
the University of Minnesota, Twin Cities (subaward), and the University of
Minnesota, Duluth (subaward). This project will utilize the NEES equipment site
at the University of Minnesota (Twin Cities). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Structural
systems that consist of slabs directly supported by columns or flat plate frame
systems are widely used in concrete construction because of their architectural
appearance, functionality, and economy. In regions of high seismic hazard, they
have been used in structures of up to 60 stories, in combination with structural
walls or moment resisting frames. Because of their potential for punching shear
failures during earthquakes, shear reinforcement is often provided in the form
of headed shear studs. Results from a test conducted as part of a prior NEESR
project (NSF award 0421180), however, have raised serious concerns about the
effectiveness of this reinforcement for punching shear resistance. Given the
large number of flat-plate structures with headed reinforcement built in the
last decade, these test results could be an indication of a latent major problem
that could surface in the next large earthquake on the west coast. If this is
indeed as serious of a problem as the prior NEESR test results seem to indicate,
the earthquake engineering community should act with diligence and prevent a
situation similar to that observed with welded steel connections during the 1994
Northridge, CA earthquake.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves a group of
researchers from three U.S. universities and the Universidad Nacional Autónoma
de México (UNAM). The main research objective is to estimate the vulnerability
of existing slab-column connections by evaluating the efficiency of typical
headed reinforcement designs used in practice. Large-scale slab-column
subassemblies will be tested under combined gravity load and biaxial lateral
displacements at the University of Minnesota NEES-MAST Laboratory. These tests
will allow the evaluation of the vulnerability of slab-column connections with
headed stud reinforcement during strong ground motions. Shake table tests of a
flat-plate structure will also be conducted at UNAM for evaluation of the
response of connections with headed reinforcement under dynamic
excitation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This research will generate
needed information that will allow practicing engineers and building officials
to identify vulnerable flat-plate construction with headed reinforcement. This
is one of a very few instances in which experimental research has prompted major
concerns about the safety of modern structures before those concerns are
confirmed by a major earthquake. Thus, the knowledge developed in this project
could have a major impact in terms of protecting lives and reducing financial
losses associated with potential failure or collapse of flat-plate structures
during an earthquake.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The education and
outreach program targets undergraduate and pre-college level students. Through
the use of the teleparticipation capabilities at the University of Minnesota
NEES equipment site, these students will have the opportunity to witness the
various steps of the experimental program and remotely attend lectures on the
basics of earthquakes and design of concrete structures for ground motions. Data
from this project will be archived and made available to the public through the
NEES data repository.