* 0936627
* NEESR Payload:  Characterization of Dynamic Soil-Pile Interaction by Random Vibration Methods
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Jeramy Ashlock, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 07/31/2012
* USD 99,913.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of
2009&lt;br/&gt;(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is an outcome
of the NSF 09-524 program solicitation ''George E. Brown, Jr. Network for
Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES) Research (NEESR)'' competition. This
Payload project will be led by Iowa State University (ISU) and will utilize NEES
equipment from the University of California, Los Angeles and the experimental
field-test setup from the NEESR-SG project entitled "Understanding and Improving
the Seismic Behavior of Pile Foundations in Soft Clays" (Award #0830328). The
overall goal of the project is to contribute to improved experimental and
computational tools to bridge the gap between theory and observation for soil-
foundation systems under realistic multi-directional loading. Despite many years
of significant advances in theoretical and experimental research, significant
discrepancies remain between experimental measurements and theoretical
predictions of general three-dimensional dynamic pile-soil interaction. These
discrepancies may be partially attributed to a host of contributing factors such
as complicated soil-pile contact conditions, difficulties in performing full-
scale dynamic tests, and the statistical variation of the engineering properties
of soils coupled with the challenge of their in-situ measurement. Such
shortcomings in current prediction capabilities can lead to unsafe under-design
or costly over-design. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this Payload project
is to expand the existing NEES technologies and testing capabilities for
characterizing dynamic soil-pile interaction, and to improve the accuracy of
current analytical and computational simulation tools. Field vibration tests
will be performed on piles installed in improved and unimproved soft clays to
gain a fundamental understanding of the seismic response of piles in these soil
conditions. Specific goals of the project are to; (1) evaluate the effectiveness
of using a servo-hydraulic inertial mass shaker and broadband random excitation
for characterizing the dynamic behavior of piles in improved and unimproved
clays, (2) improve the efficiency of current testing techniques by combining the
traditionally separate vertical and horizontal harmonic excitation cases into a
single multi-modal random-vibration test with synchronous vertical and coupled
horizontal-rocking motions, (3) investigate the use of an experimental technique
involving chaotic impulse loading which has shown great success in scaled-model
centrifuge tests, (4) compare the relative effectiveness of using sinusoidal,
random and chaotic impulse excitation types for characterizing the elastodynamic
response of the soil, (5) evaluate the predictive capabilities of current
analytical and computational techniques against the measured responses of piles
in improved and unimproved clays and develop corrections if necessary, and (6)
investigate whether experimental behavior observed in recent centrifuge studies
of piles in sands extends to piles in clays. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will generate a number of practical experimental methods and a substantive
database towards a more complete understanding of the fundamental behavior of
dynamic soil-pile interaction. Specific tools to be developed include an
innovative method for dynamic in-situ characterization of soil-pile interaction
using non-destructive random vibration techniques, improved computational
simulation tools to incorporate effects of pile installation and stress-
dependence on the soil's shear modulus and damping, and modifications to current
engineering theories which can be immediately applied in practice. In the long
term, lessons learned in this project will be extended to understanding the
dynamic behavior of a greater range of soil conditions as well as pile groups.
The experimental and computational simulation techniques generated by this
research will improve our understanding of fundamental soil-foundation-structure
interaction, enabling more accurate models for foundation design and leading to
improvements in earthquake hazard mitigation. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
project will involve the NEES community through teleparticipation, and a web
site will be created with sections tailored for disseminating the research
results to K-12 students, the general public, and the earthquake engineering
community. Preliminary dynamic field-tests of a pile will be incorporated into a
graduate course in soil dynamics at ISU, where students will have the option of
analyzing the data for credit in a term project. Data from this project will be
archived and made available to the public through the NEES data repository.