* 0936923
* Electrical Detection of Protein Binding at DNA Modified Carbon Nanotube Field Effect Transistors
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Alon Gorodetsky, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 08/31/2012
* USD 200,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Chemistry supports Alon
Gorodetsky of Columbia University as an American Competitiveness in Chemistry
Fellow. Dr. Gorodetsky will develop chemically modified carbon nanotubes (with
attached DNA) to be used in field effect transistors. The suitability of these
molecular electronic devices to detect small quantities of proteins will be
assessed. Dr. Gorodetsky will conduct experimental work in collaboration with
scientists at Columbia University, and will work with theorists at Brookhaven
National Laboratory. For his plan for broadening participation, Dr. Gorodetsky
will recruit and mentor women chemists from Stern College, Yeshiva University in
research to be conducted in the laboratories of Prof. Colin Nuckolls at Columbia
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research like that of Dr. Gorodetsky is aimed
at developing new sensors for biological molecules. The ultimate goal of
research like this is to develop improved methods for the rapid detection of
important biological molecules (e.g. cancer biomarkers) to aid researchers and
clinicians in making measurements quickly and inexpensively. The efforts at
broadening participation being pursued by Dr. Gorodetsky are aimed at increasing
the participation of young people from underrepresented groups in the
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;