* 0936704
* GSE/RES: A Mixed-Methods Study of the Effects of First-Year Project Pedagogies on the Retention and Career Plans of Women in Engineering
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Tamara Knott, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 07/31/2014
* USD 524,099.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;This project will examine first-year project
pedagogies in engineering in order to identify approaches that enhance the
likelihood of women continuing in engineering majors and entering engineering
careers. Specifically, the study will investigate the problem-based learning
(PBL) model to identify elements of the model most likely to better support the
persistence of women in engineering. The PBL model employed in a single-major
program will be compared to a more general project-based approach centered on
the engineering design process in a course serving multiple engineering
disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project integrates multiple
approaches to motivation (the participation-identification model, the
expectancy-value model, and self-efficacy theory) and the application of those
approaches to a specific pedagogy (problem-based learning) that shows promise
for first-year design courses. Each of the motivation frameworks has been shown
to be significant in predicting students' choices, effort, persistence, and
achievement in schooling, but little is known about how these approaches
generalize to women in first-year engineering courses, especially when
considered in combination with one another. At the same time, studies of first-
year experiences tend to examine curricular impacts broadly, but little rigorous
pedagogical research on specific approaches to first-year (cornerstone design)
and the effects of those approaches on women. The proposed study bridges these
gaps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:&lt;br/&gt;There is a growing
importance of cornerstone design in engineering, but a distinct lack of research
on concrete pedagogical models appropriate for such courses. This project moves
beyond the general application of "design projects" to first-year courses to
identify how specific, transferable elements of a pedagogical framework such as
PBL affect women's beliefs, performance, retention, and career persistence. In
doing so, it will provide future engineering faculty with principles of course
design and implementation that can have measurable effects on women in first-
year engineering programs across the nation. By addressing a widespread
curricular phenomenon and moving research into practice through targeted
outreach and communication efforts, the project seeks to have a transformative
impact on first-year engineering curricula nationwide.