* 0936610
* NEESR-CR:  Performance-Based Design for Cost-Effective Seismic Hazard Mitigation in New Buildings Using Supplemental Passive Damper Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Behzad Bavarian, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2013
* USD 746,691.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is an outcome of the NSF
09-524 program solicitation "George E. Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake
Engineering Simulation (NEES) Research (NEESR)" competition and includes Lehigh
University, California State Polytechnic University, Pomona (Cal Poly Pomona),
and California State University, Northridge. This project will utilize the NEES
equipment site at Lehigh University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
The vision for this research is a validated probabilistic, performance-based
seismic design procedure for buildings with passive damping systems. In this
procedure, the design of the damping system is integrated with the design of the
associated seismic load resisting frames. The uncertainties that influence the
level of damage caused by ground motions at different seismic input levels are
treated explicitly using probabilistic methods. The procedure considers multiple
performance objectives, with each objective associating a different level of
damage with a different seismic hazard level. The project will design two steel-
framed prototype buildings as the context for the research. Several types of
dampers will be studied. Tests at the Lehigh NEES equipment site will
characterize the dampers; analytical models for the dampers will be calibrated
and validated. Extending previous work, a practical performance-based design
procedure, and an associated design assessment procedure for buildings with
passive dampers will be developed. These procedures treat inherent uncertainties
using partial safety factors. The performance-based design procedure will be
used to produce several design cases for each prototype building. The strength
of the steel frames and the damper type will be varied among the design cases.
Then, each design case will be assessed with a rigorous, probabilistic
assessment procedure developed by the project. This assessment uses nonlinear
dynamic analyses, and considers the possible damage states of the building while
rigorously treating uncertainties in building properties, damping systems, and
ground motions. The procedure estimates the probabilities that these damage
states are reached at different seismic hazard (input) levels. Large-scale,
real-time hybrid simulations at the Lehigh NEES equipment site will validate the
rigorous assessment procedure as well as the results of the practical
performance-based design procedure. The hybrid simulations will have two phases:
Phase 1 uses three individual large-scale dampers as the lab specimens, while
the remainder of the building is modeled as an analytical substructure; Phase 2
uses a large-scale, three-story steel frame with dampers as the lab specimen,
while the remainder of the building is modeled as an analytical substructure.
Phase 1 simulations will be particularly efficient, by enabling numerous ground
motions to be applied to the building, resulting in various levels of damage,
without the need to repair the test specimens, since the damage will be within
the analytical substructures. Phase 2 simulations will validate the overall
project approach. This research will produce a validated, rigorous,
probabilistic seismic performance assessment procedure for buildings with
passive damping systems which addresses significant uncertainties in building
performance. This research will also produce a validated, practical, multi-
level, probabilistic, performance-based seismic design procedure for buildings
with passive damping systems. Full-scale damper characterization test data sets
will be produced. Validated analytical models for passive dampers, suitable for
numerical simulations, will also be produced. Reliable and well-documented data
sets from large-scale, real-time hybrid seismic simulations of buildings with
passive dampers will be produced and used to validate the design and assessment
procedures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This research will produce
the knowledge needed to move the performance-based seismic design procedure into
practice. Instructional materials for university classes will be developed, and
a workshop for practicing engineers will be conducted to help transfer the
design procedure into practice. Data from this project will be archived and made
available to the public through the NEES data repository.