* 0936816
* Cobalt-Based Water Oxidation Catalyst Formation at Metal Electrode Interfaces and Incorporation of Catalyst with Photoanode Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Elizabeth Young, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 08/31/2011
* USD 200,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The Division of Chemistry supports Elizabeth R. Young of the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology (MIT) as an American Competitiveness in Chemistry
Fellow. Dr. Young will work with scientists at MIT to study the formation of the
effective water-splitting photocatalyst Co-Pi at solid surfaces. Specifically,
Dr. Young will use a variety of solid-state thin film deposition techniques to
produce active Co-Pi catalyst. In addition, she will investigate a variety of
schemes to incorporate Co-Pi catalyst into a photoanode for a
photoelectrochemical cell. Dr. Young will work on these projects in
collaboration with scientists at Sun Catalytix, a company with expertise in the
development of photoelectrochemical cells. For her plan for broadening
participation, Dr. Young will partner with Science Buddies, a national non-
profit, to develop science fair projects for young people, based upon her
research. In addition, Dr. Young will mentor an undergraduate from Southern
University at Baton Rouge in summer research at MIT.

Research like that of Dr. Young is aimed at developing new materials the
efficient conversion of solar energy into chemical forms, useful to society. The
ultimate goal of research like this is to develop improved technology for the
conversion of solar energy into other forms of energy (fuel, electricity, etc.)
The efforts at broadening participation being pursued by Dr. Young are aimed at
increasing the participation of young people from underrepresented groups in the
sciences.