* 0936563
* NEESR-CR:  Steel Truss Systems with Enhanced Seismic Safety and Performance
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2015
* Michael Hagenberger, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2015
* USD 635,543.00

This award is an outcome of the NSF 09-524 program solicitation "George E.
Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES) Research
(NEESR)" competition and includes the University of Texas, Arlington (lead) and
Valparaiso University (subaward). This award will utilize the NEES equipment
site at the University of Minnesota, named the Multi-Axial Subassemblage Testing
(MAST) Laboratory. The goal of this research is to advance seismic safety and
design of building structures by studying two steel truss systems: special truss
moment frames (STMFs) and staggered truss frames (STFs). Due to their ability to
achieve large column-free floor spaces, STMFs and STFs are unique, valuable
options for structural engineers. However, although STMFs and STFs offer a wide
range of structural, architectural, and economical benefits, limited research
data is available on the seismic performance of these systems. Because previous
tests on STMFs do not adequately reflect the current practice in design and
detailing, substantial improvement in design methodology and confidence could be
gained for STMFs by further research. Despite the strong interest among the
engineering community, the application of STFs to seismic regions has been
restricted due to lack of research. The project will advance knowledge about the
system behavior of STMFs and STFs and recommend innovations to improve the
seismic performance of these two truss
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The NEES-MAST facility will be
used to impose cyclic loading on large-scale subassemblages that comprise the
fundamental structural unit of a STMF or STF. The large-scale tests will be used
to: (1) verify the behavior of STMFs constructed according to recommendations
from recent research results; (2) explore specific truss configurations that
could enhance the performance of STMFs; (3) clarify the system behavior of STFs
under cyclic loading; and (4) identify preferred energy dissipation mechanisms
for STFs. The structural engineering laboratory at Valparaiso University will be
used to examine the cyclic loading performance of shear-stud connections between
steel chord members and hollow core concrete planks. In addition, analytical
studies will lead to general nonlinear analysis methods that represent the
seismic behavior of STMFs and STFs and generate nonlinear time history analysis
data for a set of representative building systems that utilize STMFs or STFs.
Results from this research will promote wider use of STMFs and
STFs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This award will support
undergraduate students at Valparaiso University and the University of Minnesota
to participate in the research. The PI at Valparaiso University participates in
an engineering education initiative to introduce scientific visualization using
virtual reality systems. These systems will be used to create three-dimensional
(3D) models of both the experimental tests and analytical models. The PIs will
use the 3D models to aid dissemination of the research results to the
professional and academic communities. The 3D models will also be used to
develop educational tools to introduce K-12 and undergraduate students to
earthquake engineering research activity, the significance of earthquake
effects, and the functions of building structures. The educational tools will be
made available in the public domain for use in virtual reality systems or with a
traditional computer screen projector. Data from this project will be archived
and made available to the public through the NEES data repository.