* 0936791
* GSE/RES: Students' Pathways into Computer and Information Sciences Majors:A Study of Community College Men and Women
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2013
* Linda Werner, ETR Associates
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 12/31/2013
* USD 599,989.00

Intellectual Merit: Women's enrollment in computer and information sciences
(CIS) majors and completion of CIS undergraduate and graduate degrees has
declined in the US over the last 20 years. Efforts to reverse this trend have
been limited by a lack of research on the pathways into and out of CIS majors,
including community college pathways. Community colleges are of interest because
they attract a higher proportion of females and a broader demographic in terms
of age and socioeconomic status than 4-year universities. This study is designed
to collect data that can be used to inform efforts to encourage women to pursue
CIS majors by exploring the experiences of women and men in community colleges
taking introductory programming courses and the impact of those experiences on
their decisions to pursue a four-year CIS degree. The study is based on
theoretical frameworks that suggest the importance of motivation, parent and
peer support, and previous computer use, especially computer game play. The
researchers will recruit 700 female and male students in introductory
programming courses at community colleges that are key feeder schools to the
University of California (4-year public universities) CIS departments.
Participants will complete three surveys over two years, and a subsample will be
interviewed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The findings of the study
will provide much-needed data on three widely held assumptions about gender
differences in pathways to CIS majors; recent reviews suggest that there is
little actual research on the role of motivation, family support and computer
use (particularly digital gaming) among community college CIS students. That
which exists was collected before the availability of widely accessible mobile
(e.g., cell phone) and multiplayer Internet games, is short on theory, does not
examine variation within gender, and lacks a design or analytic approach that
allows for causal inference or the determination of effect sizes. This study
will overcome these limitations and provide data on why students choose
introductory programming courses and how those influential factors relate to
decisions to pursue CIS at a 4-year institution. In addition, this study will
contribute to knowledge about the role of digital gaming in choice of CIS major,
since prior research focuses on frequency of game play rather than on type of
play. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will inform efforts to increase the
number of students who pursue CIS majors at 4-year universities. Enrollment in
these majors has dropped in the last five years, especially for women. But
efforts to close the gender gap have been limited by a lack of rigorous research
on students? pathways into and through community college; little is known about
why CIS students transfer to 4-year institutions. This research aims to fill
this gap by identifying the characteristics and prior experience of students who
take introductory programming courses, and whether those characteristics and
current experience in CIS courses predict intention to go on to pursue a CIS
major at a 4-year university.