* 0936048
* Collaborative Research:  A Climate Station Network for the UC Natural Reserve System
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Kelly Redmond, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2013
* USD 248,393.00

The University of California - Berkeley and the University of Nevada Desert
Research Institute are awarded grants to install a network of monitoring
stations across the University of California Natural Reserve System (NRS). This
collaboration joins two centers of disciplinary expertise to complement and
extend their respective missions. The NRS sites have a long history of
observations and research on the dynamics of ecological function and structure.
The UC NRS contribution to this monitoring effort is to act as long term hosts
of the measurement sites, assist in site identification and deployment, and
oversee continued operation of the sites. The NOAA Western Regional Climate
Center (WRCC) at Desert Research Institute has extensive experience with climate
observations, and with supplying data to users in forms they need and prefer.
The contribution of the Desert Research Institute / Western Regional Climate
Center (DRI/WRCC) is to identify specific locations, prepare and install the
sensing platforms, set up communications, and provide for data ingestion,
archival, dissemination, and display.

Climate is a significant and pervasive influence on biota, and it is not
possible to understand observed ecosystem behavior without accounting for the
varying role of environmental drivers. The combination of a) high quality
environmental data and b) information on the trends in abundance of plants and
animals at sites across a geographic range of California, and for long periods
of time at each site, can transform our understanding of the interaction between
the physical environment and individual species and ecological communities as
they evolve in time. Much stronger inferences can be made about relations
between variations in climate and distribution of animals and plants if both
observations are made simultaneously and in close proximity. Uniformity in
observational practices and equipment across the climate observing network will
transform the ability of a larger group of researchers to link their ecological
observations to the shared climate data and explore entirely new scales of
ecology-climate interactions at within-reserve and between-reserve spatial and
temporal scales.