* 0936691
* U.S.-France Planning Visit:  Cancellation Problems
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2011
* David Finston, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 06/30/2011
* USD 20,000.00

This award will fund mathematics research planning visits for PI David Finston
and his New Mexico State University graduate students to develop strategies to
attack several problems under the framework of the affine cancellation problem
in collaboration with the working group on automorphisms of affine space led by
A. Dubouloz at Universit√© de Bourgogne in Dijon, France. An affine algebraic set
over the field of complex numbers can be realized as a subset of a Euclidean
space of some finite dimension over the complex field, defined by the vanishing
of a finite collection of polynomials. The algebraic set is called a variety if
it is not the union of two proper algebraic subsets. Given a variety, one can
construct a cylinder over it, also a variety, by taking its Cartesian product
with a complex line. The affine cancellation problem asks whether an isomorphism
of cylinders over two varieties implies an isomorphism of the varieties
themselves. The answer is no in general, although the most intriguing case,
where one of the varieties is a complex Euclidean space, is known to have a
positive solution in low dimensions and is open otherwise. Using algebraic
methods, counterexamples to cancellation among varieties resembling, but
distinct from, Euclidean spaces have been developed. Similar examples, but with
properties even closer to those of Euclidean spaces, resist algebraic analysis.
However, Drs. Finston and Dubouloz have used geometric methods to show that
these are not counterexamples. This suggests a convergence on essential
algebrao-geometric properties of varieties that influence the cancellation
property and warrant further exploration. During the planning visits, the
researchers will develop a strategy with two approaches. One approach will be
through examples constructed as quotients by actions of finite groups on certain
varieties. Another approach will be through investigation of the algebraic
structure of function fields of varieties whose cylinders yield affine spaces.
The research has implications for our understanding of Euclidean spaces as
varieties and of automorphism groups of interesting
varieties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research merges algebraic methods of the PI
with the more geometric approach of Dubouloz. Collaborations between the PI and
the working group in Dijon will enrich professional opportunities for NMSU
graduate students. NMSU is a federally designated Hispanic Serving Institution,
and the PI coordinates recruiting in the minority community for the doctoral
program in mathematics. The project will influence his teaching, research, and
thesis supervision. More immediately, the thesis work of the two graduate
students, both members of underrepresented minority groups, will be enriched by
their exposure to more geometry. In addition, the students will develop
mathematical connections with European colleagues that will be great assets in
their future careers.&lt;br/&gt;