* 0936333
* International Workshop on the Search for New Superconductors; Japan; Spring 2009
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2010
* Malcolm Beasley, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 05/31/2010
* USD 30,000.00

This award provides partial support for the International Workshop on the Search
for New Superconductors ? Frontier and Future to be held at the Shonan Village
Center in Japan, May 12 ? 16, 2009. The workshop has been jointly organized by a
Japanese and an American committee. The goal is to understand the implications
of recent unexpected discoveries of superconductivity in MgB2 and in the Fe-As
complex pnictides, as well as to explore the opportunities for further discovery
in a small workshop format. While Japan has had national programs with the goal
of searching for new materials for several years, as a whole the US does not
have such broad-ranging discovery programs. One year after the discovery of the
large class of pnictide superconductors, it is opportune to explore the
opportunities for further discovery in a small workshop format. NSF support will
enable young US scientists of diverse background and goals to attend the
workshop. The Japanese have also emphasized a significant role for young
scientists. The small workshop will provide an opportunity for the young
scientists to present their work and to interact with leading researchers in the
field. Along with the potential of developing future collaborations, the
workshop may serve as the essential seed needed to generate long-term materials
discovery programs in the US.