* 0936391
* WORKSHOP: SRC/NSF Forum on 2020 Semiconductor Memory Strategies: Processes, Devices, and Architectures, September, 2009.
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2009,01/31/2011
* Victor Zhirnov, Semiconductor Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 01/31/2011
* USD 49,440.00

CCF - 0936391 &lt;br/&gt;Title: SRC/NSF Forum on 2020 Semiconductor Memory
Strategies: Processes, Devices, and Architectures&lt;br/&gt;PI name: Victor
Zhirnov &lt;br/&gt;Inst: Semiconductor Research Corporation
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;This workshop proposal has been
initiated by the Semiconductor Research Corporation (SRC) and is part of an
ongoing attempt to periodically examine and evaluate the needs of the NSF/SRC
research community to identify the future directions of the field of
microelectronic design automation. This particular proposal is for supporting a
workshop on the topic of novel memory technologies. In particular, recent
discovery of a new memory device called the ?Memristors? inspired this workshop,
but a broader set of issues having to do with design technologies pertaining to
advances in memory technology and their continuous scaling behaviors will also
be discussed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Semiconductor Research Corporation (SRC)
is a nonprofit consortium of design automation industries. In recent years, it
has taken a major role in chalking out the future technology paths and the
requirements of industry by publishing the so called ITRS roadmap. While the
ITRS roadmap has been a guiding principle for industry, a similar agenda for
university researchers seem to be absent at the present time. The workshop is
supposed to fill this void for university researchers, by identifying an agenda
for longer term research in the domain of memory technologies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;