* 0936692
* GSE/RES: Club to School (C2S): Rethinking the SMT Pipeline
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2014
* Angela Calabrese Barton, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 07/31/2014
* USD 599,704.00

Intellectual Merit: How do middle school girls become engaged in science,
especially when their developing "sense of self" can seem to be at odds with
traditional images of what it means to be a good science student or a scientist?
The purpose of this investigation is to better understand the mechanisms by
which urban middle school girls author possible selves in science, and what
impact this has on their interest and participation in the science, mathematics
and technology (SMT) pipeline. The objectives of the project are:&lt;br/&gt;1.
To follow a cohort of girls in four cities over their middle school years to
document the mechanisms by which they author possible selves in science, how
their identity formation (and their attendant resources and positions) in
different figured worlds support them in doing so, and what impact this has on
their interest and participation in science class and the SMT
pipeline.&lt;br/&gt;2. To develop a model for how and why girls recruit
identities across different figured worlds and how girls seek to leverage them
in support of participation and interest in science.&lt;br/&gt;3. To create a
set of cases along with guiding design principles focused on girls' identity
development and SMT pipeline participation that can be used as tools for teacher
learning and program design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research follows 400 girls
in four US cities over three years. Utilizing a nationally validated survey
instrument focused on identity development and pipeline participation, data will
be gathered over the three years to ascertain patterns in identity development
and pipeline participation. The project also includes ethnographic longitudinal
case studies of 40 girls in two of the sites over three years. Case study data
will allow for an in depth analysis into girls' participation and experiences in
out-of-school figured worlds and the figured world of school science, to uncover
the salient identities pertinent to them, and how they select and coalesce
identities across figured worlds to further their interest and performance in
science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project yields a
theoretically-based, empirically-driven model for the relationship between
identity development and participation in the SMT pipeline for low-income urban
girls from racially diverse backgrounds. By creating a set of cases along with
guiding design principles focused on girls' identity development and SMT
pipeline participation, the project team will work with teachers and program
organizers to tailor program design and instructional practice to best support
girls.