* 0936920
* RUI:  Heterogeneous and Photochemical Reactivity of Surface Adsorbed Organics with Atmospheric Oxidants
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2013
* Ryan Hinrichs, Drew University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 12/31/2013
* USD 349,065.00

Surface adsorbed organics affect the heterogeneous and photochemical reactivity
of atmospheric aerosols, thereby impacting tropospheric photochemical cycles and
altering aerosol properties. Due to the diverse composition of surface adsorbed
organics in the troposphere, our understanding of this chemistry is far from
complete. This project describes condensed-phase infrared spectroscopic studies
aimed at identifying condensed-phase products, quantifying reaction kinetics,
and elucidating reaction mechanisms by means of isotopic experiments. Specific
systems of interest include: lignin pyrolysis products, nitrophenols, and
functionalized polycyclic aromatic compounds, including humic and fulvic acids,
exposed to nitrogen dioxide or ozone under dark and light conditions; and a
comparison of the heterogeneous reactivity of these organics adsorbed on
tropospheric aerosol surrogates.

Broader impacts include (1) Supporting the first active research program in
physical/atmospheric chemistry at Drew University, a small liberal arts college.
(2) Providing nine undergraduate summer research positions over the three-year
duration of the project. Under the guidance of the principal investigator,
undergraduate students at Drew will play an integral role in all aspects of the
project, including experimental design, data acquisition and analysis, and
communication of results to the scientific community as journal articles with
undergraduate co-authors and as presentations at professional meetings. (3)
Providing one local high school teacher a research opportunity for three
summers. Preference will be given to a teacher from a district with a high
percentage of students from groups underrepresented in science. Atmospheric
science curricular material will be co-developed and co-implemented by the
teacher and principal investigator. (4) Supporting curricular expansions in
environmental and atmospheric chemistry by integrating research and teaching to
enhance the Drew University chemistry major and by supporting a new major in
environmental studies and sustainability. Support will contribute to the
momentum of this new major to attract and support undergraduate students
interested in environmental sciences.