* 0936543
* NEESR-CR:  Topographic Effects in Strong Ground Motion - From Physical and Numerical Modeling to Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2009,04/30/2011
* Miguel Pando, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 04/30/2011
* USD 1,144,593.00

This award is an outcome of the NSF 09-524 program solicitation "George E.
Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES) Research
(NEESR)" competition and includes Washington State University (lead
institution), Drexel University (subaward), Georgia Institute of Technology
(subaward), University of Arkansas (subaward), and University of Puerto Rico,
Mayaguez (subaward). This project will utilize the NEES equipment sites at the
University of California, Davis and the University at Texas, Austin.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Topographic effects refer to the modification and
amplification of seismic ground motion in the vicinity of topographic features
such as hillsides, ridges, and canyons. This well-documented phenomenon has yet
to be addressed in design codes. Because tectonics and topography are closely
related, most seismically active regions of the world are marked by significant
topographic relief. In recent decades, population growth and scarcity of
undeveloped metropolitan land have changed urban land use patterns and placed an
increasing number of people and infrastructure assets in areas susceptible to
topographic effects during earthquakes. Although it is widely recognized that
topographic amplification can elevate seismic risk, there is currently no
consensus on how to reliably quantify its effects. Lack of consensus has
precluded development of acceptable guidelines on how to account for this
phenomenon in practice, thus leaving an important factor contributing to seismic
hazard unaccounted for in routine design. Until now, a major impediment towards
understanding and realistically modeling topographic effects has been the lack
of a statistically significant number of seismic recordings from densely
instrumented sites with topographic features. Moreover, while existing
theoretical models are generally capable of qualitatively predicting the effects
of irregular topographic features on seismic ground motion, there is still
significant quantitative disagreement between predictions and observations. This
research addresses this problem with a study of topographic amplification of
ground motion that will include a comprehensive and integrated program of
experimental simulations, field measurements, empirical data analysis, and
numerical modeling. These research methods, applied together in a framework now
made possible by NEES, will quickly and substantially advance the understanding
of topographic effects. This new understanding will in turn permit the
development of data- and analysis-driven guidelines to account for these effects
in engineering design, building code provisions, and seismic risk and
microzonation studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This research
integrates knowledge about topographic effects gained from: (i) centrifuge model
testing (using the NEES geotechnical centrifuge at the University of California,
Davis) of topographic features, (ii) field data acquired with temporary,
locally-dense instrumentation arrays (using the NEES mobile equipment at the
University of Texas, Austin and broadband sensors from the Incorporated Research
Institutions for Seismology (IRIS) Program for Array Seismic Studies of the
Continental Lithosphere (PASSCAL)) recording frequent and predictable stress-
induced mining seismicity in a mountainous region of Utah, (iii) rigorous
numerical modeling studies, and (iv) statistical analyses of the Next Generation
Attenuation strong ground motion data base. It is envisioned that this work will
result in: (i) an order-of-magnitude increase in the amount of high quality data
on topographic amplification, (ii) greater fundamental understanding of this
phenomenon, (iii) quantification of topographic effects on ground motions, (iv)
improved attenuation relationships that account for topographic amplification,
and (v) widely adopted guidelines and provisions to account for this seismic
hazard in practice. Ultimately, the outcomes of this research will allow seismic
risk to be more effectively managed in terms of ground motion quantification and
site response prediction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project
implements a new Bridge to Doctorate Program (BDP) geared towards educating
underrepresented students in the field of earthquake engineering. The BDP can
also serve as a model for increasing diversity in large collaborative science,
engineering and technology research projects. While this research focuses on
issues related to seismic response, the fundamental knowledge will have
relevance to other hazards, such as landslides in natural terrain and the
stability of dams, levees, and embankments. Data from this project will be
archived and made available to the public through the NEES data repository.