* 0936238
* Collaborative Research: Fluid Dynamics Foundations of Cell Printing
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Tao Xu, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
*  Ashok S. Sangani
* 08/31/2012
* USD 100,329.00

0936235/0936238 Qiao/Xu

Structural cell printing (SCP), or printing three dimensional structures of
cells held in a tissue matrix, has long been a fascinating idea. Drawing on the
micrometer resolution of droplet based printing techniques, SCP holds the
promise of achieving cell deposition resolution comparable to the size of a
single cell. Achieving such a resolution in vitro will resolve one of the most
fundamental challenges in tissue engineering and enable revolutionary
breakthroughs in numerous areas. Despite significant concerns, in particular
whether cells can survive the harsh printing process, the feasibility of SCP has
been demonstrated recently. However, despite the explosive growth of research in
SCP, such a technique is still in its infancy and many critical issues remain
unresolved. Most importantly, the envisioned cell deposition resolution has yet
to be achieved and the cell viability needs to be improved. Addressing these
issues necessitates a thorough understanding of the SCP process. The objective
of this project is to investigate a key step in the ink jet based SCP process,
i.e., printing cell laden droplets onto a thin liquid film to form two
dimensional cell patterns, using an integrated experimental and modeling
approach. Two unit operations of this critical step will be studied, namely, the
printing of a dot featuring a single cell (cell dot) and the printing of a line
of cells (cell line). The study of cell dot printing will focus on elucidating
the dynamics of a cell laden droplet impacting a liquid film with an emphasis on
the spreading and penetration behavior of the droplet and the stress evolution
of the cell, which govern the cell deposition resolution and cell viability. The
study of cell line printing will focus on delineating the interactions between
sequentially printed cell-laden droplets and how these interactions affect the
droplet liquid film impact, the stress of cells inside the droplets, and
ultimately the cell deposition resolution and cell viability.

Intellectual Merit: The proposed research is a pioneer study of the fluid
dynamics involved in ink jet based SCP techniques. The insights gained here will
provide a knowledge base for the rational design of SCP process to achieve
optimal cell deposition resolution and cell viability, and thus will help remove
critical barriers for this new technique to reach its fullest potential. By
delineating the droplet and cell dynamics unique to the SCP process, e.g., the
dynamics of cells in exceedingly strong shear flows at microsecond time scale,
this research will also enrich the fluid dynamics theories of droplet and cell
dynamics. The proposed research will benefit from the synergistic collaboration
between two PIs with complementary expertise in cell printing and mutliphysics
simulations, and is supported by state-of-the-art experimental and computing
facilities.

Broader Impacts: The project will be tied closely to the undergraduate graduate
education at the PIs home institutions. Students participating in this
interdisciplinary project will be exposed to diverse fields such as fluid
dynamics, cell mechanics and bioengineering. Five undergraduate students will be
involved in the research each year. Various resources, e.g., the minority
recruitment programs at the PIs institutions, will be utilized to recruit
students from underrepresented groups to participate in this project. Research
results will be developed into movies for use in K-12 outreach activities and
for submission to the gallery of fluid motion/image hosted by Efluid.com. To
help disseminate research to lay audiences and to help them appreciate the
significance of fluid dynamics research in developing useful technologies, we
will develop a website named The Nerdy Side of Cell Printing. This website will
explain the fluid dynamics involved in structural cell printing by using
experiment/computer generated images and movies that are easily understandable
to the general public. The website will be advertised to the target audience via
formal and informal channels.