* 0936725
* GSE/RES-Collaborative Research: Capitalizing on Opportunity: Narrowing the Gender Divide in Engineering and Computer Science through Professional Development
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2014
* Debra Major, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 06/30/2014
* USD 566,114.00

Intellectual Merit: This is a three-year collaborative research project between
Old Dominion University and Norfolk State University examining gender issues in
professional identity development among engineering (ENG) and computer science
(CS) students. Developing professional identity can help engender a sense of
belonging in the STEM field that ultimately contributes to undergraduate
retention. Grounded in social cognitive career theory (SCCT), this project
investigates the mechanisms by which professional identity is developed when
students capitalize on self-development opportunities available outside of the
classroom. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project applies SCCT, a well established
theoretical framework, to capitalization, a new area of research. Investigating
capitalization using SCCT contributes to understanding gender differences in
STEM and to the broader social psychology and capitalization literatures.
Multiple research methods are used, including qualitative critical incident
interviews, quantitative longitudinal surveys, and quasi-experimental design to
test utility of capitalization training. The proposal includes several
benchmarks and an experienced evaluator to oversee all assessment and
statistical aspects of the project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
proposed research contributes to the development of human capital by identifying
mechanisms for intervention in the effort to increase gender equity in STEM. The
training experiment is expected to yield evidenced-based methods for improving
capitalization antecedents and capitalization; and, as a result, contribute to
the development of professional identity, thereby leveling the playing field for
women. Since capitalization is a self-development skill known to yield positive
benefits in the workforce, skills developed at the undergraduate level will
contribute to the development and retention of STEM professionals as well.
Examining a Historically Black University and a Predominantly White University
broadens the understanding of capitalization across contexts. Expanding the
knowledge base regarding supports and barriers at each university type provides
the opportunity to derive a common set of ?best practices? with wide
applicability. Research findings will be shared via an interactive website;
international, national and regional conferences and journal publications; and
brochures and email campaigns targeted to relevant departments and professional
societies nationally.&lt;br/&gt;