* 0936346
* Undergraduate and Graduate Student Scholarship and Travel Grants for 2009-2011 Grace Hopper Celebration of Women in Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2012
* Telle Whitney, Anita Borg Institute for Women and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 05/31/2012
* USD 332,532.00

This CISE Broadening Participation award provides funding for approximately
eighty undergraduate and graduate students each year to attend the 2009 - 2011
Grace Hopper Celebration of Women in Computing. The Grace Hopper Celebration is
designed to bring the research and career interests of women in computing to the
forefront. Leading researchers present their current work and special sessions
focus on the role of women in today's technology fields. NSF scholarship support
allows students who could not otherwise attend to participate and become part of
the broad Hopper community of young female computing professionals that is
nurtured through the event.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this
project lies in the access to the many technical presentations and researchers
at the conference. In addition, students have the opportunity to participate in
poster sessions and receive feedback from discipline specialists. The Grace
Hopper Celebration provides a unique, supportive environment for intellectual
discourse that is particularly appealing for women and other under-represented
groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project deal with
providing resources and support to students that will help them persist in their
programs as well as access to avenues to continue through the IT workforce
pipeline. Students who attend the Grace Hopper Celebration will be exposed to
women who are creating, improving, and studying computer and information
technologies who serve as role models and mentors. This travel scholarship
support provides a unique opportunity to directly affect the careers of future
computer scientists and increase the representation of women in computing.