* 0936754
* Program for Women and Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/2010,09/30/2016
* Ingrid Daubechies, Institute For Advanced Study
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 09/30/2016
* USD 1,000,000.00

The Program for Women and Mathematics is an annual two-week program organized at
the Institute for Advanced Study (IAS), co-sponsored by Princeton University.
The program takes place each spring and is organized by senior women in
mathematics; it centers around a mathematical theme that changes from year-to-
year. The participants span different levels; they include undergraduates,
graduate students, postdoctoral fellows and senior women. The goals of the
program are to enhance the mathematics education of talented women
mathematicians through a rigorous and intense academic program, and to retain
these women in the field by providing mentoring and by establishing an extensive
network of women mathematicians. Program activities include an undergraduate-to-
beginning-graduate course in an area related to the research subject of the
year, an advanced graduate course, usually divided into two separate short
courses, intended to be an introduction to state-of- the-art research in that
year's chosen field of mathematics; research seminars in which reports from
postdoctoral level participants; problem and review sessions; and women-in-
science seminars that include interviews with senior women in the field, panel
discussions on topics of interest and organized discussions on subjects which
range from how to set up a Noetherian Ring to interviewing for a
job.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Program for Women and Mathematics has been running
for more than 15 years. It consistently receives rave reviews. The program is
not only praised for its intense scientific curriculum, it is also unique in
representing different mathematical professional paths and different stages in
such a path. Participants establish strong professional relationships that far
outlast the ten-day academic program. The establishment of a network of women at
various levels, who can (and do!) support and mentor one another through
difficult transition points, has been a well-cultivated outcome of the program,
and is something that expands and becomes stronger as the program continues.