* 0936171
* EAGER:  Transmission Welding and Single-Step Channeling of Transparent Materials by Ultrafast Laser
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2011
* Y Lawrence Yao, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Zhijian Pei
* 12/31/2011
* USD 230,252.00

The objective of this EArly-Concept Grants for Exploratory Research (EAGER)
project is to significantly advance the state of knowledge in ul-trafast laser
enabled transmission welding and single-step channeling processes in transparent
dielectrics such as glasses. Specifically, the aims are to (a) develop a deep
understanding of the underlying physical phenomena associated with morphology of
generated welds and channels as well as reliable predictive capabilities; and
(b) utilize characterization techniques in conjunction with the predictive
capabilities to elucidate the relationship of the rearrangement of glass ring
structures to the change in mechanical prop-erties as well as its implications
on reliability of welds. While the non-linear absorption of ultrafast laser in
interior of transparent dielectrics is known, how to precisely control and
predict the morphology of generated features presents significant challenges.
Equally important is the understanding and prediction how the laser process
affects mechanical properties, for example, fracture toughness, around welds and
to explore its strengthening effects. Femtosecond laser induced structural
rearrangement to lower-fold ring struc-tures are linked to glass densification
and mechanical property changes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The success of this
project will provide new design opportunities in life sciences industry. Single-
step-channeling enables monolithic microfluidic lab-on-a-chip designs with a new
level of compactness and pressure resistance. Transmission welding enables new
capsule designs of implantable micro-systems containing thermally sensitive
components. Flat panel display applications such as liquid crystal displays and
plasma displays and lighting applications such as organic light emitting diodes
will have a more reliable sealing process and thus longer product life and
improved quality. Actively recruiting and thoughtfully nurturing qualified and
underrepresented students in particular will be carried out to help train much
needed human resources in these critical and emerging fields. The research
results will be incorporated into a graduate level course and widely
disseminated.