* 0936581
* Remote Sensing of Ancient Mesopotamian Settlement Systems
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Elizabeth Stone, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2012
* USD 181,406.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With National Science Foundation
support, Dr. Elizabeth Stone will explore the organization of settlements
associated with ancient Mesopotamia, where the first known complex societies
developed. Commercial satellite imagery available from the Digital Globe
Corporation has a resolution sufficiently high to record traces of sub-surface
mud-brick architecture. Under ideal circumstances plans of entire cities, towns
and villages can be seen. Differential drying of walls and room fill either
after a rain or due to moisture from irrigation seeping up within the site
produces the architectural traces that make this possible. This project
therefore has two goals. One is to better understand the relationship between
rainfall, irrigation and site height which results in clearly visible surface
traces; the second is to acquire imagery and map sites of all sizes located
throughout the alluvium and dated between 5,000 to 1 BC. For the first time, the
excavated public buildings will be placed within the plan of the entire
settlement and comparisons can be drawn between the organization of the major
cities and that of tiny villages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These architectural plans
can be used to answer a broad array of questions relating to the distribution of
centralizing features such as palaces and other public buildings - temples,
harbors, storage facilities, fortifications and the like - as well as an
investigation of larger social structures. Were the rich and poor physically
segregated? If so, did they live in different neighborhoods or in different
settlements? What evidence is there for centralized planning of settlements?
Were there facilities for keeping domestic herd animals in the some settlements
but not in others? These issues are fundamental to resolving a long-standing
debate over whether the earliest complex societies were based on the wide-spread
exploitation of the mass of the population, or whether social mobility and more
communal decision-making were at least as important.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this project is the unparalleled insight it will provide
into the spatial organization of the cities, towns and villages that made up the
world's earliest civilization. The wide variety of approaches to understanding
the development of early complex society developed by anthropologists have been
tested on excavations of relatively small areas usually located within the
larger sites of each civilization and targeting the earlier stages of
development. By contrast this project will develop a large and broader sample of
data on all elements within the settled society, examining both urban and rural
sites and covering five millennia of development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The data
collected by this project will be shared with Iraqi colleagues who are
struggling to rebuild their antiquities service after years of war and
unprecedented looting of archaeological sites. The broad impact of this study
includes the use of the imagery purchased through this project for site
protection. In the longer term, our data will allow archaeologists - Iraqi or
foreign - to choose sites for investigation and, within those sites, chose areas
for excavation. Moreover, the methods for identifying useful imagery should be
applicable to other geographic areas, such as the Egypt, the Indus, and perhaps
China and the American Southwest.