* 0936688
* U.S.-ASEAN Workshop:  Next Generation Cook Stoves for Rural East and Southeast Asia
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/2009,03/31/2012
* Kirk Smith, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Sung
* 03/31/2012
* USD 40,000.00

0936688&lt;br/&gt;Smith&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: U.S. - ASEAN Workshop: Next
Generation Cook Stoves for Rural East and Southeast
Asia&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the participation of American
researchers, junior researchers, and graduate students in a U.S. - ASEAN
workshop on next generation cook stoves for rural East and Southeast Asia to be
held at the Asian Institute of Technology (AIT) in Pathumthani, Thailand from
November 16-20, 2009. This workshop is jointly sponsored by the U.S. State
Department and the U.S. Air Force Office of Science Research?s Asian Office of
Aerospace Research and Development (AFOSR/AOARD). The co-organizers are Dr. Kirk
Smith at the University of California, Berkeley and Dr. Kim Oanh in the School
of Environment at the Asian Institute of Technology. The workshop will also
involve researchers and graduate students from many Southeast Asian countries.
It is anticipated that these researchers will develop collaborations to apply
modern scientific theory and practice to developing better household stoves and
other small-scale combustion devices. Although such devices do not comprise a
large part of global energy demand, they are responsible for more ill-health
than any other category of energy use globally ? far exceeding that from
vehicles and power plants combined. This is due not only to their highly
inefficient combustion, which for traditional technologies leads to substantial
emissions of products of incomplete combustion, including a range of health-
damaging pollutants, but also because their proximity to the population leads to
high intake fractions, i.e., exposure per unit emissions. In addition many of
these same products of incomplete combustion (which include methane and black
carbon) are important greenhouse pollutants. The poor combustion and heat-
transfer of traditional technologies also leads to unnecessary waste of the
primary fuel supplies, largely wood and crop
residues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Emphasized at the workshop will be development of
joint research not only to develop advanced combustion stoves with low emissions
and high energy efficiency, but also to explore the potential for joint
production of space/water heating and small-scale electrical power generation.
In addition, the workshop will explore the potential for appropriate and
innovative sensor technology for in situ evaluation of cook stove performance
(e.g., reduction of indoor air pollution and black carbon emissions and
improvement in combustion efficiency). Laboratory or simulated measurements are
insufficient to assess how well such devices operate in real households over
time, but a number of IT-based sensors and processing platforms offer the
possibility for cost-effective assessment, even remotely over large populations.
Finally, the workshop will engage practitioners in stove dissemination who have
dealt with industrial engineering challenges related to materials quality,
manufacturing efficiency, and consumer behavior and perceptions. This
collaboration will provide an excellent opportunity for the U.S. junior
researchers and graduate students to receive a global research experience. It is
anticipated that this award will provide the basis for their continuing contacts
with their Southeast Asia colleagues throughout their research
careers.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;