* 0936340
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: Interactions Between Dislocations and Grain Boundaries in BCC Metals: Hall-Petch Effect
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Robert Wagoner, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Taleff
* 08/31/2011
* USD 155,462.00

Technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A numerically tractable multi-scale
model incorporating the effects of large numbers of discrete dislocations will
be constructed and compared with novel electron-backscattering diffraction
(EBSD)-based characterization to address the long-standing open question: ?Why
does the mechanical strength of polycrystalline metals vary with grain size
(Hall-Petch Effect)?? The model will avoid arbitrary length scales (strain
gradients) and unobserved microstructures (linear pile-ups). Instead, a
predictive capability will be constructed and tested. The new modeling and
characterization capabilities will enable material design and improve
applications, e.g. metal forming, particular for body-centered cubic metals such
as steels. The advances will be incorporated in instructional modules at the two
participating universities; undergraduate and graduate students will be trained
in research practices; EBSD sensitivity will be extended by up to two orders of
magnitude; and results will be disseminated widely by peer-reviewed
publications, theses, and dissertations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical
Summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The strength of common structural metals (e.g.
steel, copper, aluminum, titanium) varies greatly with the scale of its
microstructures. For example, the strength of steel can be increased 10 times by
changing the grain size alone. There is no confirmed mechanism or model that
predicts this well-known effect quantitatively. In order to facilitate the
design and use of better, stronger materials, a predictive multi-scale
(micro/macro) model will be constructed and tested using new analytical
techniques. Benefits of a fundamental understanding of this important effect
will permit production and use of better materials, resulting in a variety of
societal advantages such as increased personal and national safety, reduced fuel
consumption, and reduction of greenhouse gas emissions.