* 0936896
* Investigating Social, Economic, and Political Organization of the Liangchengzhen Polity, Southeastern Shandong, China
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,09/30/2010
* Anne Underhill, Field Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/2010
* USD 20,915.00

The NSF Archaeology Program High Risk Exploratory Research competition will
permit Dr. Anne Underhill (Field Museum) and her colleagues at Shandong
University, China, to test 3-5 potential sites in the Rizhao area of
southeastern Shandong province for excavation. Through their systematic,
regional survey for over a decade, Dr. Underhill and her Sino-American team
located hundreds of settlements from the Longshan period, c. 2600-1900 B.C..
They identified a clear hierarchy with respect to the size of settlements and
hypothesized that the site of Liangchengzhen, long known for its finely made
pottery vessels and jade objects in an area over 100 hectares in size, was a
regional center. Mainly utilitarian pottery vessels and stone tools were found
at the smaller settlements judged to be subsidiary to the political center at
Liangchengzhen. The team then excavated at Liangchengzhen from 1999-2001. What
remains unclear however is the nature of the interactions between people living
in the regional center and those in the smaller, outlying communities.

By excavating a smaller settlement contemporary to and located near
Liangchengzhen, the team aims to investigate the nature of social, economic,
political, and ritual relations in the late prehistoric, Liangchengzhen polity.
The team will evaluate hypotheses about the emergence of urbanism, the nature of
economic control (by means such as craft production and exchange) of smaller
settlements by elites at Liangchengzhen, and mechanisms such as public rituals
involving veneration of ancestors for social integration in the region.
Achieving this goal will require extensive testing of the buried Longshan
deposits at the smaller settlement sites. The team will work with local experts
in probing and assessment of exposed profiles to identify buried residential
areas dating to the Early and Middle phases of the Longshan period as at
Liangchengzhen. The ideal site to be chosen for eventual excavation will have
evidence for houses and residential debris (production and consumption of
pottery and stone objects, rice and other grains, domesticated animals, and
ritual remains such as unusually large pits containing pots with residues for
fermented beverages). Since the sites to be tested were discovered by the team a
decade ago, another task will be to assess the impact of modern farming and
other activities on the buried deposits. The field season also will be devoted
to an initial study of resource distribution (such as clays) and changes to the
regional landscape during and after the Longshan period.

This NSF funded project will enable the continuation of one of the longest Sino-
foreign collaborative fieldwork, training, and publication programs. The short
testing phase will provide opportunities for archaeology students from the
United States and Shandong University. The opportunity to adequately assess the
deposits at the candidate sites for their potential to yield the kinds of
artifacts necessary to test the nature of interactions between settlements is
essential for the success of the future excavation. Few regional projects in
China, home to one of the world's earliest civilizations, have involved studies
of the range of possible hierarchical and horizontal relations between
settlements and how polities developed prior to the establishment of the first
literate dynasties.