* 0936184
* Travel Support for the 22nd ACM Symposium on Operating Systems Principles (SOSP 2009)
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2010
* Thomas Anderson, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Mohamed G. Gouda
* 07/31/2010
* USD 15,000.00

The Twenty-Second ACM Symposium on Operating Systems Principles will be held in
Big Sky, Montana on October 11-14, 2009. For over 30 years SOSP has been the
leading forum for innovative research in operating systems. Like its
predecessors, SOSP 2009 will bring together researchers from around the world to
present and discuss the latest results. In addition to such traditional topics
as the performance, functionality, and security of kernels, file systems, and
networks, this year's conference will place increasing attention on such
emerging topics as ubiquitous and mobile computing, sensor networks, overlay and
peer-to-peer communications, and power management. Particularly noteworthy
papers will be forwarded to ACM Transactions on Computer Systems for possible
journal publication. There will also be poster and work-in-progress sessions for
the presentation of promising preliminary work.&lt;br/&gt;This proposal requests
funding to support the attendance of 20 US-based graduate students.
Participation in leading conferences is an extremely important part of the
graduate school experience, providing the opportunity to interact with more
senior researchers and to be exposed to leading edge work. The support requested
in this proposal will make possible the participation of students who would
otherwise be unable to attend. Particular attention will be paid to directing
support towards underrepresented minorities including women, African-Americans,
and Native Americans.