* 0936408
* NEESR-CR:  Evolutionary Intensity Measures for More Accurate and Informative Liquefaction Hazard Evaluation
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Kenan Hazirbaba, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Richard J. Fragaszy
* 09/30/2013
* USD 638,327.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This award is an outcome of the NSF 09-524 program solicitation ''George E.
Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES) Research
(NEESR)'' competition and includes the University of Washington (lead
institution), the University of Alaska, Fairbanks (subaward), and the University
of Portland (subaward). This project will utilize the NEES equipment site at
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute.

Soil liquefaction is an important seismic hazard that has caused extensive
damage to buildings, bridges, dams, wharves, and lifelines in past earthquakes.
It has caused buildings to sink into the ground, bridges and dams to collapse,
and buried tanks and pipelines to pop out of the ground. It has also caused
devastating landslides in both natural and man-made ground, and has destroyed
major port facilities.

Soil liquefaction first sprang to the attention of engineers following large
earthquakes in Alaska and Japan in 1964. Engineers realized that similar
earthquakes occurring in more heavily populated and industrialized areas of the
United States, such as the Los Angeles, San Francisco, Seattle, and Portland
areas, could cause liquefaction that would kill people and produce billions of
dollars in economic losses. Geotechnical engineers went to work immediately to
produce procedures for evaluating liquefaction hazards. While a number of useful
and important refinements have been made, the basic procedures used today are
the same as those developed 30-40 years ago, despite greatly improved
understanding of the liquefaction process.

In current practice, the complex, transient ground motion produced by an
earthquake is typically represented by a single point "its maximum value" and a
measure of the duration of the motion. Such peak-amplitude-based parameters
provide no information on whether liquefaction occurs early or late in an
earthquake, which limits their effectiveness in predicting the effects of
liquefaction. The use of evolutionary measures of ground motion intensity, i.e.,
measures that build up with time over the duration of a ground motion, which
would allow the missing dimension of time to be brought into the liquefaction
hazard evaluation problem, will be investigated in this project. The
relationship between soil liquefaction and a variety of different measures of
ground motion intensity will be investigated. The research will generate a large
amount of experimental validation data using centrifuge model and element
testing with realistic, transient loading histories. The experiments performed
using these motions will provide a much more severe, and realistic, test of the
pore pressure and permanent deformation prediction capabilities of ground motion
intensity measures than the types of tests for which data is currently
available.

This project will provide a basis for the development of liquefaction hazard
evaluation procedures that are more accurate and that provide important
additional information than currently used procedures. Such procedures will lead
to improved public safety and the more efficient use of retrofitting/remediation
resources. An existing educational website devoted to soil liquefaction will be
substantially updated and expanded. We will also interact with organizations
such as the Alaska Native Science and Engineering Program, the Alaska Summer
Research Academy for grade 8-12 students, and the Oregon Museum of Science and
Industry to bring the problem of liquefaction and the benefits of this research
to students who would not normally be exposed to it. Data from this project will
be archived and made available to the public through the NEES data repository.