* 0936434
* GSE/RES Taking credit for one's success: Reducing stereotypic attributional bias can improve women's science and engineering outcomes
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/2009,10/31/2014
* Denise Sekaquaptewa, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 10/31/2014
* USD 499,908.00

Intellectual merit: Women studying in fields non-traditional for women,
including science and engineering, are proposed to show a spontaneous pattern of
implicit achievement attribution, termed "stereotypic attributional bias" (SAB).
SAB is defined as a subtle form of stereotypic bias in which women's science and
engineering successes are spontaneously attributed to external causes (such as
luck) and their failures spontaneously attributed to internal causes (such as
lack of ability). This research explores whether the tendency to engage in SAB
is promoted by being in educational environments perceived as unwelcoming to
women. Features of unwelcoming environments include having few or no other
female colleagues or role models, and witnessing subtle behavioral biases
favoring men. It is proposed that female students pursuing science and
engineering may come to engage in SAB, independent of their explicitly stated
beliefs about women and science, as a result of stereotypic messages encountered
in their environments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research unites three strong
theoretical perspectives (gender distinctiveness, implicit stereotyping, and
achievement attribution) to advance understanding of women's lower participation
in science and engineering compared to men. The SAB concept is a unique
contribution based on sound research evidence in social psychology placed in a
new theoretical framework, i.e. as an unintended, implicit attributional bias
that is increased by stereotypic environmental cues and that influences academic
outcomes. This project also promotes both basic experimental and applied
intervention approaches to understanding, predicting, and improving academic
outcomes among female science students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In seven
laboratory studies, the research tests these hypotheses: 1) female students in
settings perceived to be unwelcoming to women [e.g., male-dominated settings
and/or those in which behavioral biases favoring men exist] will show greater
SAB than women in settings more welcoming to women; 2) SAB predicts diminished
motivation for and performance in science and engineering among women; 3) female
science and engineering students who do not evince SAB show increased academic
persistence after success feedback, whereas women who engage in SAB do not; 4)
the implications of SAB will be different for White vs. African American women
due to differences in the content of stereotypes regarding their race/ethnicity;
and 5) an intervention designed to reduce SAB can improve women's science
outcomes, as a result of increasing internal attributions for their science and
engineering success. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The proposed
research advances discovery about factors influencing female science students
while promoting teaching, training and learning as undergraduate and graduate
students will participate fully as student collaborators in all aspects of the
project. Members of underrepresented groups will participate in the proposed
research, as this project focuses directly on an important underrepresented
population (women in science), and reserves key roles for racial minority and
majority male and female students as research assistants as well as respondents.
The proposed research will serve to enhance infrastructure for research and
education, as computer technologies will be developed and collaborative contacts
will be made with the university's Center for Research and Learning on Teaching,
the College of Engineering, and related departments, encouraging and
facilitating future research collaborations. Broad dissemination of the results
of the research will include research presentations and publications, in both
psychology and education journals. Moreover, these results will be shared with
educational, research, and diversity programs. Finally, this project will offer
important and significant benefits to society, as understanding the processes
influencing women in science is critical in moving toward the goal of greater
representation of women in science and scientific innovation.&lt;br/&gt;