* 0936274
* Collaborative Research: Graduate Student Training Through Research on Plasma-Based Accelerators
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2009,09/30/2013
* Martin Gundersen, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Steven J Gitomer
* 09/30/2013
* USD 385,197.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a collaborative project
involving a consortium of six premier U.S universities and one national
laboratory to train graduate students in an area of anticipated manpower need:
advanced acceleration techniques. In particular, students will be trained in
experiment, theory and computer simulations on plasma-based particle
accelerators. Recent results in this field have shown that plasma-based particle
accelerators have the potential to drastically reduce the size and hopefully the
cost of future colliders needed for basic science on the one hand and to lead to
table-top electron accelerators for myriad industrial, medical and research
applications on the other.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to provide a
coordinated learning and research experience for Ph.D. students from leading
research institutions that have developed different sets of experimental and
theoretical/simulations tools. The topics proposed for their theses span
fundamental science yet to be uncovered in the plasma-based accelerators field,
the development of new diagnostic techniques, advancing the underlying theory,
and advancing the use of computational techniques to model both fundamental
phenomenology and ongoing experiments. Examples of basic science topics that
will be experimentally investigated include ionization induced trapping,
generation of He2+ ion beams, acceleration of electrons and generation of
radiation in spatially modulated plasma waveguides, control of plasma wakefields
using a beat-wave or two-color scheme and the development of a high repetition
rate wakefield accelerator. While most of the experiments will be done using
high power lasers, the 75 MeV electron beam facility (ATF) at Brookhaven will be
used to investigate high-gradient, high-efficiency acceleration of electrons in
a beam driven wakefield. Much effort will be devoted to the development of
diagnostic techniques. For instance a Faraday rotation technique will be
explored as a means to identify the self-trapping of particles in the wake
whereas a tomographic imaging technique will be developed to enable
visualization of the evolving wakes. Theoretical/computational effort will focus
on many fronts including emittance preservation in wakefields, self-propagation
of laser pulses over pump depletion distances, novel strategies for acceleration
of positrons, and physics of electron trapping and injection in plasma
accelerators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plasma-based accelerator laboratories
arguably contain the most complex and cross-disciplinary instrumentation as any
on a campus. In addition, the field of plasma-based acceleration is also very
cross disciplinary. Computer simulations in this area are at the forefront of
computational science and high performance computing. Furthermore, the field is
also at the forefront of closely coupling experimental data to simulation data.
The challenges of using complex experimental and computational instruments to
carry out cross disciplinary research attracts creative physics and engineering
students as well as provides them with an excellent training environment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plasma-based acceleration has the potential for broad
impact. It may some day be the technology used to build a future linear collider
at the energy frontier as well as be the basis for compact accelerators that
would have use in medicine and novel photon sources. The intent of this project
is to provide the graduate students with a sense of community through the
formation of a multi-university consortium that has access to state-of-the-art
facilities and a multi-disciplinary intellectual environment. This will be
accomplished through sharing of intellectual as well as of experimental
resources. The students will be in direct contact with a large number of leading
researchers in the field. The project will produce a trained workforce that is
comfortable with complex systems, interdisciplinary research and collaboration,
reporting of findings to colleagues, and ready for future challenges, such as a
future plasma-based high-energy particle collider at the energy
frontier.&lt;br/&gt;