* 0936547
* NEESR-CR:  An Innovative Seismic Performance Enhancement Technique for Steel Building Beam-Column Connections
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Jose D'Arruda, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2013
* USD 590,391.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This award is an outcome of the NSF 09-524 program solicitation "George E.
Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES) Research
(NEESR)" competition and includes the North Carolina State University (NCSU,
lead institution) and the University of North Carolina at Pembroke (UNCP,
subaward). This project will utilize the NEES equipment site at the University
of Minnesota to experimentally validate an innovative technique for enhancing
the seismic performance of steel building beam-column connections.

Intellectual Merit: The proposed seismic enhancement technique involves heat
treating sections of beam flanges by exposing these sections to a very high
temperature for certain amount of time before slow air cooling. Such a heat
treatment process reduces the strength of steel in the heat treated areas of the
flange. Consequently, under seismic loading, a plastic hinge develops at the
heat treated beam section (HBS). A connection enhanced by this technique will
have the advantages of the popular reduced beam section (RBS) connection, but
the HBS will have better energy dissipation than the RBS connection. In RBS
connections, "weakening" of the beam flanges induces a plastic hinge away from
the welds. In HBS connections, a plastic hinge develops at the heat treated
section because of the reduced strength of steel. Moreover, as the beam flange
remains intact and the inelastic modulus of steel is not altered at the HBS, the
lateral and torsional buckling resistances of the HBS connection will be higher
than those of the RBS connection. Consequently, the HBS connection will
dissipate a larger amount of energy with a minimum loss of strength or stiffness
compare to the RBS connection. Through a pilot study at NCSU, the seismic
performance enhancement technique is validated analytically. This project will
validate the technique by conducting full-scale connection experiments.
Currently, RBS is the most popular connection design because of its seismic
performance and cost effectiveness. The HBS connection is anticipated to be more
seismically robust and economical than the RBS connection. The research will be
performed through integrated experimental and analytical studies. Material
experiments of heat treated and unconditioned coupons will be conducted and data
will be analyzed to quantify the influence of heat treatment parameters (peak
temperature and hold time) on the reduction of strength and to determine the
constitutive model parameters. Detailed structural analyses of HBS connections
will be performed to determine the optimum heat treatment parameters and
geometry of HBS. Beam-column connections with and without HBS will be built and
tested to demonstrate seismic performance enhancement of the modified
connections. Detailed measurement of strains, displacements and rotations at
various locations will be recorded for investigating both the local and global
failure modes of HBS connections. Experimental and analytical results will be
used to refine the technique and to develop a methodology for practical
application of the technique.

Broader Impacts: The research results will be integrated into professional
development courses, and the research will involve faculty and students from a
predominantly undergraduate Native American institution in the experimental
activities. A methodology for application of the novel technique will be
developed and disseminated. The heat treatment concept is applicable to steel
building or bridge connections; the proposed heat treatment technique will
benefit industries that use welded joints. Experimental data from this project
will be archived and made available to the public through the NEES data
repository.