* 0936971
* WORKSHOP:   Biomimicry - Educating a New Generation of Leaders in Sustainability - San Diego Zoo, October 2, 2009
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* John Phillips, Zoological Society of San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Diana Anderson
* 08/31/2010
* USD 25,000.00

Transformational change in how humans view the natural world, utilize its
resources, and interact with the environment is necessary to alleviate continued
degradation of land and resources. Biomimicry is the discipline of applying
nature's design solutions to human design and innovation. Nature is the world's
largest research and development laboratory, and has been testing and retesting
biological designs and strategies for billions of years. Nature's solutions are
closed loop and in harmony with the ecosystem. By learning to design,
manufacture, and live according to principles observed in nature, the tools
needed to transform our world can be developed. The goal of this workshop is to
convene members of the business, policy, and educational communities to learn
about the transformative elements of biomimicry, envision a future where nature
plays a role in education and innovation, and jointly determine the path for
fully utilizing the potential that biomimicry represents. This workshop will
highlight educators who have taught biomimicry both formally and informally, to
discuss how biomimicry can be an exceptionally effective tool for learning. It
will also feature business leaders who have developed biomimetic products and
solutions. These innovative leaders will discuss the challenges of developing
and commercializing products based on biomimicry, as well as the significance of
their products from the perspective of industry and sustainability. Finally,
there will be a biomimicry tour of the San Diego Zoo and an Invention Convention
showcasing existing biomimetic inventions. This workshop will be one of the
first community-wide discussions focused on the impact of biomimicry in industry
and society. It is the contention of the organizers that biomimicry as a
scientific discipline will play a key role in future innovation. The future will
require products and processes that are sustainable and closed loop. If
students, scientists and business leaders can be taught to learn principles of
design and manufacture according to principles observed in nature, those
principles can be used to develop the tools needed to live sustainably.