* 0936137
* BRIDGE:  A Proposal to Conduct a Mentoring Workshop for Underrepresented Minority Undergraduate Engineering Students and their Advisors
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2009,12/31/2011
* Shirley McBay, QUALITY EDUCATION FOR MINORITIES NETWORK
* Standard Grant
* Darren Dutterer
* 12/31/2011
* USD 403,483.00

Abstract of proposal number 0936137 by Dr. Omnia El-
Hakim.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal # 0936137&lt;br/&gt;Title: A Proposal to
Conduct a Mentoring Workshop for Underrepresented Minority Undergraduate
Engineering Students and their Advisors.&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator:
Shirley McBay.&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Quality Education for Minorities
Network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Proposal # 0936137 title "A Proposal to
Conduct a Mentoring Workshop for Underrepresented Minority Undergraduate
Engineering Students and their Advisors" is an opportunity for students to meet
outstanding mentors; and to understand the role of mentor and attributes of a
good mentor. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two-day intensive workshop focused on
mentoring of underrepresented minority undergraduate engineering majors. The
goal of the workshop is to increase the participants' understanding of the role
that faculty and peer mentoring play in enhancing the successful academic and
professional outcomes of undergraduate engineering majors who are members of
underrepresented minority groups. The workshop is planned for 150
underrepresented minority undergraduate engineering majors and 15 engineering
faculty/staff advisors from 15 institutions with ABET-accredited engineering
programs. The institutions will include seven Historically Black Colleges and
Universities, five Hispanic-serving Institutions, one Other Minority
Institution, and two Predominantly White Institutions. Each of the 15
institutions will be represented by 10 underrepresented minority undergraduate
students and one faculty/staff advisor. Sessions will provide sharing
experiences and best practices, learning about effective mentoring as well as
build a plan for development of a peer support network and interaction. In
addition, this proposal recognizes the importance of development of the whole
person (i.e. communication skills, engineering in today's society, professional
conduct, as well as academic preparation) and demonstrated commitment to
diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; All presentations on the agenda will be placed
on QEM's website and shared with interested students and faculty, whether or not
they attended the workshop. Over the long-term, effective mentoring will pay off
through an increase in the number of minority students who obtain baccalaureate
and doctoral degrees in engineering that, in turn, will help strengthen the
nation's global competitiveness in science and
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Omnia El-Hakim, Ph.D.-Program Director
&lt;br/&gt;For Diversity and Outreach&lt;br/&gt;National Science
Foundation&lt;br/&gt;Directorate for Engineering&lt;br/&gt;4201 Wilson Blvd.,
Suite 505N&lt;br/&gt;Arlington, VA 22230&lt;br/&gt; Tel: (703) 292-
2149&lt;br/&gt;Fax: (703) 292- 9013&lt;br/&gt;E-Mail: oelhakim@nsf.gov