* 0936886
* CAREER: New Phases at the Surfaces/Interfaces of Transition-Metal Oxides
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2009,05/31/2010
* Jiandi Zhang, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 05/31/2010
* USD 89,467.00

This CAREER project will have an integrated approach to research and educational
outreach in the area of materials physics. The discovery, understanding, and
design of novel phases at the surfaces/interfaces of transitional-metal oxides
(TMOs) are the objective of the research activities. The major physics issues to
be addressed are the nature of surface metal-insulator transition and the
essence of nanophase separation in reduced dimensionality. The main approach is
to use a unique combination of characterization techniques to investigate both
local and global structural and electronic properties and dynamical response
(including phonons and low-energy excitations) of well-defined surfaces of
single crystals or expitaxial thin films. The major educational component of
this project is aimed at addressing modern materials science education at the
pre-college and college levels to aggressively encourage and promote the study
of physics (or physical science in general) in the greater Miami area, a
minority-dominated region. Activities include: enrichment activities and
research experience involving undergraduates, high school students and teachers,
a materials research seminar series, and the development of an interdisciplinary
advanced materials science curriculum. The goal of this proposal is 1) increase
the minority-student enrollment in science, 2) educate a new breed of materials
scientists as the future workforce for technology-driven society 3) explore new
physical phenomena at surfaces/interfaces of TMO materials, and 4) exploit
materials tailoring for desired functionalities for future
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project will have an integrated
approach to research and educational outreach in the area of materials physics.
The discovery, understanding, and design of novel phases at the
surfaces/interfaces of transitional-metal oxides (TMOs) are the objective of the
research activities. The main approach is to use a unique combination of state-
of-the art techniques to investigate both local and global properties of well-
defined surfaces of single crystals or expitaxial thin films. The impact will be
on both the understanding of the fundamental physics of these strongly
correlated electron materials and also their technological applications. The
major educational component of this project is aimed at addressing modern
materials science education at the pre-college and college levels to
aggressively encourage and promote the study of physics (or physical science in
general) in the greater Miami area, a minority-dominated region. Activities
include: enrichment activities and research experience involving undergraduates,
high school students and teachers, a materials research seminar series, and the
development of an interdisciplinary advanced materials science curriculum. The
goal of this proposal is 1) increase the minority-student enrollment in science,
2) educate a new breed of materials scientists as the future workforce for
technology-driven society 3) explore new physical phenomena at
surfaces/interfaces of TMO materials, and 4) exploit materials tailoring for
desired functionalities for future applications.&lt;br/&gt;