* 0936059
* The Effect of Moist Processes on Midlatitude Static Stability
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2010,02/28/2014
* Dargan Frierson, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 02/28/2014
* USD 329,363.00

Research conducted under this grant will study the static stability of that
portion of the atmosphere (specifically the troposphere and lower stratosphere)
which lies between the warm tropics and the cold polar caps (i.e. the
midlatitudes). The static stability of the atmosphere is a key factor which
influences many aspects of atmospheric behavior, including the frequency and
intensity of convective precipitation, the propagation speed of various kinds of
atmospheric wave motions, the horizontal size required for atmospheric
circulation patterns to be strongly influenced by the Coriolis force, and even
the strength of the atmospheric greenhouse effect. Stability is determined by
the vertical variation of temperature with height, and processes which warm the
upper atmosphere relative to the lower atmosphere (i.e. lessen the rate at which
temperature decreases with height in the troposphere) cause an increase in
static stability. The particular focus of this project is the extent to which
the condensation of atmospheric water vapor and the attendant warming of the
upper atmosphere by latent heating is important for determining the stability of
the midlatitude atmosphere. Many previous studies have suggested that the
stability of the midlatitude atmosphere is primarily determined by baroclinic
instability, which can be thought of roughtly as the action of frontal systems
in which warm air masses from the south are displaced by cold air masses from
the north. However, some studies have shown that condensational heating could
have a potentially large impact on the static stability, and it is generally
accepted that condensational heating associated with convection is a primary
determinant of static stability in the tropics. Research conducted under this
grant will use a hierarchy of atmospheric models of varying degrees of
complexity, in combination with the most recent and accurate observational
datasets, to understand the fundamental physical and dynamical processes through
which moisture influences midlatitude stability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
determination of midlatitude static stability is a classical problem in
fundamental atmospheric science, but it also has practical real-world
consequences. Previous work by the principal investigator and others shows that
midlatitude stability increases with global warming, with potentially
significant consequences for the hydrological cycle. In addition to the
scientific broader impacts, the work would contribute to education by funding
two graduate students. Scientists conducting the work will also present their
research results to the public in a short video, prepared using the resources of
their university.