* 0936108
* CAREER:  Folding and Function of Acidophile Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2008,05/31/2010
* Thomas Kappock, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Michele McGuirl
* 05/31/2010
* USD 112,510.00

Acid tolerance is important for industrially useful bacteria, including some
organisms that allow internal pH to drop well below neutrality. The entire
proteome of these organisms is designed to function at low pH, by global
adaptation of each protein for acidic conditions and/or by the action of
putative acid chaperones. The goal of this project is to understand acid stable
enzymes in Acetobacter aceti, an economically significant, non-pathogenic Gram-
negative bacterium that converts ethanol into vinegar, a strong acetic acid
solution that kills other microorganisms. Acetic acid seeps constantly into the
cytoplasm of A. aceti, which routinely reaches pH 4. Because they have been
adapted to function at low pH, cytoplasmic enzymes from A. aceti are excellent
models for investigating acid stability in proteins. Biophysical and
enzymological methods are used to understand how these proteins fold and
function under harsh conditions. Previous studies of thermophilic enzymes have
advanced our fundamental understanding of protein structure and provided useful
materials for biotechnology (e.g., PCR). This research follows a similar course
with a different extreme environment, acidic pH. Design principles derived from
these studies may be used to improve biocatalysts and to understand protein
folding.

Broader impacts: The educational component of this award involves teaching,
training and outreach activities. Bioprocess technology requires suitable
biocatalysts, enzymes or microbes able to carry out particular chemical
transformations. A new practical laboratory experience will be developed to
challenge students to find and characterize new pollutant-degrading reactions in
microbial bioremediation consortia. Precollege students and science teachers
will participate in the selection and improvement of consortia that degrade non-
toxic dyes. Students with a range of backgrounds readily grasp the environmental
relevance of using microbiological and chemical analysis methods to discover
valuable enzymatic activities.