* 0936081
* Support for U.S. Delegation to Annual Meetings of the International Society for Rock Mechanics
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2011
* Peter Smeallie, American Rock Mechanics Association Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Richard J. Fragaszy
* 04/30/2011
* USD 11,318.00



This award is for an international travel grant to the American Rock Mechanics
Association Foundation (ARMA/F) to support the U.S. delegate to the 2009 and
2010 International Society for Rock Mechanics (ISRM) Council meetings and
symposia. For 2009 and 2010, the U.S. delegate is Peter Smeallie, the executive
director of ARMA and the ARMA/F. In 2010, the delegation will be expanded to
include Dr. Francois Heuze, who in 2009 will stand for President of the ISRM.
Dr. Hueze's travel expenses in 2010 will be offset by a contribution by the
American Rock Mechanics Association. Mr. Smeallie serves on the ISRM Council and
represents the interests of the U.S. rock mechanics community. The U.S. delegate
will attend the ISRM Council and Commission meetings as appropriate in Hong Kong
in 2009 and in New Delhi, India, in 2010.

The intellectual merit of the trips is to enhance US geo-engineering and rock
mechanics by providing an international perspective on important issues
currently being addressed by ISRM such as international underground research
laboratories, radioactive waste disposal, rock testing methods, application of
geophysics in rock mechanics, and post-mining rock mechanics. The ISRM meetings
will also allow the opportunity to generate international interest in rock
mechanics research experiments at the proposed Deep Underground Science and
Engineering Laboratory (DUSEL) and to update the international rock mechanics
community on the progress and plans for DUSEL.

The broader impacts of this award go beyond the geo-engineering and rock
mechanics communities. US participation in the activities of ISRM has a direct
impact on issues of national importance through collaborative alliances fostered
by the international society. These areas include resource exploration and
production, national security issues, environmental considerations, and civil
infrastructure systems through advances in tunnelling and excavation
technologies