* 0936830
* Differential geometry approach for  virus surface formation, evolution and visualization
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Yang Wang, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tie Luo
* 08/31/2013
* USD 497,645.00

Viruses are contagious agents and can cause epidemics and pandemics. The
importance of the prevention and control of viral epidemics and pandemics to
homeland security and daily life cannot be overemphasized. Viruses cannot grow
and/or reproduce outside host cells. Their infection starts with the attachment
of a virus on the host cell surface, with possible fusion of viral capsid
surface and the host cellular membrane, followed by virus penetration into the
host cell. These processes involve mostly non-bonding interactions between the
virus capsid surface and the aquatic environment, as well as the host surface
membrane or receptor. It is imperative to understand the molecular mechanism of
virus attachment on its host cell, the movement of virus fusion with cellular
membrane, and the dynamics of virus penetration into its host cell. The
prerequisites to these studies are efficient mathematical and computational
techniques for virus surface construction, evolution and visualization, and
analysis of the virus's non-bonding interactions with its host cell.
Unfortunately, an average virus comprises millions of atoms, and virus dynamics
involves an additional number of degrees of freedom due to its environment and
host cell. The exceptionally massive data sets in virus systems pose severe
challenges to full-atomic scale virus surface formation, visualization and virus
interaction analysis. Therefore, the real time dynamic simulation of viral
attachment, fusion and penetration of a host cell in the aquatic environment
requires microsecond or millisecond simulation time and is technically
intractable with full-atom models at present.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project addresses these challenges by developing a multiscale framework which
reduces the problem dimensionality by a macroscopic continuum description of the
aquatic environment, and a microscopic discrete description of virus atoms. To
further reduce the size of virus data for excessively large viruses, a coarse-
grain particle description based on amino acid residues is built into our
multiscale framework. A total free energy functional is introduced to bring the
macroscopic surface tension and microscopic potential interactions into the same
footing. The differential geometry theory of surfaces raises naturally for the
description of the interface between macroscopic and microscopic domains.
Potential driven geometric flows are constructed to minimize the total free
energy functional. A hybrid Eulerian-Lagrangian method is developed based on the
geometric measure theory to accelerate the surface construction involving
topological changes. In addition to promising preliminary results illustrating
the power of this approach, extensive validation and applications are proposed
to ensure that this methodology yields robust and powerful tools for virus
surface construction, visualization, evolution, and dynamics.