* 0936603
* NEESR-CR:  Tsunami Generation by Landslides: Integrating Laboratory Scale Experiments, Numerical Models and Natural Scale Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* James Beget, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 09/30/2013
* USD 804,923.00

This award is an outcome of the NSF 09-524 program solicitation "George E.
Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES) Research
(NEESR)" competition and includes the Georgia Institute of Technology (lead
institution), the University of Alaska, Fairbanks (subaward), and Texas A&M
University, Galveston (subaward). This project will utilize the NEES tsunami
wave basin at Oregon State University.

Tsunamis are commonly associated with submarine earthquakes, such as the 2004
Indian Ocean tsunami, which are limited in wave height by seafloor displacement.
In contrast, landslide and volcanic eruption generated tsunamis are typically
regionally confined but account for all known localized heights exceeding 100
meters. Some of the most catastrophic tsunamis are produced by volcanic
eruptions and landslides. The two deadliest non-tectonic tsunamis in the past
300 years were due to gravitational or eruptive volcanic island collapses at
Mount Unzen and Krakatoa. For some earthquakes, such as the 2006 South Java
tsunami with 600 fatalities, it has been proposed that the large tsunamis were
triggered by failure of the sea floor in the form of giant submarine landslides.

Intellectual Merit: This project's long-term goal is to transform assessment and
mitigation of the landslide tsunami hazard through hybrid modeling of landslide
tsunami evolution in real world scenarios, where the generation, propagation,
and runup stages overlap. Rare field measurements are mostly limited to
landslide scarp, deposit, tsunami runup, and eyewitness accounts, while
critically important data related to the landslide motion and tsunami evolution
is lacking. The goal of the research is to compensate for missing data by
combined physical and numerical modeling of fully three-dimensional landslide
tsunami scenarios. The proposed work builds upon the developed, NSF-supported
(NEESR-SG award CMMI-0421090), deformable landslide tsunami generator, which
enables full control of the dynamic landslide parameters. Towards this goal, the
following significant objectives will be achieved in this project: (1) analysis
of landslide tsunami generation and source runup scenarios - the characteristics
of historical landslides and tsunamis will be used to generate linked laboratory
and numerical models of landslide tsunamis; (2) experimental program at tsunami
wave basin - a joint numerical modeling and experimental program will be
designed based on well-constrained, real-world landslide generated tsunami and
near-source runup scenarios. Particular focus is on the source with backward
runup for conical island scenarios and the multiple runup in confined fjord-like
bays; and (3) validation of landslide generated tsunami models - the measured
landslide and tsunami characteristics will be compared to existing real world
observations providing a validation for physical, analytical and numerical
models used in this research. This research enhances knowledge, understanding
and modeling of landslide generated tsunamis towards mitigation of the
deadliest, non-tectonic tsunami hazard. Originality of the proposed work is
based on its interdisciplinary nature combining experimental and numerical
modeling with geology, volcanology, and geophysics.

Broader Impacts: Transitioning landslide tsunami modeling from experiments to
natural scale applications has broad implications not only to engineering but
also to saving lives. It will both transform assessment and mitigation of
tsunami and landslide hazards. The deployed landslide tsunami generator will
complement existing NEES tsunami facilities and provide payload opportunities.
Instrumentation funds provided from this award will upgrade the particle imagery
velocimetry (PIV) system at the NEES tsunami wave basin to full three-
dimensional capabilities for the entire community. The results of this research
will be incorporated into both undergraduate and graduate courses. The research
results will be disseminated to a broad scientific and engineering audience
through journal publications and via presentations at national and international
meetings. K-12 students will be reached by popular lectures emphasizing the
important role of engineering professions in mitigation of natural hazards. The
project team will coordinate education and outreach activities with the NEES
tsunami wave basin site. Collaboration with the West Coast/Alaska Tsunami
Warning Center (WC/ATWC) will enable implementation of research results into
tsunami warning practice and reach potential users. Data from this project will
be archived and made available to the public through the NEES data repository.