* 0936783
* EAGER: Mentoring, Networks, and Under-represented Minorities in the Science Pipeline
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2014
* Roberta Spalter-Roth, American Sociological Assoc
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 06/30/2014
* USD 140,800.00

According to recent reports, mentoring is integral to increasing the share of
under-represented minorities in the science pipeline. Both the federal
government and private foundations have put millions of dollars into training
and mentoring programs for under-represented minorities with little information
about whether these programs have paid off in terms of increasing retention and
productivity in the scientific workforce. Although mentoring has become a norm
of graduate training, its current conceptualization is limited. Mentoring is
usually thought of as a dyadic relationship between mentor and mentee rather
than a dynamic and complex networked system with patterns of linkages. The
American Sociological Association?s 35 year-old Minority Fellowship Program
(MFP) attempts to create such networks. The purpose of this exploratory study is
to compare outcomes in terms of career trajectories, scientific productivity,
transformative scholarships, and disciplinary service of members of MFP networks
with outcomes of other groups. This project is exploratory because the principal
investigators need to determine whether enough data on the MFP Fellows, as well
as the other comparison groups, can be obtained at an acceptable cost, and
whether these data can be used in a comparative study of mentoring,
collaboration, and productivity networks.

If successful, this exploratory study should have three outcomes. First, it can
provide a model for studying the structure and efficacy of mentoring networks in
other STEM disciplines. Second, its findings can be used to recommend changes
that can increase the effectiveness of scientific mentoring programs for under-
represented minorities. An additional contribution is to develop and apply new
approaches to measuring mentoring in order to improve our ability to describe
and analyze the ties and linkages among minority sociologists. When completed,
this comparative study can tell us the value added by MFP mentoring networks.