* 0936769
* GSE/RES: Gender Differences in the Foundations of Sense of Belonging:  Effects on Achievement, Aspirations, and Learning in STEM Disciplines
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2009,05/31/2015
* Catherine Good, CUNY Baruch College
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 05/31/2015
* USD 600,000.00

Intellectual Merit: This research focuses on two key social factors that are
important predictors of women's math performance: negative stereotypes about
women's math abilities and perspectives on the nature of math ability as being
either a fixed trait or a developable skill. The researchers are particularly
interested in how a sense of belonging (SOB)--feeling like an accepted member of
an academic community whose contributions are valued--can buffer women against
the negative impacts of negative stereotypes or fixed concepts of math ability.
The PIs will conduct a series of four studies designed to test hypotheses about
how SOB emerges from various sources: a) experiencing high achievement; b)
having friends in the domain; or c) exerting high effort. The PIs predict that
effort-based sense of belonging will mitigate gender differences in math
achievement, aspirations and learning, particularly those due to stereotype
threat and fixed-ability learning environments. Hypotheses will be tested by
experimentally manipulating both SOB and either stereotype threat or theories of
intelligence and data will be analyzed through ANOVAs on math achievement, math
aspirations, course-taking behaviors, and math learning. The study will involve
both college freshmen and middle school students as they transition to high
school. Research sites include Baruch College and middle schools in Montclair,
NJ.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The proposed research addresses two
key moments in students' educational lives--transitions to high school and
college. Educational experiences at these points lay the foundation for future
interest in STEM domains, and thus influence decisions about future career
paths. If findings support the notion that effort-based sense of belonging
decreases the effects of stereotype threat and messages of fixed ability for
females, then fostering effort-based sense of belonging may address pipeline
issues for women in STEM fields and redress the persistent gender gaps in these
domains. Specifically, educators who emphasize effort (rather than high
achievement) as a key determination in students' belongingness in STEM may help
eliminate the culture of "talent" and the mentality of the "weed-out system"
that pervades many STEM classrooms and that can undermine women's STEM outcomes.
Specifically, environments that foster a culture in which anyone who develops
their skills through effort and engagement is considered a member of the
community may encourage many more females to pursue STEM degrees. In addition,
the methods of increasing SOB are easily implemented in any classroom setting.
Although this study focuses specifically on sex differences in math outcomes,
the findings may apply to any STEM discipline and to members of any group who
face negative stereotypes and messages of limited ability, such as Black and
Latino Americans.