* 0936062
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Social Transformations and Regional Scales of Identity in the Cibola World: AD 1150-1325
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Keith Kintigh, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2010
* USD 10,000.00

Under the direction of Dr. Keith Kintigh, Matthew Peeples will conduct
archaeological analyses of pottery, architectural data, and site locations from
the Zuni/Cibola region of New Mexico and Arizona. The Zuni/Cibola region is
centered on the contemporary Zuni Pueblo and the Zuni Indian Reservation. This
region has long been a location of relatively large agricultural communities
beginning as early as 3,000 years ago. Peeples's work focuses on the period from
AD 1150-AD 1325. This period saw a major transformation in the organization of
communities as well as changes in the ways that people interacted across the
region. In a single generation, people in the Zuni/Cibola region went from
living in thousands of small, dispersed agricultural hamlets to living in about
twelve large nucleated towns housing several hundred individuals. These analyses
are directed at understanding how interaction and social identification among
individuals and groups may have changed during this transition. Analyses include
(1) chemical characterizations of pottery focused on determining where it was
made, (2) studies of the techniques used to produce pottery focused on
identifying people using similar methods, (3) studies of painted pottery and
public architecture focused on understanding how people expressed social
similarities or differences through material culture, and (4) studies of site
distributions focused on documenting settlement changes. Together, these
analyses will provide a dynamic characterization of social organization and
interaction at a regional scale during a period of wide-spread social change.
Peeples will test models based on contemporary social theories focused on social
movements to explore potential similarities among major social transformations
across a variety of cultural and historical contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will result in the use of well-developed body of theory new to
archaeology, as well as new insights into how to address regional-scale social
processes in the archaeological record. The large, well-documented regional
database of settlements, ceramic source data, and material culture analyses will
permit an examination of social change at scales that are seldom directly
considered by archaeologists or ethnographers. Archaeological studies such as
the one proposed here are uniquely suited to this objective because ethnological
studies cannot typically take place at such broad scales and are limited in
their temporal coverage. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will promote
participation of underrepresented groups in science by engaging members of the
Pueblo of Zuni in consultation. Peeples will organize public presentations for
the Zuni Tribal Council and other interested individuals at Zuni during various
stages of the project. In addition, Peeples will train three undergraduate
anthropology students from Arizona State University to assist in the project.
This training will provide job skills for these students and will foster future
collaborations. Lastly, this research addresses questions directly relevant for
assessments of cultural affiliation in the United States as mandated by the
Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act. Specifically, this
research will provide an alternative means for defining affiliation that does
not rely on traditional archaeological culture areas. This alternative has the
potential to help in reintegrating anthropological and Native American
perspectives into archaeological assessments of affiliation by specifically
addressing social and cultural variation rather than masking it.