* 0936204
* Workshop Proposal:  Scholarly Evaluation Metrics: Opportunities and Challenges
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Johan Bollen, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Griffin
* 08/31/2010
* USD 20,756.00

This workshop aims to bring together leading scientists and practitioners in the
domains of bibliometrics, informetrics, network and web science, digital
libraries, academic policies, and open repositories for a public discussion on
the quantitative evaluation of scholarly impact and value of publications. on
scientific research. Quantitative evaluation of scholarly impact and value has
historically been conducted on the basis of citation data. This approach is not
always appropriate or accurate in the fast-paced, open, and interdisciplinary
nature of scholarship which is, to a large degree, dependent upon digital data
and sources. The workshop is meant to provide guidance and research agendas for
further development of metrics for scientific impact and value. The workshop's
intellectual merit is found in defining the scientific criteria and objectives
that would lead to a more general community-acceptance of various impact
metrics. The impact of science as traditionally measured is at the point of
fundamental change as the digital research environment grows and attracts more
participants. Novel impact metrics, that gain community acceptance, may lead to
a more diverse and balanced scientific landscape in which the contributions of a
larger and more diverse community are more equally recognized and
valued.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;