* 0936199
* Understanding the Role of Ecology in Saving the Orangutan from Extinction
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Cheryl Knott, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 08/31/2013
* USD 378,429.00

Orangutans are at risk of becoming extinct in the wild, yet scientists are only
beginning to understand the variables that influence their reproduction.
Existing evidence suggests significant reproductive variation both within and
between populations. Genetic distinctions between orangutans inhabiting the
islands of Borneo (Pongo pygmaeus) and Sumatra (P. abelii) may explain much of
the diversity, yet ecological variation may also play a significant role. To
address this, researchers from four field sites on Borneo and Sumatra will
collaborate on an intensive study of ecology, energetics, life history, and
hormonal physiology in orangutans. One major objective is to understand how
variation in diet and resulting weight gain or weight loss influences
reproductive functioning. This will be evaluated through measurement of hormones
in urine and make possible the documentation of changes in reproductive status,
such as when an individual begins cycling after giving birth. These reproductive
changes will be linked to changes in food availability and energy status. Urine
samples will be used to validate innovative new techniques for the non-invasive
assessment of physical condition which can then be applied to other species. The
results of this project will have a potentially important impact on
understanding the evolution of life history traits (such as the age at first
reproduction and the length of the interval between births) in animals. Models
of life history variation predict slower, longer life histories, with longer
intervals between births, in species living in stable, low mortality
environments. A contrasting model, from the field of reproductive ecology,
indicates that higher reproductive rates, and faster life history variables, are
found within populations of great ape species (including humans) occupying
higher quality habitat. Thus, these two models make different predictions for
the comparison of Sumatran orangutans, who live in an environment of more food
availability, compared to Bornean orangutans, where food fluctuates more.
Investigating the relative importance of life history evolution versus shared
physiological responses between these two species will serve as a model for
comparative studies of other species. The study focuses on collaboration across
field sites to maximize data and to allow for replication of findings across
study areas utilizing identical methodologies while improving the infrastructure
and facilities at each site; this process will facilitate and provide
opportunities for the training of students in behavioral observation and
laboratory techniques. Orangutans share substantial genetic and physiological
similarities with humans, yet have inter-birth intervals two to three times as
long, thus the study of orangutan reproduction has important applications to
understanding the evolution of human life history and reproductive adaptation.
Finally, the study of reproduction in endangered species has important
conservation applications in quantifying the influence of habitat degradation on
reproductive rates. By providing knowledge essential for conservation
management, deterring illegal logging and through involvement in conservation
efforts in surrounding communities, this project will bring increased attention
to the last remaining populations of orangutans, and the synergy of scientific
and conservation goals may be one of the best strategies at hand for saving
these species and their habitats.

