* 0936613
* GSE/RES A Multi-Method Investigation of the Situational Cues and Contexts Inhibiting Women in STEM Settings
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/2010,02/28/2013
* Sabrina Zirkel, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 02/28/2013
* USD 629,959.00

INTELLECTUAL MERIT: This project draws on the contextual theory of social
identity threat to 1) examine how the features and structures of STEM settings
serve as cues to women about how they might be valued and treated in STEM
settings, and 2) investigate the mechanisms by which situational cues influence
women's interests, aspirations, persistence, and performance in STEM.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project involves 2 phases. Phase 1 consists
of a 3-year longitudinal and experience-sampling study of women and men in 3
theoretically informative college contexts: (a) a large, public university
(University of Illinois, Chicago), (b) a women?s college (Mills College), and
(c) a polytechnic university (California State Polytechnic University). With the
public university serving as an ecologically-valid comparison group, the
researchers will investigate several situational cues (e.g., numerical
representation, gender of professors, explicit institutional values of women
and/or STEM, etc.) to identify the ones that most impact women's STEM outcomes.
This work assesses critical time periods in students' college careers (years
1-3) when they appraise the cues in their new environments, decide upon a major,
take major-related courses, and select career options. The data are analyzed
using HLM techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phase 2 consists of six experimental
laboratory studies that investigate the causal mechanisms by which cues affect
women's STEM outcomes. In particular, they test whether the orientations that
academic institutions adopt towards STEM abilities and learning moderate the
extent to which situational cues affect women's STEM outcomes. Two sets of
institutional orientations, drawn from the literature, are investigated: (a)
fixed v. malleable lay-theories of STEM ability, and (b) competitive v.
cooperative orientations. Because STEM settings are complex and likely to
contain more than one situational cue, the experiments will investigate these
orientations within the context of other cues known to negatively affect women
in STEM (e.g., numerical under-representation, gender-segregation, and the
congruence between an individual's and an institution's orientation). It is
hypothesized that institutional orientations that facilitate effort and
persistence while guarding against performance concerns--namely malleable (v.
fixed) theories of STEM abilities and a cooperative (v. competitive) environment
--will ameliorate the negative effects of under-representation and gender
segregation on women's STEM outcomes. Data are analyzed using ANOVA and linear
regression techniques that allow for tests of causal mechanisms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: The project offers direct examinations of
how situational cues influence women's interests, aspirations, persistence, and
performance in STEM. This work has potential to illuminate aspects of STEM
settings that negatively influence women's STEM outcomes and provide specific,
concrete, and easily adaptable strategies that can be used in STEM classrooms
and to train STEM faculty and students. By providing strategies for both
institutions and individuals, this work is poised to provide insight into how
equitable and inviting STEM environments can be created. The findings will be
actively disseminated in psychology and education journals and at national
conferences. A website will also be developed to enable broader dissemination.
In addition, the findings will be actively shared with STEM educators at both
the high school and university levels. The project fosters the integration of
research and education as undergraduate and graduate research assistants are
involved at every stage. Women and members of underrepresented groups will be
recruited as undergraduate and graduate research assistants.