* 0936857
* Developing a Beta Site for a National Digital Library for Ethics in Science and Engineering
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2009,10/31/2011
* Jane Fountain, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Kelly Moore
* 10/31/2011
* USD 249,999.00

This project provides resources that will be of wide use in the science and
engineering community. The America Creating Opportunities to Meaningfully
Promote Excellence in Technology, Education, and Science (COMPETES) Act requires
that proposals to the National Science Foundation (NSF) have a plan to provide
appropriate training and oversight in the responsible and ethical conduct of
research to undergraduate students, graduate students, and postdoctoral
researchers participating in the proposed research project (Sec 7009). It
further requires that proposals describe in detail the mentoring activities that
will be provided for postdoctoral researchers (Sec 7008). While NSF has always
encouraged ethical conduct of research, the America COMPETES Act makes this
requirement explicit and creates an opportunity to better compile and
disseminate ethics research results and related education materials.
Accordingly, this project develops an initial online resource for building a
digital library on ethics in science and engineering that NSF intends to
support. The University of Massachusetts Amherst beta site will be
interdisciplinary, multi-media, and international. Current repositories,
clearinghouses, and websites that house ethics materials generally focus on one
disciplinary field. The University of Massachusetts beta site repository will be
used to examine effective ways to coordinate and present materials from across
disciplines, including the social sciences, and will act as a portal to direct
faculty, post-doctoral, and graduate researchers to a wide range of ethics
resources. The ability to freely, quickly and easily locate and review materials
for use in mentoring, education and training of future generations of scientists
and engineers is invaluable. A beta site that compiles selected materials with
the objective of making them freely and easily accessible -- while incorporating
Web 2.0 and social networking tools to enhance usability and effectiveness -- is
the starting point for a digital library for the 21st Century. The beta site
uses various media to engage a younger generation of scientists and engineers in
ethics issues and to help faculty incorporate ethics concepts into classrooms
and labs in an engaging way. Finally, a focus on the international dimensions of
ethics will contribute to broad reach given the continuing globalization of
scientific and technological research.