* 0936696
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Late Prehistoric Socio-Economic Organization in Northwest Alaska: a Study of Pottery Production and Distribution in the Arctic
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2011
* Ben Fitzhugh, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 08/31/2011
* USD 25,531.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research examines the history of
emergent complexity in Northwest Alaska over the past 2000 years through a
focused study of archaeological pottery from the coast of Kotzebue Sound and the
adjacent river corridors into the Alaskan interior. Northwest Alaska witnessed
significant social change over the past two millennia with the development of
organized whale hunting, aggregated coastal villages, wealthy burials, and
warfare. On both sides of the Bering Strait ethnic groups formed strong regional
identities during this period that led to marked differences in material culture
styles from sub-region to sub-region and eventually the expansion of Thule whale
hunters eastward across the Canadian arctic. The relationships, interaction, and
evolution of these ethnic populations remain among the most unresolved issues in
the archaeology of this region. This research attempts to shed light on these
issues and their implications for changing social and political organization in
Northwest Alaska through the study of the pottery used by these groups. Pottery
composition, manufacture techniques, and stylistic variability from
archaeological assemblages around Kotzebue Sound will allow the student P.I. to
evaluate several predictions about social development between the first and
second millennia A.D. These predictions include the expectation for increased
population density, territoriality, and social asymmetry at the corporate group
level (within and between settlements) with implications for the production and
distribution of pottery from clay source to production, use and discard.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Archived and newly acquired pottery collections from Cape
Krusenstern, the northern coast of the Seward Peninsula including Cape
Espenberg, the shores of Kotzebue Sound, and the Noatak and Kobuk River valleys
will be studied to determine chemical composition of clays used in constructing
the pots, the nature of pot manufacture (form, wall thickness, tempering, firing
regime, etc), and variability in stylistic characteristics (of both decorated
and non-decorated pottery). These characteristics will be studied to determine
the degree of inter-regional pottery movement and inter- and intra-settlement
differences in access to diverse sources, technologies, and/or styles of pots An
important component of this research includes the collection of clay samples
from geological sources around Kotzebue Sound and the Kobuk and Noatak Rivers
for comparison to archaeological pottery samples. This will allow an estimation
of the degree of pottery movement from source to deposition locales and a proxy
for social interaction and movement. Another component of this research will be
precision mapping and dating of archaeological features around this region in
order to develop estimates of changes in regional population densities and
distributions. Expanded radiocarbon and thermoluminescence chronologies will be
built to refine and supplement existing chronological models for the
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work is conducted in partnership and under
permit with the National Park Service. Project results will be shared with
Native Alaskans and other local groups in the Northwest Alaska community through
public and school presentations, primarily in Kotzebue, Alaska. In addition,
large laminated posters and a self-timed PowerPoint presentation describing this
research will be created and distributed to communities across the region. These
educational products are easily distributed to remote communities and schools
and are more effective and cost-efficient than trying to present in person in
every village community in the region. Project results will be disseminated more
widely through presentation at professional conferences, the creation of a
project website, and public and school presentations in the Seattle area.
University of Washington undergraduate students will participate in the project,
assisting in sample preparation while taking an independent lab course for
credit, supervised by the Co-PI.&lt;br/&gt;