* 0936885
* International Research Experience for Students in Microbiology
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Jon Roll, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* W. Y. B. Chang
* 08/31/2012
* USD 149,737.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The University of Wisconsin-Madison Department of Bacteriology and College of
Agricultural and Life Sciences will direct an NSF-funded International Research
Experience for Students in Microbiology program for five students, undergraduate
or graduate, during the summers of 2010-2012. Recruiting efforts will pay
particular attention to underrepresented minorities and women and those with
limited opportunities at their home institutions. Selected students will spend
ten weeks in a biological sciences laboratory in the Department of Microbiology
at Mahidol University in Bangkok, Thailand conducting their own full-time
research project in microbiology, microbial genetics and/or molecular biology.
They will study under the direction of Thai faculty mentors in active, top-
notch, internationally recognized research laboratories.

The program provides a unique summer study-abroad program without the need to
postpone graduation due to the rigid course scheduling requirements of most
biological sciences curricula. The goal is to encourage young scientists into
internationally active careers in science. This will aid in ensuring the United
States remains at the forefront of world science and technology by ensuring an
educated science and engineering workforce capable of operating in the
international research environment and a global market.

