* 0936892
* IUTAM-ISIMM Symposium Mathematical Modeling and Physical Instances of Granular Flows
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Joe Goddard, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
*  Ashok S. Sangani
* 08/31/2010
* USD 10,000.00

National Science Foundation - Division of Chemical, Bioengineering,
Environmental, and Transport Systems &lt;br/&gt;Particulate &amp; Multiphase
Processes Program
(1415)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
0936892&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Goddard, Joe&lt;br/&gt;Affiliation:
University of California-San Diego&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title:IUTAM-ISIMM
Symposium Mathematical Modeling and Physical Instances of Granular
Flows&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a proposal for an NSF travel grant
to Support U.S. participation in the joint Symposium of the International Union
of Theoretical Mechanics (IUTAM) and the International Society for the
Interaction of Mechanics and Mathematics (ISIMM), Mathematical Modeling and
Physical Instances of Granular Flows", Reggio Calabria, Italy, September 14-18,
2009. The symposium, whose web site is under construction at
http://mat520.unime.it/granular09/, is to be held in a centrally located hotel
in the city of Reggio Calabria. In keeping with IUTAM rules, refereed
proceedings are to be published, and the American Institute of Physics (AIP) has
been contracted to publish these as a two-volume AIP Conference Proceedings. At
least half the requested travel support will be awarded to younger researchers,
including advanced PhD students, postdoctoral researchers and beginning faculty
members.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Granular materials are ubiquitous in nature and
technology, ranging from alimentary products to sandy soils and planetary rings.
These many-body systems with nonlinear, dissipative interactions pose long-
standing and challenging theoretical problems in both discrete and continuum
modeling. Phenomena such as particulate mixing and de-mixing (size-segregation),
vibratory transport, strain localization and arching, granular compaction and
seismic liquefaction of soils require more detailed physical understanding and
mathematical models. One can identify three distinguished flow regimes for non-
cohesive, dry granular media:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1.) A quasi-static (Hertz-
Coulomb) elastoplastic regime, in which particle-scale inertia is negligible and
the mechanics is governed largely by enduring frictional-elastic
contacts,&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2.) A low-density (Bagnold) "granular-gas"
regime, dominated by particle inertia and short-duration collisional contacts,
and&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3.) An intermediate and poorly understood regime of
dense rapid flow, reminiscent of liquid-like behavior, in which enduring
frictional-elastic contacts are mediated by particle inertia and
gravity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The IUTAM-ISIMM symposium will bring together
mathematicians, physicists and engineers interested in the continuing
development and application of mathematical models of granular matter. One
objective is to promote the interchange of new ideas and methodologies and to
present recent research on rheological models, methods of homogenization for
connecting continuum to discrete models, numerical simulation and experimental
observations. While all the above flow regimes will be addressed, a major
emphasis will be placed on the most poorly understood, Regime 3, dense rapid
flows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mathematical models of granular media, which are
essential to civil, geotechnical and process engineering, have also been applied
to planetary rings, lunar regolith and accretion of cosmic dust. While the
formulation and solution of such models provides basic mathematical problems of
interest in their own right, the underlying physics is common to a wide range of
problems in the statistical mechanics of dissipative systems and the glassy
states of condensed matter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;