* 0936970
* Incentives and Barriers to U.S. Academics? Participation in International Collaborations
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Kathrin Zippel, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* John Tsapogas
* 07/31/2011
* USD 141,514.00

This project is being funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of
2009 (Public Law 111-5). The research proposes to generate knowledge that will
allow us to better understand the extent to which academia is attentive to
gender and minority issues, specifically on whether they have developed any
strategies to increase women and minorities in their international
collaborations. The research will summarize incentives and barriers for academic
women and minorities to engage in international research and will explore the
impact of organizational structures of academic institutions on the
participation women and minorities in international collaborations. The
principal investigators will also investigate the impact of international
collaborations on characteristics of academic employment, such as its ability to
attract, retain, and/or advance women and minorities in academic jobs.
Furthermore, they will investgate how academic culture and climate on
international collaborations in various countries compare with each
other.&lt;br/&gt;They will also ascertain if collaborating internationally is a
key component for the advancement of women and minorities in academia and
propose to identify practices that increase women and minority participation in
international collaborations. Finally, they will explore how race/ethnicity
shape participation in international academic collaborations.