* 0936214
* ATOL:  Assembling a taxonomically balanced genome-scale reconstruction of the evolutionary history of the Enterobacteriaceae
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2016
* Frederick Blattner, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 08/31/2016
* USD 2,998,822.00

The goal of this project is to determine the evolutionary relationships among
the Enterobacteria. Enterobacteria are a diverse family of bacteria that occupy
a wide variety of environments including both plant and animal hosts, and many
are biomedically or agriculturally relevant. Genome sequences of members of this
family are abundant, but are almost exclusively limited to a small number of
species associated with human diseases. This project will sequence the genomes
of 100 additional previously neglected species, and use these data to
reconstruct the phylogeny of the group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Evolutionary
analysis of bacteria and some other groups of organisms is complicated by their
ability to exchange genetic material between species, which causes inference of
conflicting relationships between different regions of the genomes. To tackle
this problem, a multidisciplinary team of biologists, statisticians and computer
scientists will develop new methods of analysis. These new approaches will allow
resolution of the relationships between nearly all regions of enterobacterial
genomes, and provide tools for other researchers studying different groups. In
addition, development of educational modules will allow incorporation of this
work into the training of undergraduate and graduate students at the University
of Wisconsin, and beyond. A public database will be created to encourage use of
these genome sequences by any interested party.