* 0936670
* US-Israel DDEP: Asymptotic Methods at Nano/Microfluidic Interfaces in Electrokinetically Driven Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2011
* Boyd Edwards, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 05/31/2011
* USD 5,075.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
OISE-0936670&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Boyd
Edwards&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Institution: West Virginia
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: US-Israel DDEP: Asymptotic Methods at
Nano/Microfluidic Interfaces in Electrokinetically Driven
Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Doctoral Dissertation Enhancement Project
(DDEP) project involves collaboration between two research groups working on
different technological applications of a common phenomenology. While at the
Jacob Blaustein Institute for Desert Research, which is part of the Ben Gurion
University, the student will undertake a focused study of a mathematical
analysis of electrokinetic problems related to a study of transport phenomena at
the interface between an ion exchange membrane and a two-species bulk
electrolyte. This work is to be done by the student with the host research group
acting in a mentorship capacity, introducing student to methods, and providing
an opportunity for discussions and feedback. The student has corresponded with
the lead professor in Israel, Isaak Rubinstein, and will be working with him and
his group for one month while abroad. The Rubinstein group has expertise in
theoretical approaches to electro-diffusion and electro-convection near ion
exchange membranes. In terms of the broader impacts, the opportunities presented
by this work are valuable to the improvement of the infrastructure for nanoscale
science and engineering research and education at the student?s home
institution. Beyond aiding in graduate student training, the activity will
provide basic knowledge essential to the development of an integrated
microfluidic sample concentrators. Such a device would be beneficial for
applications involving complex chemical and biochemical analyses like
proteomics, genomics or chemical analyses in remote environments. Environmental
applications such as water desalination and biomedical applications like
electrodialysis, which depend on electrokinetic transport through nanoporous
membranes, may benefit from this work as well.