* 0936996
* Photoelectrochemical Reduction of Carbon Dioxide Using Earth-Abundant Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Paul Bracher, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 08/31/2012
* USD 200,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Chemistry supports Paul
Bracher of the California Institute of Technology (Caltech) as an American
Competitiveness in Chemistry Fellow. Dr. Bracher will investigate the use of
naturally occurring semiconductor minerals (e.g. ZnS, MnS) as catalysts for the
photoelectrochemical reduction of carbon dioxide. Bracher will work in
collaboration with Prof. Harry B. Gray and other scientists in the "Powering the
Planet" Center for Chemical Innovation at Caltech. In addition, he will
collaborate with industrial scientists at Nano-Terra (of Cambridge, MA). In his
plan for broadening participation, Dr. Bracher will work with youngsters with
physical disabilities to encourage them to pursue their interests in science. In
addition, Dr. Bracher will maintain a website (and blog) to bring solar
chemistry topics to a broader audience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research like that
of Dr. Bracher is aimed at developing new kinds of chemistry that take advantage
of a plentiful resource -- carbon dioxide -- to make valuable chemicals. Another
aim of research like this is to investigate the mechanisms of photosynthesis on
the early earth. The efforts at broadening participation being pursued by Dr.
Bracher are aimed at increasing the participation of young people from
underrepresented groups in the sciences.