* 0936493
* NEESR Payload:  Fiber Optic Method for Buried Pipelines Health Assessment after Earthquake-Induced Ground Movement
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2012
* Branko Glisic, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 01/31/2012
* USD 99,968.00

This award (NEESR Payload) is an outcome of the NSF 09-524 program solicitation
''George E. Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES)
Research (NEESR)'' competition and includes the Princeton University (lead
institution of this NEESR Payload project) and University of Michigan at Ann
Arbor (lead institution of NEESR Award CMMI-0724022 that will accommodate this
NEESR Payload). This project will utilize the NEES equipment site at the Cornell
University. Close collaboration will be realized with other partners of the
NEESR Award CMMI-0724022, Merrimack College and Purdue
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Natural disasters, in particular earthquakes,
can cause damage to pipelines which transport life- and society-sustaining
supplies, such as water or hydrocarbons. Earthquake damage to pipelines can have
disastrous humanitarian, social, economic, and ecologic consequences.
Consequently, real-time, and automatic or on-demand assessment of damage to
pipelines after the earthquake is essential for early emergency response,
efficient preparation of rescue plans, and mitigation of the disastrous
consequences. Assessment is particularly challenging for buried pipelines.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A method for real-time, automatic or on-demand, assessment
of health condition of buried pipelines after the earthquake will be developed
in this Payload project. The focus will be on damage detection and localization
generated by earthquake induced ground displacement. The method will be based on
the use of distributed fiber-optic sensing technology and will be applicable to
both concrete and steel pipelines. A distributed fiber-optic sensor can be
represented by a single several-kilometer long cable that is sensitive at every
point along its length. Hence, one distributed sensor can replace thousands of
traditional point sensors, and is less difficult and more economical to install
and operate. Both, strain (deformation) and temperature will be monitored:
strain (deformation) because the earthquake induced ground displacement actually
strains (deforms) the pipe, while temperature sensing is proposed since the
damage of a pipeline is often correlated with leakage of transported material
that can be indirectly detected as a change of thermal parameters in the
surrounding soil. Besides the assessment of damage, the method can be used for
long-term structural health monitoring and operational monitoring, which will
serve as an important input for lifetime maintenance
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed method will help mitigate
disastrous consequences of the earthquake-induced damage to pipelines, but it
will also help lifetime maintenance activities of pipelines through structural
health monitoring and operational monitoring. This will have a direct broad
impact on society through an increase in safety for the human population and
goods, the containment of economical losses for industry and users, and the
preservation of the environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broadened participation
will be achieved through teamwork with other NEESR award partners, and in
particular with Merrimack College, MA, which is a non-PhD-granting institution.
The outcomes of the project will be included in Princeton University courses at
both the undergraduate level (structural analysis course) and graduate level
(structural health monitoring course). Results of the project will be
disseminated by the Principal Investigator at Princeton University and jointly
with partners of NEESR Award CMMI-0724022 to relevant industries, practitioners,
and the broader public in the form of newsletters, website pages, papers
published in scientific journals and professional magazines, documents, posters,
and presentations via web-seminars (webinars). The project necessitates research
in several disciplines and consequently, a multi-disciplinary collaboration will
be established and the project will be presented in multi-disciplinary workshops
and conferences at the national and international level.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data from this project will be archived and made available
to the public through the NEES data repository.&lt;br/&gt;