* 0936647
* GSE/RES. Supportive Communities: How Gender Impacts the Native American Experience in STEM Fields.
* EDU,EES
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2015
* Anneke Metz, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 01/31/2015
* USD 217,859.00

INTELLECTUAL MERIT&lt;br/&gt;This study will investigate how Native American men
and women differentially negotiate cultural expectations as well as social
support structures to persist in STEM (Science Technology, Engineering and Math)
disciplines. The researchers hypothesize that Native American cultural roles may
intersect with perceived gender roles to either enhance or undermine student?s
persistence in STEM disciplines. Further, the study is based on the hypothesis
that Native American men and women differentially interact with formal and
informal support structures in a university setting and may benefit from
different specific interventions in pursuing STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has two aims:&lt;br/&gt;Aim 1:
Investigate how the gendered experiences of Native American men and women
influence their persistence in STEM disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;Aim 2: Investigate
how specific formal and informal support structures differentially benefit
Native American men and Native American women in STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will follow 240 total Native
American men and women in STEM majors at 2 institutions, Montana State
University and Northern Arizona University, and perform in-depth interviews with
at least 60 of these students. Researchers will examine the differential impact
across gender of social support structures, informal academic support
structures, and formal academic support program and of the persistence of these
students in STEM, with the goal of identifying the specific structures that lead
to Native American student persistence in STEM. The study utilizes a mixed-
method, longitudinal approach of quantitative analysis using well-validated
instruments, and qualitative analysis of open-ended survey responses and in-
depth interviews.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS&lt;br/&gt;Native American
students are underrepresented in higher education, particularly in science and
engineering. Native Americans represent 1.6% of college-age students, but are
awarded less than 1% of college degrees, and only about 0.7% of science and
engineering bachelor degrees. Additionally, there is a gender disparity in the
makeup of Native American students in educational settings. Since 1994, the
increase in Native American students entering college appears to be due mostly
to the increased enrollment of Native American women. It is therefore critical
to study impact of gender on Native American student success; both in
relationship to mainstream cultural expectations associated with gender as well
as gendered expectations that may stem from traditional Native cultures. The
study will identify specific social and academic support structures important
for Native American men?s and women?s persistence in STEM, and expect to make
concrete, data-driven recommendations to academic institutions that lead to more
equitable learning environments for Native students in these
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the EPSCoR and the
Research on Gender in Science and Engineering programs.