* 0936489
* GSE/RES: Gender Differences in Early Science Experiences leading to 8th Grade Science Achievement-related Choices
* EDU,EES
* 03/01/2010,11/30/2013
* Jacquelynne Eccles, Goodman Research Group Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 11/30/2013
* USD 589,135.00

Intellectual Merit: This project explores how early science experiences in
formal and informal settings are related to 8th grade gender-based differences
in science achievement-related choices. The research is guided by the Eccles
Expectancy-Value (EV) Model of Achievement-Related Choices and is designed to
follow overlapping cohorts of children, girls and boys, as they progress from
third grade to eighth grade. The study starts with 1150 students from classrooms
across six randomly selected Massachusetts school districts, with the goal of
having complete data at the end of three years for 800 students (assuming 20%
annual attrition). The key data collection tool is a science experiences
questionnaire administered annually for three years to all students in the
sample, supplemented by: in-depth in-person interviews with a subset of
students, a parent questionnaire, a teacher questionnaire, a science specialist
questionnaire, and informal science community scans.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This research advances our knowledge
about attracting girls into science, in particular the role of early
experiences, interests, and aspirations. Considering the science career model as
a chain across the life-course, ultimate science career selection can be linked
back to earlier points in time, including graduate and undergrad science degree
attainment and high school and middle school science course choice and career
aspiration. Gender disparities have been documented at all of these points.
However, to date, little systematic research has examined how experiences
earlier than middle school affect successive links in the science life-course
chain, and how these relationships differ by gender. The knowledge gained from
this project should help teachers and informal educators consider activities
that narrow rather than widen gender gaps, take an informed approach to engaging
both girls and boys in science, and work with parents to understand their role
in their child?s achievement-related choices. The impacts will extend more
broadly to inform both school district practices and federal level funding
decisions regarding programs addressing gender equity in the
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;