* 0936780
* GSE/RES: The Influence of Educational Climate on College Women's Attrition from STEM Fields: A Three-year Longitudinal Study
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2013
* Kathi Miner, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 12/31/2013
* USD 506,838.00

Intellectual Merit: This project investigates how educational climates affect
college women?s withdrawal from STEM fields. Specifically, the research
examines: 1) the extent to which negative educational climates for college women
(e.g., those that are perceived as uncivil, sexist, racist; have few female and
faculty of color role models, and are male-dominated) lead them to depart from
STEM fields; 2) whether women's perceptions of STEM careers (e.g., the presence
of a glass ceiling, that non-STEM fields are more welcoming for women),
aspirations in STEM fields, declines in well-being (e.g., mental health,
physical health, and school satisfaction), and declines in performance (e.g.,
GPA) mediate the relationship between negative climates and withdrawal; and 3)
whether demographics (e.g., race, socioeconomic status, parents' education
level, and academic ability), support resources (e.g., family, peer, and
environmental support), and personal resources (e.g., self-efficacy,
nontraditional gender attitudes, and instrumental personality traits) moderate
these relationships. The study is following college women in STEM fields for
three years and asking them to complete online surveys. Data is being collected
from women at two different universities to assess whether the theorized
processes act similarly in disparate academic contexts. The primary focus is on
women's climate experiences, but a small sample of college men who are STEM
majors are also included to allow for cross-gender comparison. Tinto's
theoretical work on student persistence and departure serves as a foundation for
the project. Hierarchical linear modeling is used to test the
hypotheses.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed study addresses six critically
important but neglected gaps in the literature on the retention of women in STEM
fields. First, although some research has examined climate issues for college
women in STEM, few have examined how climate affects women in a range of STEM
fields in the same study to determine how they are similar or different. Even
less attention has been given to how both objective and subjective aspects of
educational environments simultaneously affect STEM women's departure decisions;
the proposed project assesses both of these climate dimensions. Second, the
proposed project includes participants from two very different universities--a
predominately white research university and a minority-serving undergraduate
university--which will allow a comparative evaluation of how climate affects
women in dissimilar educational environments. Third, over half of the
participants in the study are women of color; there is currently a paucity of
research examining factors that affect women of color's retention in STEM
fields. The sample also includes variability in social class and first-
generation college student status, allowing an investigation of how climate
affects STEM women from working-class backgrounds. Fourth, this project examines
STEM women's career perceptions, career aspirations, well-being, and academic
performance as key factors that may mediate the climate-withdrawal link. This
component of the proposed research increases our understanding of why women exit
STEM fields when they experience negative educational climates. Fifth, the
proposed research investigates factors that moderate, or buffer, women from the
negative effects of negative educational climates, thereby increasing the
likelihood that they will remain in STEM. Finally, the longitudinal design
allows for the identification of particular points in women's college trajectory
that are most sensitive to departure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
Findings from the proposed project have the potential to transform the
undergraduate educational experience for women in STEM fields and address the
critical social need of educating young women to compete in the global economy.
As such, educators, students, parents, researchers, policy makers, and the
general public benefit from the study's findings. Outreach focuses on: 1) the
construction of a website reporting all major findings and providing links to
published papers and presentations on study findings, 2) meetings with
university administrators, faculty, and student groups to report findings,
discuss intervention strategies, and provide recommendations, and 3)
dissemination to the academic research community via presentations at
professional meetings and peer-reviewed publications. Study results also inform
educational intervention design to promote women's retention in STEM and allow
employers and policy makers to develop effective strategies to retain female
workers in STEM fields. The project also provides research training
opportunities for female and racial minority undergraduate and graduate
students. Finally, findings contribute to societal debates regarding the extent
of sexism, racism, and general mistreatment targeted at women in university
environments, particularly those that are science-based and male-dominated.