* 0936599
* NEESR-CR:  Multi-Scale, Mechanistic Fracture Prediction and Optimal Panel Zone Participation in Steel Moment Frame Buildings
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Gary Fry, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2013
* USD 1,226,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is an outcome of the NSF
09-524 program solicitation "George E. Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake
Engineering Simulation (NEES) Research (NEESR)" competition and includes Texas
A&amp;M University in College Station, Texas (lead institution), The University
of Texas in Austin, Texas (subaward), Lafayette College in Easton, Pennsylvania
(subaward), and Texas A&amp;M University in Galveston, Texas (subaward). This
project will utilize the NEES equipment site at the University of
Minnesota.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Steel moment frames are widely used for seismic-
resistant building construction throughout the United States and in many other
parts of the world. Although steel moment frames were studied extensively
following the 1994 Northridge, California, earthquake, one critical technical
issue remains unsolved: the role of the panel zone in steel moment frame joints
(beam to column connections). Recent U.S. building codes have significantly
increased the required strength of panel zones in steel moment frames. To
satisfy these requirements, column sizes must be increased or doubler plates
must be welded to the column, resulting in increased cost, sometimes
substantially so. However, there is significant experimental evidence that
moment frame joints with weak panel zones show highly ductile performance, and
consistently achieve large interstory drift angles under cyclic loading without
strength degradation. There is also analytical evidence suggesting excellent
overall seismic performance can be achieved by moment frames with weak panel
zones. This strongly suggests that current building codes have adopted an
incorrect approach to panel zone design, needlessly increasing the cost of
construction while potentially degrading seismic performance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this research is to resolve the
question: how much panel zone participation should be permitted in evaluating
the inelastic seismic response of a steel moment frame? Despite a number of past
studies on this issue, there are sharply conflicting views of how panel zones
should be treated in design, both within the research community as well as
within the building regulatory community. At the crux of the disagreements are
concerns regarding fracture induced by panel zone yielding. There appears to be
broad agreement that panel zone yielding is a highly ductile process. However,
there is broad disagreement on the role that panel zone yielding plays in joint
fracture. To address these concerns will require the fundamental capability to
predict fracture at joints with weak panel zones subject to seismic loading.
Thus, the intellectual merit and a key objective of this research is to advance
the state of the art in predicting cyclic rupture within critical ductile
components of steel building structures, and to apply this knowledge to the
problem of the panel zone in steel moment frames. To meet these goals, this
research project will integrate (1) fundamental studies on cyclic rupture of
steel components combined with high resolution finite element simulations of
beam-column joints,(2) advanced frame simulation studies, (3) large-scale
experimental studies conducted at the NEES equipment at the University of
Minnesota, and (4) parametric computational studies on joint performance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With respect to broader impacts, the knowledge gained from
this research is expected to impact design practice and building codes for
seismic-resistant steel moment frames. The project team will conduct a
professional development program for high school science and mathematics
teachers to create and deliver web-based instructional materials to bring
concepts of earthquake engineering-related problems into the classroom. Data
from this project will be archived and made available to the public through the
NEES data repository.