* 0936722
* Collaborative research GSE/RES: A cultural-psychological analysis of gender discrimination (and privilege) in STEM fields
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/2009,10/31/2013
* Elliott Hammer, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 10/31/2013
* USD 325,996.00

Intellectual Merit: This project uses a cultural-psychological approach to
examine the processes that create and maintain the gender gap in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM). This study examines how the
male-gendered construction of STEM creates environments that put women at risk
for social identity threat, which harms their performance, motivation, and
identification with STEM fields. For men, the masculinization of STEM leads to
social identity privilege, which can improve their outcomes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research tests three hypotheses. The amplification
hypothesis proposes that the impact of social identity threat will be greater in
more masculinized STEM fields relative to less masculinized STEM fields. This is
tested through a manipulation of social identity threat by exposing participants
to an allegedly sexist instructor (Study 1), a sexist joke (Study 2), or body
objectifying photos (Study 3). The cultural grounding hypothesis proposes that
the masculinization of STEM and the resultant gender gap varies across cultural
contexts. This hypothesis is tested by examining the magnitude of the
amplification effects across universities (Studies 1 - 3). The consciousness-
raising hypothesis proposes that increased consciousness of sexism as a source
of the STEM gender gap protects women's outcomes in STEM fields. Studies 1 - 3
test this hypothesis by examining whether individual differences in critical
consciousness are a source of resilience for women exposed to social identity
threatening cues in a STEM domain. Study 4 tests this hypothesis by examining
whether a consciousness-raising intervention has long term impacts on academic
outcomes among women majoring in STEM. STEM majors at the University of Kansas,
Tulane University, and Xavier University are participating in this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This research promotes teaching,
training, and learning at the PIs' institutions through the creation of research
teams of undergraduate and graduate research assistants. Students will have the
opportunity to assist in data collection, data analysis, and will be given
opportunities to serve as co-authors on conference presentations and
publications when appropriate. The project broadens the participation of
underrepresented groups in science by including Xavier students as both research
participants and as members of the research team. Providing opportunities for
Xavier students to work as research assistants contributes to the development of
ethnic minority scientists. The results of this research will be communicated to
STEM majors at the participating institutions, STEM educators, and the
scientific community. The research has the potential to benefit society more
broadly by identifying factors that make women vulnerable and resilient in STEM
contexts. The approach will integrate research and education by using the
results of the research to develop an educational intervention to increase
women?s performance and participation in STEM fields. The research findings and
integrative approach ultimately contribute to more effective scientific
institutions.