* 0936948
* New Geometric Methods of Mixture Models for Interactive Visualization
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Bruce Lindsay, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 08/31/2014
* USD 497,973.00

This research project will extend the theoretical foundations of mixture
modeling for statistical learning by novel mathematical tools that can probe
into the precise geometry of mixture models. Based on the theoretical results,
the investigators will develop new approaches to clustering, dimension
reduction, variable selection, and temporal analysis. These methods will open
promising paths for interactively visualizing complex data and for data
summarization. A suite of statistical tools will be integrated as the technical
backbone into a new visualization system. Applications to very large-scale, high
dimensional, and temporally evolving data will be explored. The principal
investigators, with complementary backgrounds in theoretical statistics,
computational statistics, and information visualization, will also work with
colleagues across multiple departments at Penn State University to test their
methods and prototype systems using real-world data sets.

In a plethora of scientific and engineering areas with direct and tremendous
impacts on our everyday life, such as extreme weather prediction and
manufacturing engineering design, researchers are facing gigantic amount of data
with great complexity in terms of dimensionality, data types, statistical
dependence, and temporal variations. Visualization has played important roles in
support of analyzing complex data. Visualization systems help users increase
available spatial and cognitive resources, improve searching, enhance pattern
recognition, and ultimately make sense of abstract phenomena. This research
project aims at fundamentally advancing the mathematical core of visualization
systems. The investigators take a probabilistic framework to model data,
specifically the mixture model. Mixture modeling provides a highly flexible and
theoretically solid basis for summarizing data and automatically extracting
patterns from data. This project will develop theories and algorithms for
mixture modeling and exploit them to construct new statistical learning and data
mining techniques. These statistical methods will thoroughly change the ways
visualization systems are designed, offering more functions as well as better
functions. Software packages for advanced methods of statistical learning and
interactive visualization will be developed and distributed for public use. The
proposed research on data visualization and modeling techniques are expected to
affect a wide range of fields in science, engineering, and commerce. The
applications to hurricane forecast and engineering design can deeply influence
our daily life.