* 0936829
* Symposium:   Functional morphology of cartilaginous fishes (July 22-27, Portland, OR)
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Mason Dean, University of Tampa
* Standard Grant
* Mark R. Brodl
* 06/30/2010
* USD 10,000.00

For a relatively small group, the cartilaginous fishes (sharks, rays, &amp;
their relatives) possess a remarkable morphological and functional diversity.
They are the top-level predators in most marine trophic systems, are the oldest
living example of mineralized skeletal tissues in vertebrates, and are the most
ancestral living jawed vertebrates. Thus, understanding the roots and mechanisms
of their morphological, functional, and ecological diversification will provide
a critical link in the reconstruction of vertebrate evolutionary history. This
symposium, which will be held at the annual Joint Meeting of Ichthyologists and
Herpetologists (July 22-27, 2009), will promote an integration of ideas and
techniques across multiple disciplines and levels of biological organization,
all within the context of the functional morphology of cartilaginous fishes. The
symposium participants constitute a diverse group of speakers in terms of
gender, geographic origin, as well as career stages, and include members of
underrepresented groups in science and engineering. A novel aspect of this
symposium is that pairs of participants will develop "state of the field"
presentations, and it is anticipated that the integration of numerous functional
systems in one symposium will foster an understanding of the parameters unique
or common to each system. As the nature of the symposium is synergistic, the
event will undoubtedly promote future collaborations as well. Additionally, the
symposium will facilitate a transfer of technology and techniques among the
speakers and audience through a half-day workshop featuring industry-leading
producers of technology used in functional morphology research.