* 0936421
* NEESR-CR:  Properties of Cohesionless Soil Subsequent to Liquefaction and Resedimentation
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2014
* Ronaldo Borja, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 09/30/2014
* USD 813,013.00

This award is an outcome of the NSF 09-524 program solicitation "George E.
Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES) Research
(NEESR)" competition and includes Stanford University (lead institution),
Arizona State University (subaward), and Bucknell University (subaward). This
project will utilize the NEES equipment sites at the University of California at
Davis, and at the University at Buffalo. The project will experimentally and
numerically investigate the properties of resedimented soil following
liquefaction, including void ratio distribution and shear strength. To
investigate the properties of cohesionless soil subsequent to liquefaction, a
series of coordinated physical model tests, numerical analyses, imaging
analyses, and laboratory shear strength tests will be conducted. Physical model
testing will include laboratory column testing, small- and large-scale shake
table testing, and centrifuge testing. Numerical analyses will include
simulations of the impact of non-homogeneities (as revealed by the physical
model testing) on shear banding and the undrained shear strength of cohesionless
soil, and novel computational fluid dynamics- (CFD-) based analyses of
resedimentation of cohesionless soils. Laboratory testing will include shear
strength testing on specimens recovered from the physical models, using special
techniques to preserve their structure. Imaging will include bright field
microscopy (BFM) and computer-aided tomography (CT) scanning of recovered
specimens to evaluate their structure prior to and after
liquefaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Uniform and non-uniform sands will be
liquefied and allowed to reconsolidate at different stress levels. Solidified
soils will be removed and freeze-dried for cutting into smaller samples. The
heterogeneity of the smaller samples will be quantified through CT, BFM, and
digital image processing (DIP). The numerical modeling program will utilize
sedimentation theories and CFD implemented in Eulerian framework. The
mathematical model will consist of three layers: clarified water, fully
liquefied soil, and solidified soils. Shock fronts will be tracked using the
volume of fluid (VOF) method. Two numerical modeling schemes will be pursued,
the first aimed at predicting the heterogeneity of liquefied soils, and the
second aimed at studying the effect of heterogeneity on the post-liquefaction
strength.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This year's NEES solicitation seeks "ground-
breaking and transformative basic research" requiring the use of NEES equipment
sites. Much progress has been made in studying and modeling the phase transition
process when a soil with a well-defined solid skeleton liquefies and eventually
behaves like fluid. The reverse phase transition, in which a liquefied soil
solidifies and forms a new solid skeleton, has not received the same level of
attention, yet this process could dramatically alter the post-liquefaction
properties of such soil, including its shear strength. The proposed work,
requiring the use of two NEES testing facilities and focusing on a problem
rarely addressed in the literature, satisfies the definition of a
?transformative basic research.? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will advance
discovery and understanding of the sedimentation, liquefaction, and
consolidation processes while promoting teaching, training and learning in the
graduate and undergraduate levels, as well as in high school and K-12 levels. A
teaching module on the subject of liquefaction will be integrated into the
University Consortium on Instructional Shake Tables (UCIST), a partner of NEES,
and will ensure an active undergraduate participation. Visualization tools
demonstrating solid-fluid interaction will enhance education and research. Every
effort will be made to get underrepresented students and women involved in this
project. Data from this project will be archived and made available to the
public through the NEES data repository.