* 0936044
* Biochemical Engineering XVI: Past, Present, and Future.  Held in Burlington, VT from July 5-9, 2009
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2010
* Anne Robinson, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Theresa Good
* 05/31/2010
* USD 15,000.00

0936044&lt;br/&gt;Robinson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For this premier international conference, which is
the sixteenth edition in the series, the Principal Investigators will bring
together established researchers, young investigators, private sector scientists
and engineers, and graduate students to assess the present and chart the future
of the ever-changing field of biochemical engineering. The last Biochemical
Engineering conference (XV: Quebec City, Canada, July 15-19, 2007) was attended
by 252 participants from 24 countries, with 58% academia, 34% industrial, and 8%
other (institutes, etc). With plenary presentations, oral sessions, and poster
sessions, BioChE XVI will explore a number of emerging and established subjects
with a small conference atmosphere that enables high-level discussion and
participation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biochemical Engineering XVI will provide
comprehensive coverage of present challenges and future directions in
biochemical engineering. The choice of topics across the biotechnology field -
molecular design and display, the cell-materials interface, biofuels and
bioenergy, vaccines, nanotechnology, metabolic engineering, continuous
bioprocessing, and quantitative analysis and engineering of biochemical
networks, and stem cell bioengineering in combination with core areas of
biochemical engineering (downstream processing, protein stability and
engineering, process development, and cell culture) will have a profound impact
on the direction of biotechnology over the next ten
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs have also made a significant effort to
invite and recruit speakers and session chairs from groups underrepresented in
science and engineering. Eleven of the fifteen oral sessions include at least
one female speaker from academia or industry. NSF funds provided for the meeting
will support female and underrepresented minority speakers and students from US
academic institutions.