* 0936986
* Workshop:  Proposal for a Systems and Control Workshop, to be held in Santa Barbara, CA on May 28-29, 2009.
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2010
* Mustafa Khammash, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2010
* USD 10,000.00

The overall objective of the workshop is to explore new methodologies and
techniques for increasing the penetration of systems theory into other fields
and for teaching systems theory and control. The workshop will be open to all
topics pertaining to the broad area of systems and control theory, but with
especial emphasis on topics that are likely to have significant impact in
applications to engineering and the basic sciences.

Intellectual merit

The workshop will consist of four short tutorials, about a dozen technical
talks, and two panel sections. The tutorials and technical talks will be
delivered by a selected group of researchers in academia and industry,
internationally known for their interdisciplinary work and collaborations with
researchers outside the systems and control area. A web site for the workshop
will be created to host all the talks along with related reference materials. A
report will also be written to summarize the discussion and key conclusions of
the panels. All these materials will be made publicly available.

Broader impacts

A key objective of this proposal is to seek the funds needed to ensure wide
participation in this event. We will actively seek participation by
undergraduate and graduate students in the areas of systems and control theory
as well as other areas of engineering and the basic sciences, where a systems
perspective can have significant impact. To make the workshop especially
appealing for students, we will cover the expenses to a selected group of
students and postdoctoral researchers. By exposing these students to a vibrant
research community, we expect to attract them to research careers in Science,
Technology, Engineering and Math (STEM). The student selection plan will give
priority and thus extend opportunities to students from underrepresented groups
in the STEM disciplines.