* 0936110
* IRES: International Research Experience for Students in Micro Medical Manufacturing (IRES-MMM) with the University of North Carolina and Laser Zentrum Hannover
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/2009,09/30/2013
* Roger Narayan, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 09/30/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recover and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The medical industry increasingly
relies on knowledge of novel materials and fabrication processes in order to
develop replacements for biological tissues as well as advanced medical devices.
Rapid prototyping technologies have attracted significant interest for use in
fabricating biomedical and dental devices out of biocompatible materials. This
proposal supports the development of a research and education program between
the University of North Carolina/North Carolina State University Joint
Department of Biomedical Engineering and the research group led by Professor
Boris Chichkov at the Department of Nanotechnology at Laser Zentrum Hannover,
which will fully and systematically assess the structural and functional
properties of medical devices created using a rapid prototyping process known as
two photon polymerization. Twenty-one students from the University of North
Carolina/North Carolin State joint program and Florida International University
will participate in the proposed International Research Experience for Students
program. Groups of seven students, including four undergraduate students and
three graduate students, will fabricate inorganic-organic hybrid materials,
mosquito-like microneedles for transdermal drug delivery, and patient-specific
breast prostheses using the two photon polymerization system at Laser Zentrum
Hannover over seven-week periods in Summer 2010, Summer 2011, and Summer 2012.
In addition, the principal investigator will develop a new capstone course that
will prepare the students for their research at Laser Zentrum Hannover, and
students will be able to participate in industrial internships when they return
to the United States.&lt;br/&gt;