* 0937768
* X-band Phased-Array Spaced-Antenna Interferometry for Cross-Beam Wind Estimation by Mobile Doppler Radar
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2010,06/30/2013
* Stephen Frasier, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley F. Smull
* 06/30/2013
* USD 641,423.00

Standard processing of weather echo signals by Doppler radars routinely
retrieves information on the "radial" wind component, i.e. that portion of the
wind velocity directed toward or away from the radar antenna. While this
information has proven quite valuable, especially in tracking severe weather, a
full description of the horizontal wind in all directions (independent of radar
viewing angle) has generally been restricted to situations where two Doppler
radars are purposefully coordinated and sampling the same storm volume. New
advances in radar antenna design based on "spaced antenna" (SA) techniques may
allow measurement of the full two-dimensional horizontal wind field by a single
Doppler radar. This work leverages previous research on phased array radar
technology developed under the NSF-sponsored Engineering Research Center for
Collaborative Adaptive Sensing of the Atmosphere
(CASA).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this effort rests in
application of the spaced-antenna technique to a newly fabricated linear phased-
array radar transmitter panel. Specific objectives of this work are to (1)
analyze and develop techniques to configure X-band radar wavelength solid-state
phased-arrays to obtain cross-beam wind estimates via SA techniques, and
analysis of associated uncertainties, (2) implement an X-band phased-array
spaced-antenna design, (3) perform validation studies to evaluate SA wind
measurements by comparison with simultaneous dual-Doppler and/or Doppler beam-
swinging techniques, and (4) collaboration with the University of Oklahoma
School of Meteorology and other NSF-supported investigators working on the
VORTEX2 project in analysis of observations from existing X-Pol and W-band
mobile radar observations of severe thunderstorms from both 2009 and
2010.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this effort include the education
and training of engineering graduate students who will be involved in the design
and testing of SA technology, and who will collaborate with established
scientists in other fields of research. Undergraduate students will also be
involved through CASA's Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) program,
and demonstrations of mobile radar technology will be used as a K-12 outreach
tool. Successful application of this technique could represent a significant
enhancement of future radar network capabilities, thus serving to improve severe
weather monitoring and other meteorological applications.