* 0937145
* 2009 Northeast Control Workshop.  To Be Held at Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, April 24-26, 2009.
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/15/2009,10/31/2010
* Bruno Sinopoli, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 10/31/2010
* USD 34,913.00

This proposal requests funds to support the fourth Northeast
StudentWorkshop&lt;br/&gt;on Systems and Control, to be held at Carnegie Mellon
University, Pittsburgh, PA, from Friday, April 24, through Sunday April 26,
2009. The goal of the workshop is to offer educational opportunities to graduate
students, postdoctoral scholars, and junior researchers to learn about the
latest developments in control systems research, particularly in emerging
application areas; to present their research results; and to share and discuss
ideas with their peers, as well as with faculty members from other universities.
The proximity of the universities in the Northeast provides an excellent
opportunity to realize this goal with minimal travel cost. In contrast
to&lt;br/&gt;previous editions, this year the Northeast Student Workshop on
Systems and Control will include panels on careers in industry and on funding
opportunities. The former will give students and postdoctoral scholars the
opportunity to interact with industry representatives and learn about research
careers in industry. The panel on funding opportunities will give postdoctoral
scholars and junior researchers a unique perspective on the funding
opportunities at various funding agencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of the proposed activity is that it will provide a stimulus for sustained
research in control systems theory, as well as increased number of applications
in other fields of science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact resulting from the proposed workshop will be the encouragement of a
broader and more diverse group of students (than those who are already able to
attend major conferences in the field) to pursue research careers. A directed
effort has been made to attract faculty and students from Historically Black
Colleges and Universities to attend this workshop.&lt;br/&gt;