* 0937300
* Collaborative Research:    Evolution in a Vortex:   An Inventory of the Fishes and Mollusks of the Lower Congo River Rapids
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2010
* Daniel Graf, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Scott D. Snyder
* 03/31/2010
* USD 48,014.00

A grant has been award to Dr. Daniel Graf of the Academy of Natural Sciences in
collaboration with Melanie Stiassny of the American Museum of Natural History to
survey the diversity of freshwater mollusks (clams and snails) in the Lower
Congo River of Western Africa. These organisms are of interest to biologists not
only because they have interesting evolutionary histories but also as
intermediate hosts of disease-causing parasites. The lowest reach of the Congo
is punctuated by numerous powerful rapids, and it is expected that these
cataracts constitute barriers to aquatic dispersal and therefore contribute to
the endemic diversity of the area. Through sampling expeditions to the Lower
Congo, the specimens collected for this research can be used to test hypotheses
of evolutionary relationships and biogeographic processes, both at the
population level and among species on a continent-wide scale. The result will be
a clearer understanding of the origin and maintenance of biological diversity in
western Africa.&lt;br/&gt; The data and conclusions generated by this research
will not only be made available through traditional media but will also take
advantage of modern means of dissemination, especially the internet
(http://www.mussel-project.net/). An important component of the internet
presence for this project will be the use of powerful database technology to
provide searching and browsing interfaces into the data and conclusions, with
multiple points of entry. The target audience for this research is not only
scientists and conservation officials; these results will also serve teachers,
students and all members of the public interested in better understanding their
world. Besides providing a novel scientific perspective on an interesting,
important but poorly known fauna, this study will also serve to train up-and-
coming biologists including Congolese faculty and students through hands-on
research experience.&lt;br/&gt;