* 0937777
* Urbanization and Global Environmental Change (UGEC) International Project Office
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2014
* Anthony Rock, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 09/30/2014
* USD 585,000.00

Urban studies have a long tradition in the social sciences, engineering
sciences, and planning. Contributions from the natural sciences and health
sciences recently have expanded knowledge about urban issues. Absent thus far
has been a framework that integrates these disciplinary contributions. An
interdisciplinary approach and an effective network that links researchers from
across the globe are essential to understanding the complex interactions among
global environmental change and urban processes. A stronger collaboration among
academics and policy makers also is needed to craft policies that can mitigate
the consequences of those interactions. To meet this need, the Urbanization and
Global Environmental Change (UGEC) project was launched in 2005 by International
Human Dimensions Programme (IHDP) on Global Environmental Change. The following
year, the International Project Office (IPO) was established at Arizona State
University to coordinate and facilitate the work of the project. For the last
three years, the UGEC project IPO has been building an expanded international
network of scholars and practitioners that work at the interface of urban areas
and global environmental change. The UGEC project is envisioned as a ten-year
effort designed to enhance knowledge and understanding about the interactions
and feedbacks between global environmental change and urbanization at local,
regional, and global scales. Toward this end, UGEC assists in developing
conceptual frameworks and methods that support the study and analysis of these
interactions; it guides the study of the interactions between global
environmental change and urban systems with the ultimate goal of contributing to
the improvement of decision-making processes directing urban growth; and it
identifies the points and strength of interaction, the thresholds for change,
and the direction of causality in a coupled human-environment urban system. The
IPO seeks to play a catalytic role in the project by facilitating connections
between research and public policy by organizing international workshops and
conferences and by using communication tools such as a listserv, newsletter, and
website. It also will assist in increasing the connections between U.S.-based
networks of UGEC scholars and practitioners with their international
counterparts. By engaging urban practitioners, decision makers, and
stakeholders, the IPO intends to generate an active, collaborative dialogue
among members of the UGEC network on both national and international
scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The UGEC project will contribute to the process of
creating new interdisciplinary knowledge by encouraging innovative conceptual
and methodological approaches that link social sciences with natural science,
engineering, planning, and finance. The IPO will communicate these integrative
research results to decision makers, practitioners, and other end-users at
local, national, and international levels, thus linking cutting-edge academic
research to public policy. By bringing together an ever-larger and more diverse
group of scholars on global environmental change issues, the IPO will help
develop theories, strategies, and methods that foster interdisciplinary research
and encourage young scientists to reach across the social-natural science
divide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;