* 0937848
* EFRI-BSBA Integration of Dynamic Sensing and Actuating of Neural Microcircuits
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Arto Nurmikko, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2014
* USD 2,006,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Integration of Dynamic Sensing and Actuating of
Neural Microcircuits&lt;br/&gt;PI: Arto V. Nurmikko &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed EFRI program aims to develop transformative paradigms in our
understanding of the complex nonlinear dynamics of brain microcircuits and their
function, by developing and fusing a new generation biosensing (recording) and
actuation (neurostimulation) techniques to a potent toolbox. The proposed
research engages brain circuits with external photonic and microelectronic
interfaces in animal models, in particular for the study of the so-called
"working memory" - the brain's "random access memory". At the neuroengineering
level, the proposed research integrates new set of neural sensing and actuation
tools on the microscale that are applied to engage with specific sensing and
planning action by the brain - in particular the dynamics of information
processing in the prefrontal cortex. A key experimental driver is the
development of a new micro-optical/photonic device technology that will enable
precise spatio-temporal targeting through sensory pathways of cortical
microcircuitry and the imaging of this circuitry in real time in specific animal
models. The unique device technology elements in the sensor/actuator engineering
integrate ultracompact multi-element arrays of light emitters and
microelectronic chip-scale sensors for excitation and mapping of the brain
microcircuitry in real-time, which has been rendered both stimulus responsive
and recordable by cellular-level genetic and nanomaterial sensitizing. The goal
of the development of sensing/actuation microtools with associated brain science
paradigms is to pave way for microdevice interfaces for bidirectional access
across a population of neurons in the brain. Bidirectionality requires that both
neural recording and neural stimulation can be achieved simultaneously at
cellular level for multiple neurons, and ultimately multiple brain sites,
spatially and temporally. Development of a class of specific brain-interfaces
probes which synergize approaches from contemporary photonics/optoelectronics
for "reading" and "writing" neural information from/to brain's microcircuits is
the contributing aim of this planned EFRI proposal. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a
broader context, the research aims to facilitate the implementation of a closed-
loop feedback compact device technology that offers the promise of entirely new
classes of neural interfaces for (i) advancing the understanding of the brain
from sensing to actuation- with cellular level resolution of microcircuit
dynamics, (ii) aim the application of the technology to potentially therapeutic
and prosthetic applications. For example, the study of the working memory
function in the brain is closely associated with neurological diseases such as
schizophrenia, attention deficit disorder and has been linked to epilepsy. The
team aims to leverage the research outcomes from this program in mammalian
animal models (in vitro and in vivo) so that key brain science paradigms such as
the fundamentally important "working memory" will find translation to human
neuroscience and rehabilitative goals. By including within the team a clinical
neurology interface, our proposed research is envisioned to contribute to our
unraveling of neurological disease, pave way for elucidating and exploring the
applicability the nature of the brain-like systems to other technologies, as
well as improve U.S. competitiveness in the global economy through advanced
technology development in a frontier area at the intersection of physical and
life sciences. The research on these topics is also expected to create a
generation of "neuroengineering" graduate students with true interdisciplinary
education, as well as innovative businesses and entrepreneurs.