* 0937836
* ComPADRE Pathway II:   Sustaining Physics and Astronomy Resources for Education
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Theodore Hodapp, American Association of Physics Teachers
* Continuing Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 08/31/2013
* USD 493,001.00

The ComPADRE digital library is an NSDL Pathway to support Physics and Astronomy
Education. ComPADRE supports a network of resource collections targeted at
specific audiences and provides specialized tools and services for
communications, sharing, and content development. The ComPADRE support for
different resource collections, each focused on a particular physics or
astronomy community of educators and learners, puts resources in the context of
their use for learning. ComPADRE Editors and collaborators created 14 resource
collections for communities including high school teachers, undergraduate
science majors, and university faculty teaching advanced courses. The Physics
and Astronomy education community has recognized ComPADRE as an important
partner in the support of educators and learners and in the dissemination of
best practices in science education. ComPADRE collaborates with curriculum
development projects and education researchers to distribute proven learning
resources. ComPADRE continues to strengthen existing collaborations and
establish new collaboration using web enabled interest groups and by featuring
curriculum sequences to highlight the best uses of the materials available.
ComPADRE also is reaching new users through expanded workshops and tutorials,
both live and online, in collaboration with professional societies and other
partners. ComPADRE is using the technical and outreach capabilities of the NSDL
to extend its web services and connect resources to education standards. The
ComPADRE technical staff and editors are in the process of streamlining the
project infrastructure and operations to become more
sustainable.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The ComPADRE team selects teaching
and learning resources of the highest quality with particular consideration
given to proven effectiveness. Collaborations with physics education
researchers, curriculum developers, and the professional societies place
ComPADRE in the midst of the latest in research and development to improve
learning and teaching best practices. For these materials, researchers have
shown positive learning impact but need more information about usage outside of
the research setting. ComPADRE provides a platform for both disseminating these
resources and gathering information on how they are being used by teachers and
students. Surveys, requests for comment, and virtual focus groups are being used
to study content usage, as well as improve the design and dissemination efforts
of ComPADRE.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Many of ComPADRE's projects and
collaborations directly support&lt;br/&gt;broader communities and meet national
STEM needs. ComPADRE provides technical support for virtual mentoring of high
school students by physicists, increasing their exposure to real science.
ComPADRE hosts a coalition for improving the training of physical science
teachers, a great need in this country. ComPADRE provides resources to help
undergraduate physics and astronomy majors become integrated into the physics
community, an outcome that can strengthen the nation's science workforce.
ComPADRE resource collections and outreach efforts are aimed at supporting new
physics teachers to help keep them in the classroom.