* 0937771
* EAGER:  A Thermally-Assisted Magnetic Flow-Based Process for the Manufacture of Bulk Metallic Glass Surgical Cutting Edges
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Richard DeVor, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Charalabos C. Doumanidis
* 06/30/2010
* USD 125,065.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

The proposed research is directed at developing a manufacturing process for
making ultra-sharp bulk metallic glass surgical knife blades as a high-
performance low-cost alternative to single-crystal diamond blades. The work will
involve developing a novel thermally-assisted magnetic field-based micro-drawing
process for sharpening cutting edges to a radius of 20 ? 50 nm. This process
involves heating a cutting edge with a laser in order to temporary render it
more ductile and simultaneously applying a high-intensity magnetic field to pull
the heated material. Localized drawing is expected to produce an extremely sharp
and durable bulk metallic glass cutting edge.

Successful development of the novel sharpening process has the potential to have
an extremely broad-based impact. For example, it could enable manufacture of
nano-probes for applications including DNA manipulation and manufacture of
arrays of sharp features for dip pen lithography. Understanding of the process
may also enable derivative processes such as micro joining via localized heating
and deformation of micro-parts in a magnetic field. Additionally, under the
proposed project, students will receive training on a broad range of topics in
the rapidly emerging field of micro-scale manufacturing. Education of the
general public will be addressed by participating in outreach activities such as
the University of Illinois Engineering Open House program.