* 0937626
* Isotope Effects in Methoxy Radical Chemistry
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2013
* John Orlando, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 12/31/2013
* USD 475,582.00

This project has three goals: 1) Experimentally determine the branching ratio
for abstraction of hydrogen atoms (H) versus deuterium atoms (D) from mono-
deuterated methoxy radicals (CH2DO*) in their reaction with molecular oxygen
(O2) as a function of temperature; 2) Experimentally determine absolute rate
constants for CH3O* and CD3O* reacting with O2 as a function of temperature; 3)
Compute rate constants for methoxy + O2 reactions, including tunneling and
variational effects, and extend calculations to larger radicals. Two
experimental approaches will be used: Fourier Transform Infrared (FTIR)
spectroscopy in the reaction chamber of collaborators at the National Center for
Atmospheric Research (NCAR) will be used to determine the branching ratio for
production of deuterated versus normal formaladhyde in the CH2DO* + O2 reaction.
Rate constant ratios for reaction of CH3O* and CD3O* radical with O2 (kO2) and
NO2 (kNO2) will also be determined at NCAR from product yields. Experiments at
NCAR will be carried out by one of the Principal Investigator's (PI) graduate
students under the direct supervision of senior scientists at NCAR. Direct
measurements of kNO2 at the PI's lab (SUNY-ESF) will be carried out using laser
flash photolysis to generate radicals and laser-induced fluorescence for time-
resolved detection. The combination of kNO2/kO2 from NCAR with kNO2 from SUNY-
ESF will enable determination of kO2(T) for both CH3O* and CD3O*. Direct
measurements of kO2 at SUNY-ESF will validate the combined results. An
understanding of the isotope effects in these reactions will be achieved via
high-level quantum calculations coupled to cutting-edge algorithms for
statistical rate theory and multi-dimensional tunneling calculations.
Calculations will be extended to larger alkoxy radicals. This research will be
the first to determine kO2 at temperatures less than 298 K for methoxy radical.
It will also be the first temperature-dependent determination of branching ratio
for production of normal and deuterated formaldehyde in the CH2DO* + O2
reaction, and only the second study of this branching ratio. The calculations
will provide benchmarks for reliable calculations of kO2(T) for a diverse range
of alkoxy radicals of tropospheric interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By enhancing
other researchers' abilities to calculate reliable values of kO2(T), this
research will lead to a much better understanding, not just of alkoxy radical
chemistry, but also of the overall mechanisms of degradation of many classes of
volatile organic compounds (VOCs). This will help improve representations of VOC
degradation processes in models of air pollution and global tropospheric
chemistry, contributing to more effective ozone abatement plans and better
modeling of climate-chemistry feedbacks. The results will also constrain the
mechanism of deuterium enrichment of molecular hydrogen in the atmosphere, and
improve our understanding of the atmospheric budget of molecular hydrogen. This
will help to understand the potential impacts of a hydrogen economy on microbial
communities, stratospheric and local ozone, and the abundance of greenhouse
gases. Two graduate students and several undergraduates working on this project
will grow intellectually and professionally, and gain advanced technical
knowledge of diverse experimental and computational methods for kinetics.