* 0937370
* Evaluating Impact of the 2009 American Recovery and Reinvestment Act on Social Science: An NSF RAPID Proposal
* SBE,SBE
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2011
* Myron Gutmann, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Joshua Rosenbloom
* 05/31/2011
* USD 199,879.00

This research will develop a database of the investments in and outcomes of
social science projects funded by the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act.,
The database will be developed by the InterUniversity Consortium for Political
and Social Research (ICPSR), which has been a leader in data dissemination and
preservation for nearly five decades. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;The development of this infrastructure will help ensure that it
will be possible to understand and evaluate the impact of investments in social
science research and data production funded by the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009. Such a database will help scholars evaluate their
contribution to economic change, to the making of science policy, and to
innovative social science research more broadly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A novel
feature of the approach is that it enables scholars to examine the entire life
cycle of a research project and its products through publications, citations,
presentations to policymakers, and other means. The PIs use a combination of
bibliometric analysis and surveys with principal investigators to get at the
multidimensional nature of research impact. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will leverage the core technologies and staff that have been used to
successfully track research outputs for other
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;The major impact derives
from the database of outcome indicators published and preserved as part of
ICPSRs archival holdings. In addition, the acquisition and dissemination of the
ARRA-funded research data to the scientific community permits a wide variety of
secondary analyses, replication, and reporting.