* 0937005
* 2009 International Conference on Nanotechnology for the Forest Products Industry
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2009,11/30/2009
* Robert Moon, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Jorn Larsen-Basse
* 11/30/2009
* USD 15,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this award is to promote
undergraduate and graduate student interest and involvement in nanoscience and
engineering within forest produces sector by encouraging participation in the
high level scientific forum ?The International Conference on Nanotechnology for
the Forest Products Industry?. Initiated in 2006, this is the sole conference
that is devoted to nanotechnology in the forest products industry. With over 150
national and international attendees from industry, academia, and national labs,
this is the largest gathering of forest products professionals and decision-
makers with a focus on nanotechnology R&amp;D, nano-manufacturing and business.
The 2009 conference will be held in Edmonton, Canada on 23-26 June. Considered
in this proposal are funds to support to lower student registration fees and
offer subsidized travel expenses for participating students, junior faculty, and
Keynote speakers. The conference also includes a graduate and undergraduate
student poster competition to encourage further student involvement &amp;
participation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this conference
is that it provides a forum for researchers and students to gain exposure of new
advances in nanoscale science and engineering applied to lignocellulosic
biopolymers. This years conference there is an increased focus on the
nanocrystalline materials from forest based materials (characterization,
imaging, mechanical properties surface functionalization, composite processing,
self-assembly), health and environmental issues, and applications of
nanotechnology in biobased materials. There will also be a nanotechnology short
course taught by Paul Burrows to help connect the fundamental science to
forestry based applications. The broader impact of this conference is that it
supports the development of the underlying science and technology necessary to
understand and utilize the nanodimensional structure and properties of wood-
based materials and thus enabling a research pathway that contributes to the
next generation of sustainable and renewable nanobiocomposite
materials.&lt;br/&gt;