* 0937303
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Coping with Collapse -- the Effects of Political Decline on Social Identities
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,02/28/2011
* Patrick Williams, Field Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2011
* USD 11,450.00

With support from a National Science Foundation Doctoral Dissertation
Improvement Grant, Dr. Ryan Williams and Nicola Sharratt will complete an
archaeological study on the collapse of the Tiwanaku state, one of the earliest
states in the Andes. Following its emergence near the shores of Lake Titicaca,
in Bolivia, around AD 600, the Tiwanaku held cultural and political sway over
the south central Andes. It established colonies throughout the region. The
largest of these colonies was 300km away from the state capital, in the Moquegua
Valley, Peru. Around AD 1000, the state began a drawn out process of violent
collapse. Inhabitants of Tiwanaku settlements destroyed symbols of state
authority, burnt down temples, and fled from state administrative centers.
Although considerable research has been undertaken on the emergence and
expansion of the Tiwanaku state, and the causes of its violent disintegration,
comparatively little work has been devoted to understanding how the collapse
affected the way in which communities identified themselves and the individuals
within them. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using archaeological evidence from burials,
this dissertation project addresses that issue. It examines the extent to which
post-collapse communities continued to assert an identity that was rooted in
their Tiwanaku ancestry. It also explores whether intra-community identities
(such as gender, status, occupation and age) were maintained despite the
collapse of the state. To do this, the project compares burials in Moquegua from
before and after Tiwanaku state collapse. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Archaeological
data from a cemetery dating to the height of state authority is compared with
burials excavated by Williams and Sharratt at a cemetery that was used after
political disintegration. The arid environment of the Moquegua Valley allows the
analysis of wooden and textile grave inclusions that would normally perish. The
excavation and analysis of skeletal remains as well as pottery, textiles,
jewelry and carved wooden objects suggest that post-collapse communities largely
continued to identify themselves as Tiwanaku, despite the absence of an
overarching Tiwanaku state authority. However, it appears that other aspects of
intra-community identity were increasingly significant after the collapse of the
state. In particular, kin-groups within the community used funerary rituals and
material goods to assert their particular group identity. NSF funding will
support the final, important stages of this project. It will support radiocarbon
dating of burials from both sites, enabling the project to determine the
temporal framework of this shift in salient identity. It will also support
chemical analysis of ceramic material, through which the project will establish
whether crafting differences evident in pottery forms and decorative styles are
evident also in unseen aspects of craft production. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;State
collapse has been a topic of increased archaeological interest, but most of this
research has concentrated on the causes and immediate political ramifications of
political disintegration. Anthropological research on social identities has
focused on the relationship between identities and the expansion of a colonial
power or empire. The intellectual merit of this project is that it considers the
opposite situation by drawing on these two important themes (collapse and
identity) and asks how identities are affected when an overarching political
authority collapses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;State collapse continues to occur in
the contemporary world, and recent ethnic conflicts suggest that identity and
political fragmentation are intertwined in powerful, constructive and often
destructive ways. Understanding how communities react to state collapse has
relevance far beyond the Tiwanaku state. This project is being undertaken in
close collaboration with the local archaeology museum in Moquegua, and Williams
and Sharratt are involved in contributing to museum displays and producing
informational leaflets for the community on the excavations and project
findings.