* 0937123
* Scalable Visualization and Model Building
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* William Cleveland, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2013
* USD 500,000.00

Title: Scalable Visualization and Model Building&lt;br/&gt;PI: Cleveland,
William S. [Purdue University]&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developing new algorithms,
visualization tools, and mathematical models that can predict and explain
patterns in data is fundamental to machine learning and statistics. They enable
a predictive modeling that is fundamental to science and engineering.
Visualization is critical in all phases of data analysis, from the moment the
data are collected when data checking and cleaning are needed, to the final
presentation of results. Visualization facilitates model building by allowing
the analyst to critically assess the predictive power of a model, and to
diagnose problems in fitting the patterns in the data. The investigators are
carrying out research in approaches, methods, and models for describing patterns
in data with a strong emphasis on visualization and on comprehensive analysis of
massive datasets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is addressing two broad
topics. One is a framework for the integration of visual analysis and
statistical modeling. We envision a system that facilities an iterative modeling
process. The modeling cycle includes multiple stages, starting with descriptive
visualization, then model selection, model fitting, diagnosis and evaluation,
and finally iterative model refinement. The second topic is a general approach
to visualization and modeling that scales from small to massive datasets, and
the development of new methods specifically for the scaling of data
visualization. We approach scaling by partitioning the data into subsets,
sampling the subsets, and applying modeling and visualization to each subset.
The investigators are carrying out the research in the context of two
challenging data analysis projects in homeland security: (1) Daily counts of
chief complaints from 76 emergency departments of the Indiana Public Health
Emergency Surveillance System; and (2) Internet packet traces for network
security that we collect on the campuses of Purdue University and Stanford
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;