* 0937825
* 2009 Gordon Research Conference on Physical Metallurgy: Integrating Computational Materials Science and Engineering (ICMSE); Andover, NH: August 2-7, 2009
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2010
* Hamish Fraser, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Alan J. Ardell
* 06/30/2010
* USD 10,000.00

TECHNICAL:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this Gordon Conference, to be held at
the Proctor Academy, Andover, NH, August 2 to 7, 2009, is to explore recent
progress in the use of computational materials models to unify the science and
engineering of metallic materials. An essential part of the discussion at this
meeting is to form a new and potentially transformational discipline within the
materials profession. It is called Integrated Computational Materials Science
and Engineering (ICMSE). The topic of a 2008 US National Academy Study and a
number of government and industry sponsored R&amp;D programs, ICMSE involves the
development and utilization of materials models that capture fundamental
insights and quantitative processing-structure-property relationships for use by
the engineering community. Key advances in quantification of processing-
microstructure and microstructure-property relationships of advanced structural
alloys and thermal barrier coatings will be highlighted. Advanced computational
techniques such as those linking ab-initio calculations to phase equilibria and
microstructure will be covered. Experimental activities are central to the
development of quantitative processing-structure-property relationships and new
experimental characterization tools will also be a focus. An aim of this
conference is to foster a deep discussion advancing our understanding of the
current capability and challenges for vertical integration of this knowledge and
its application in aerospace, automotive, power generation and other industries.
The participants represent universities, industries and national
laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
conference is designed to benefit those on the forefront of development and
application of computational materials models in industry, as well as those
involved at the leading edge of computational and experimental materials
science. There has been a significant effort involved in coupling computational
methods with experiment to capture accurate mechanistic details and provide
independent validation of predictions, at scale, and also integrating across
length scales. The current quest is to develop the integration of these various
approaches such that the insertion of a material in a given component may be
optimized prior to its actual manufacture. The 2009 Gordon Research Conference
on Physical Metallurgy will focus on the development of ICMSE for metallic
materials. It will make a marked contribution to the establishment of a new
discipline with significant, and broad, impact on industrial competitiveness and
national security. However, many of the computational and experimental
approaches and schemes for integration developed for these metallic materials
will be useful for other materials types, often with only minor modifications.
It is clear that establishing ICMSE as a new discipline will have an extremely
broad impact. The provisional program includes 30 invited speakers and
discussion leaders with 5 of these speakers from Europe or Australia and the
remainder from the US. Additionally, it is expected that approximately 40
promising graduate students or postdoctoral fellows will be supported and 10% of
the participants are expected to benefit from NSF support.