* 0937829
* HECURA: Colaborative: Multidimensional and String Indexes for Streaming Data
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Martin Farach-Colton, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2012
* USD 200,007.00

This research project aims to understand and develop systems
for&lt;br/&gt;maintaining superlinear indexes for streaming data. A
superlinear&lt;br/&gt;index provides search capability over an abstract space
that cannot&lt;br/&gt;easily be linearized (totally ordered). In contrast, a
linear index,&lt;br/&gt;typified by a B-tree, supports point and range queries
on totally&lt;br/&gt;ordered data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Examples of superlinear
indexes include multidimensional indexes,&lt;br/&gt;which can be over a
geometric domain, such as geographic data, or&lt;br/&gt;which can be over
multiple linear indexes; and full text queries,&lt;br/&gt;which can include
searching for a particular word or substring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
superlinear indexes found in today's databases cannot support
high&lt;br/&gt;rates of insertion. On traditional mechanical disk drives,
the&lt;br/&gt;existing superlinear indexes can only support about one
hundred&lt;br/&gt;insertions per second in the worst case. For many
important&lt;br/&gt;applications, that is too slow, and so database users often
avoid&lt;br/&gt;superlinear indexing. Even traditional linear indexes based
on&lt;br/&gt;B-trees cannot support the high insertion rates demanded by
many&lt;br/&gt;databases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research investigates
streaming superlinear indexes, that is,&lt;br/&gt;indexes that efficiently
support full text or multidimensional&lt;br/&gt;queries, and can be updated at
speeds that are related to disk&lt;br/&gt;bandwidth rather than seeks per
second.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Among the significant research issues are the
following: (1) design&lt;br/&gt;efficient files structures for streaming
superlinear indexes; (2)&lt;br/&gt;investigate how streaming superlinear indexes
might pave the way to&lt;br/&gt;improved file systems; (3) determine whether
cache-oblivious&lt;br/&gt;algorithms technology can enhance streaming
superlinear indexes; and&lt;br/&gt;(4) program complex data structures for
transactions and recovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this research
will show how to build filesystems that&lt;br/&gt;achieve dramatically better
performance than today's B-tree-based&lt;br/&gt;filesystems, how to maintain
rich geometrical data and&lt;br/&gt;multidimensional nongeographical databases
in real time, and how to&lt;br/&gt;maintain full-text searchable databases in
real time. For example,&lt;br/&gt;some of today's file systems try to maintain
an full-text index to&lt;br/&gt;find strings in files quickly, but these systems
often fall behind at&lt;br/&gt;high data write rates. A streaming superlinear
index would allow such&lt;br/&gt;a file system to keep up, and would improve the
usability of both&lt;br/&gt;high-end storage systems and relatively small
consumer storage systems&lt;br/&gt;that are nonetheless too large to index with
today's indexes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers are developing course
materials on streaming indexing&lt;br/&gt;technology which will be made freely
available under the MIT&lt;br/&gt;OpenCourseWare initiative
(http://ocw.mit.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Further information on this project
may be found at the project&lt;br/&gt;web page:
http://supertech.csail.mit.edu/superlinear-indexes