* 0937406
* RIDGE: Tipping Points in the Evolution of Submarine Hydrothermal Systems: Habitat Generation, Organic Transformation, and Rock Alteration
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Everett Shock, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 09/30/2013
* USD 521,875.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microbial habitats in extreme
environments and organic transformations at ridge-crest hydrothermal systems are
receiving increased attention as the novel properties of microbes that live in
these environments become increasingly important in terms of bioprospecting for
natural products from which new drugs can be made. This research is theoretical
in nature and designed to guide the discovery of such micro-organisms by
calculating "tipping points" (i.e., temperature, pressure, and compositional
conditions that trigger the most dramatic changes in mineral reactions and/or
fluid evolution). The focus of the work is on known hydrothermal vent systems
from the Ridge 2000 Integrated Study Sites where extensive hydrothermal vent
fluid compositions and mineral data are present. Goals of the project are to use
thermodynamic constraints and calculations to predict the supply of chemical
energy to microbial communities that inhabit seafloor hydrothermal vents. It
will also focus on adding estimates of hundreds of additional organic compounds
to thermodynamic databases to allow more complete and realistic calculations of
organic transformations and the abiotic synthesis of organic compounds.
Calculations will examine the full compositional ranges of igneous basement
rocks and sediments that exist in mid-ocean ridge settings. By focusing on
locating and understanding tipping points, the proposed work departs from most
previous theoretical work, and provides a new way of looking at the evolution of
hydrothermal systems and identifying the best locations to sample for high
temperature or other unique microbial life forms. Broader impacts of the work
include student training, building infrastructure for science in terms of
providing much needed thermodynamic data for organic compounds, and public
outreach.