* 0937447
* Conference Support for Student Participation at the 2009 ASME International Manufacturing Science and Engineering Conference; West Lafayette, Indiana; October 4-7, 2009
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2009,06/30/2010
* Yong Huang, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 06/30/2010
* USD 40,000.00

This award provides funds to support 100 undergraduate and graduate students
studying in the United States to attend and/or present their research papers at
the 2009 American Society of Mechanical Engineers International Manufacturing
Science and Engineering Conference, October 4-7, 2009, in West Lafayette,
Indiana. Sponsored by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers Manufacturing
Engineering Division, this upcoming International Manufacturing Science and
Engineering Conference is the annual flagship conference for disseminating the
latest manufacturing research and development results to an international
audience. This conference support for students will be announced through the
email lists of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers Manufacturing
Engineering Division and conference symposium organizers. Student recipients
will be selected for conference support mainly based upon their research
statements on manufacturing innovations by an ad-hoc selection committee. Other
criteria, including underrepresented status, paper authorship, and degrees being
pursued, will also be considered.

This conference serves as a knowledge dissemination platform of manufacturing
innovations and challenges for undergraduate and graduate participants. The
student participants will share and learn the state-of-the-art and challenges of
manufacturing research through keynote presentations, plenary sessions, posters,
and regular paper presentation sessions. They will also have opportunities to
interact with industrial researchers, professors, and other undergraduate and
graduate students. Such interactions will facilitate future domestic and
international collaborations. This conference experience will be invaluable for
developing the skills of this highly talented group of students who will be the
next generation of manufacturing professionals and academics.