* 0937612
* CAREER: Modeling Time Invariances in Human Motor Coordination for Robot-Assisted Rehabilitation
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2009,07/31/2012
* James Schmiedeler, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2012
* USD 208,571.00

Robot-assisted rehabilitation can enhance and speed motor control recovery
following brain injury such as stroke. Most existing rehabilitation approaches
and modeling work supporting them focus primarily on the forces required to
generate controlled movements, in effect deemphasizing planning that occurs at a
kinematic level. A thorough understanding of the role of kinematics in
coordination is needed to help diagnose the level at which deficiencies lie, and
then focus treatment at that level. In this project, the PI will formulate and
experimentally validate unified, coherent models of human motor coordination
based on a foundational time-invariant, kinematic mapping between the output
space and the control space. Inspired by curvature theory, which is
traditionally applied to mechanism synthesis, such a mapping provides an elegant
description of motion. With this novel approach, the PI will seek to demonstrate
that decoupling the kinematic geometry from the time-based trajectory tracking
of arm motion leads to a compact internal model of path planning consistent with
experimental data. The work will further demonstrate that a similarly compact
internal dynamic model provides an additional layer for an efficient formulation
of motor control. The internal kinematic and dynamic models to be developed will
enable investigation of optimization mechanisms at the kinematic level, the
dynamic level, and through mutual interaction of the two. In order to
experimentally validate this model, the PI will develop an actuated, but back-
drivable, planar x-y table that has uniform apparent endpoint inertia throughout
its workspace. This device will both enable the model validation experiments and
serve as a first prototype for a new robot-assisted rehabilitation device that
can be used to clinically leverage the knowledge gained from the modeling
effort. The PI will collaborate with colleagues in his institution's Physical
Therapy Division and Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation Department to develop
and evaluate new diagnostic and rehabilitation techniques that implement the new
device based on the findings.

Broader Impacts: Robot-assisted rehabilitation is likely to have an increasingly
significant impact on society as health care costs rise and the number of
strokes increases with population aging. Grounded in understanding human motor
coordination, this research will impact the fields of locomotion, neurally
controlled prosthetics, digital human modeling, and robot control. The
investigator will integrate this research into his educational activities with
two foci: increasing student understanding of the significance of kinematics and
dynamics in human motor coordination; and enhancing student ability to
internally visualize physical movement in mechanical systems. These activities
will involve modifications to a required undergraduate kinematics course, an
elective undergraduate product design course, and two graduate kinematics
courses to incorporate the results of the research. Additionally, a seminar
course for students from all academic units will be developed to more broadly
disseminate the work. In conjunction with four other faculty in the Ohio State
College of Engineering, the PI will organize a weeklong engineering summer camp
for women and minority high school students. The PI will create two modules for
the camp: one related to human motor coordination in which the students will
conduct experiments using the x-y table developed in the project; and one
related to visualization of motion in mechanical systems.