* 0937035
* A 10-yr Climatology (1999-2009) on 4-dimensional Precipitation Characteristics Using Weather Radar Observations in the European Alps
* GEO,AGS
* 01/15/2010,12/31/2013
* Katja Friedrich, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Anjuli Bamzai
* 12/31/2013
* USD 413,811.00

This project seeks to improve our understanding of the processes that modulate
precipitation intensity, distribution, and type in mountainous regions in order
to better distinguish between natural and climate change related variations. The
research focuses on developing a 10-year climatology of moderate and heavy
precipitation based on high-quality radar measurements within the European Alps.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through the use of four-dimensional radar observations in
conjunction with operational sounding analysis, Global Positioning System (GPS)
derived water vapor fields, water vapor satellite images, and European Center
for Medium Range Weather Forecast (ECMWF) reanalysis maps, the project will i)
analyze the characteristics and four-dimensional structure of precipitation as
well as determine time-space variations of precipitation within five regions
with highly differentiated climate conditions, ii) determine the role of
synoptic-scale atmospheric circulation and upstream conditions on the
precipitation characteristics, and iii) determine seasonal and annual
variability of precipitation characteristics, atmospheric circulation, and
upstream conditions. Furthermore, the 10-yr precipitation climatology will be
compared to rain-gauge and satellite observations, and regional climate model
results for the Swiss Alps and other mountain areas around the World. The
research will advance the knowledge about precipitation variations related to
weather and climate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project
includes (i) the understanding of potential changes in precipitation intensity,
frequency, and snow-rain distribution by monitoring precipitation and estimating
changes in precipitation characteristics as being an important tool for policy
makers and climate researchers to assess various future climate scenarios, (ii)
the training of a graduate student, and (iii) wide dissemination of results and
findings in conferences and refereed literature. The principal investigator will
include the results into the university teaching curriculum and will give talks
to non-research community as part of outreach efforts.