* 0937819
* EAGER: Exploration of Late Miocene Strata in a Critical Fossil Gap of the Hominoid Record: the Red Series of Northern Afar, Ethiopia
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2011
* Jonathan Wynn, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Boush
* 07/31/2011
* USD 24,491.00

Exploration of Late Miocene Strata in a Critical Fossil Gap of the Hominoid
Record: the Red Series of Northern Afar, Ethiopia&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI:
Jonathan G. Wynn&lt;br/&gt;University of South Florida,&lt;br/&gt;Department of
Geology&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this research is to explore little
documented sediments in the northern Afar Region of Ethiopia for a paleoclimatic
record from what is now recognized as a critical interval in paleobiology
research. This paleoclimatic record will span the Late Miocene epoch, which is
of contemporary interest the scientific community because of recent
paleontological discoveries that have revealed new understanding of patterns of
ape and human evolution. Three recent discoveries of fossil hominoids have been
reported from strata representing an interval previously known to
paleoanthropology as the fossil ape gap in the Miocene. These and other recent
developments have brought the Late Miocene to the forefront of human
evolutionary studies in efforts to reconcile the known fossil record with
molecular-based hypotheses of the split between the ape and human clades during
this interval. Sediments of the Red Series in the northern Afar region of
Ethiopia span this age range, but have not been explored in any detail since
early work that advanced the theory of plate tectonics during the 1960s. Hence,
the record of ancient climate and environment that we will produce from these
strata will be immediately relevant to current human origins research. This
record will also be able to provide potential future continental drilling sites
in this critical geological interval, the likes of which are now providing high
resolution records of Quaternary paleoenvironmental change in the sedimentary
basins in which our ancestors evolved. The exploratory work funded by this SGER
grant will set the stage for work that may radically change our understanding of
the critical stages of early hominin evolution. We will better understand the
environmental conditions which led to the split between the ape and human
clades, better understand a critical interval for Eurasian-African mammalian
faunal migration, and provide potential sites for continental drilling that will
be aimed at understanding the role of paleoclimatic change in the course of
human evolution. &lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the SGP Program
and the Office of International Science and Engineering (OISE).