* 0937706
* EFRI-HyBi: Conversion of Biomass to Fuels using Molecular Sieve Catalysts and Millisecond Contact Time Reactors
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Dionisios Vlachos, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 08/31/2014
* USD 1,956,112.00

ABSTRACT &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI Name: Michael Tsapatsis&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of Minnesota-Twin Cities&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
0937706&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EFRI: EFRI-HyBi: Conversion of Biomass to Fuels
using Molecular&lt;br/&gt;Sieve Catalysts and Millisecond Contact Time
Reactors&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The practical exploitation of biomass as a carbon-
neutral source of fuels requires the development of small distributed production
systems capable of processing solids and chemical conversion technologies that
can overcome the recalcitrance of lignocellulosic biomass. While several
processes for biomass utilization have been proposed, none meets the
productivity, scalability, product distribution and economic requirements for
commercial implementation. The objective of the proposed research is to develop
a continuous and scalable autothermal catalytic process for the "one pot"
conversion of lignocellulosic biomass to fuels over metal and zeolites based
multifunctional catalysts in a short contact time stratified reactor. Such a
process has not been attempted before but feasibility of important elements of
the proposed technology were recently demonstrated including: (i) the continuous
char-free production of volatile organic compounds from lignocellulosic
particles in a short contact time autothermal reactor by Schmidt's group; (ii)
the control of mesoporosity at the nanometer level to reduce mass transfer
limitations in zeolite catalysts by Tsapatsis' group and (iii) the demonstration
of short contact time zeolite catalysis by Bhan using monolith supported thin
zeolite films.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The production of fuels
from biomass may be accomplished by its conversion to small fragments, the
selective removal of oxygen from carbohydrates, and the conversion of small
intermediates into larger hydrocarbons via carbon-carbon bond formation. It is
proposed to systematically explore possible ways to combine the metal-based
exothermic volatilization of biomass with zeolite-based deoxygenation and C-C
bond formation in millisecond contact time reactors thereby avoiding deleterious
polyaromatic or solid carbonaceous by-products. To realize this transformative
concept, emerging frontiers in heterogeneous catalysis, reaction engineering,
material design and systems integration will be advanced in the following
synergistic research activities:&lt;br/&gt;1. Schmidt, Bhan and Vlachos will
combine experiments and multiscale modeling to tune product selectivity towards
carbon chain length preservation during biomass conversion in autothermal
(partial oxidation) short contact time reactors.&lt;br/&gt;2. Tsapatsis will
control meso- and microporosity in zeolite-based thin film catalysts to enable
millisecond contact time operation and Bhan will optimize deoxygenation and
chain growth reactions with these catalysts. Floudas will perform computational
screening to guide the selection of zeolites frameworks while detailed
reaction/diffusion and microkinetic models will be developed by
Vlachos.&lt;br/&gt;3. Design principles for the "one pot" reactor will be
developed and tested by the team of co-PIs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:
Transforming traditional chemical processing and production into a sustainable
future is one of the enormous challenges that global society faces. The
development of small scale reactor systems capable of processing ligoncellulosic
feedstock will lead to new technologies for harnessing diffuse or currently
wasted biomass resources and has the potential to contribute to this
transformation and the economic growth of the US. The co-PIs will integrate
elements of this work as case studies in undergraduate, graduate and topical
courses on renewable energy and chemicals, as well as in teaching modules that
will be made available on the internet for widespread dissemination. The scope
and breadth of the project and the research team further provide unique
opportunities for interdisciplinary education of undergraduate and graduate
students and students from underrepresented groups. Moreover, an outreach effort
to develop related extracurricular activities for middle school students is
proposed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The co-PIs are committed in communicating their
work to the public. This will be facilitated by the infrastructure provided by
the Institute on the Environment (IonE) at the Univ. of Minnesota and the Center
for Catalytic Science and Technology (CCST) at the Univ. of Delaware. Important
findings from this work will be included in IonE and CCST sponsored newsletters,
press releases, media briefings and public forums.