* 0937293
* EAGER: Exploratory Study of Carbon Dioxide Sequestration using Industrial Wastes and the Potential of End Products in Concrete Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,05/31/2011
* Sulapha Peethamparan, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 05/31/2011
* USD 33,793.00

This EAGER award is intended to test the hypothesis that waste materials
containing significant amounts of alkali or alkaline earth metal oxides have
sufficient carbonation potential to permanently store at least a part of the CO2
generated from industrial process. Industrial alkaline waste materials, viz.,
cement kiln dust (CKD), high carbon fly ash from fluidized bed coal combustion,
fine glass powder from highway glass bead manufacturing, and lime mud from paper
manufacturing will be investigated. It is also proposed to investigate the
beneficial utilization of the resulting carbonated end products in concrete
applications. The specific research objectives for this EAGER study are: (i) To
quantify the efficiency of industrial alkaline waste materials in their as-
procured condition for CO2 sequestration; and (ii) To evaluate the behavior of
the carbonated end products in cement pastes so as to lay the foundation for
their potential application in concretes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The waste
materials to be evaluated in this study are generated in industrial settings
that emit significant quantities of CO2. If successful, this project will
provide a pathway for the utilization of the CO2 emitted from a particular
industrial process towards the beneficiation of the waste material from this
process. Two, the beneficiated (carbonated) waste products will be evaluated in
this study for their potential application as binding materials in concrete. If
the carbonated products can be utilized in concrete applications, this will
contribute towards making the concrete ?greener?.