* 0937015
* Exciton Transport and Charge Separation in Organic Solar Cells Visualized with Interface Specific Femtosecond Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Sean Roberts, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 09/30/2012
* USD 200,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Chemistry supports Sean
T. Roberts of the University of Southern California (USC) as an American
Competitiveness in Chemistry Fellow. Dr. Roberts will study the dynamics of
energy migration in organic photovoltaic materials using sophisticated
femtosecond spectroscopy techniques. In particular, he will look at the dynamics
at the interface between electron-donor and -acceptor materials using interface-
sensitive spectroscopies. Dr. Roberts will collaborate with experimental
scientists at the University of Southern California as well as with theorists at
Los Alamos National Laboratory. For his plan for broadening participation, Dr.
Roberts will help launch a summer internship program at USC for high school and
community college students in Southeast Los Angeles -- a region with a large
percentage of Hispanic students. The internship program will include classroom
and hands-on laboratory work studying alternative energy technologies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research like that of Dr. Roberts is aimed at developing a
better understanding of how organic photovoltaics convert energy from sunlight
into electricity. The ultimate goal of research like this is to develop improved
technology for the conversion of solar energy into electricity. The efforts at
broadening participation being pursued by Dr. Roberts are aimed at increasing
the participation of young people from underrepresented groups in the
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;