* 0937434
* Chemistry Communication Institute: A Pilot Program; September 2009, Seattle, WA
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Deborah Illman, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 07/31/2012
* USD 187,121.00

This pilot project will investigate new strategies to enhance the preparation of
chemistry professionals to communicate with broader audiences. The overall goal
is to cultivate a cadre of chemistry communication leaders who can 1) help bring
about a cultural change in the field of chemistry to value and reward public
communication; 2) serve as mentors and ambassadors for chemistry communication
efforts; and 3) share a modular chemistry communication curriculum/resource
guide.

This project will generate new knowledge about strategies to enhance the
preparation of informal science educators with particular attention to the
following central questions: 1) to what extent does this course improve
chemists' ability to communicate their own research to broader audiences; 2) how
does the role-playing experience of being a journalist for a few days affect the
preparation of chemists to serve as sources for journalists; 3) how does this
preparation affect, if at all, chemists' understanding of and attitudes toward
the process of public communication of chemistry; and 4) how does the course
affect participants' ideas, attitudes, plans, and actions with respect to
undertaking communication efforts in their home departments? These questions
will be addressed by means of pre- and post-course writing assignments, pre- and
post-questionnaires, and follow-up surveys and email/phone interaction with
participants.