* 0937652
* EAGER: Engineering of Ultra-High Performance Cement Based Materials Using Superhydrophobic Hybridization
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2010
* Konstantin Sobolev, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 07/31/2010
* USD 32,791.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the EAGER project is
to validate a completely new and untested concept: the superhydrophobic
hybridization of concrete. This concept engages novel interdisciplinary
perspectives by combining biomimetics, chemistry, and nanotechnology to produce
a new generation of concrete that resolves the fundamental problems related to
concrete behavior, such as durability and corrosion resistance. The objectives
of the project are to 1. Evaluate the effect of: siloxane-based admixtures,
superplasticizer, and mineral additives/ supplementary cementitious materials
(SCMs). 2. Realize the concept of superhydrophobic hybridization of concrete
pore space capable of providing a controlled air-void structure. 3. Obtain a
basic understanding of concrete hydration and microstructure development with
siloxanebased admixtures and superplasticizer, novel superhydrophobic
admixtures, and mineral additives/SCMs. 4. Evaluate the strength and durability
of cement based materials with superhydrophobic admixtures, which are important
for designing UHPC to meet the performance criteria.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
preliminary investigation will serve as a platform for the development of new
types of cement-based materials, including those with ultra-high durability and
increased volumes of mineral additives such as Ultra-High Performance Concrete
(UHPC), and self-healing materials. Furthermore, the cement industry currently
contributes up to 5% of global CO2 emissions; thus, the application of concrete
made with higher volumes of mineral additives also will provide greener
solutions at lower costs.