* 0937319
* Collaborative Proposal: Influence of plate boundary evolution and global mantle flow on ridge geodynamics
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2013
* Clinton Conrad, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 12/31/2013
* USD 39,387.00

Earth?s surface is covered by a, mosaic of thin (100km) rocky plates known as
the lithosphere. While the lithosphere beneath the continents is more-or-less
permanent, the lithosphere beneath the oceans is recycled ? consumed at deep sea
trenches and created at a global network of mid-ocean ridges. Several mid-ocean
ridges feature asymmetric and ridge-parallel variations of crustal thickness,
seismic velocity, and basalt chemistry than cannot be explained by passive
spreading caused by plate divergence only. Instead, recent studies suggest that
this complexity may reflect an influence of large-scale mantle flow on ridge
dynamics, or result from temporal changes in ridge geometry. This project will
test these hypotheses for the East Pacific Rise and the Juan de Fuca Ridge by
constructing three-dimensional regional flow models with imposed global flow or
evolving ridge geometries. The models by comparing predictions of geological,
geochemical, and geophysical parameters against observations at these sites.
This study will thus contribute to understanding mantle controls on the ridge
system and the general geodynamics of the Earth. In addition to contributing new
software to the community, this project will support participation by a female
post-doctoral fellow and both graduate and undergraduate students. Undergraduate
participants wil be specifically recruited from the minority community in the
vicinity of the University of Maryland.