* 0937987
* EFRI-BSBA: Photonic Technique for Sensing and Understanding Subcellular Structures at Nanoscale
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Hemant Roy, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2014
* USD 2,000,000.00

ABSTRACT &lt;br/&gt;Photonic technique for sensing and understanding subcellular
structures at nanoscale &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Vadim Backman&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project is at the interface of biophotonics, macromolecular
biophysics, biology and medicine. The main focus of the project is the
development of a photonics technique for sensing the complexity of cellular
structure at the nanoscale and its use for understanding alterations in cell
nanoarchitecture in early carcinogenesis with the potential impact to advance
fundamental knowledge of the initial stage of carcinogenesis and enable, for the
first time, population-wide screening for a wide range of major cancers. The
project addresses the following two BSBA elements: i) "paradigm shift in
practices and applications in engineering, health care, medicine, and biological
research" and ii) "sensing at the nanoscale, novel photonic techniques for
detecting, identifying, characterizing, and understanding subcellular structures
and processes at nanoscale". &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The applicants have developed
a novel optical technique, single-cell partial-wave spectroscopy (PWS), which
quantifies the statistical properties of nanoscale cellular structure. Using
PWS, we demonstrated that an increase in the disorder of cell nanoarchitecture
is one of the earliest events in carcinogenesis which precedes any known
microscale alterations. Importantly, the increased nanoscale disorder is not
restricted to tumor cells but seen diffusely throughout the organ thus serving
as a marker of field carcinogenesis. This provides the impetus to elucidate the
mechanisms that determine these nanoscale changes and their role in cancer
progression, which is the main goal of this project. Using PWS the following
three key questions will be adressed: i) Is the increase in the disorder of cell
nanoarchitecture a general phenomenon that takes place in essentially all types
of epithelial cancers? ii) What is the origin of these changes? iii) What are
the biological implications and possible role in carcinogenesis of the nanoscale
disorder? In other words, is this alteration a "side-effect" of other genetic
events or is it a necessary step in carcinogenesis?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although it is well accepted that early cancer screening
would dramatically decrease cancer mortality, no test currently exists for
accurate screening of the most lethal cancers. This is largely because the
current state-of-the-art requires direct examination of an already formed
precancerous lesion through interventional procedures such as colonoscopy,
endoscopy, bronchoscopy, etc. These procedures are expensive, laborious,
invasive and not well tolerated by patients, leading to very poor screening
rates. This project may lead to a new general paradigm of cancer screening where
the presence of neoplasia is detected by the non-invasive optical analysis of
non-neoplastic tissue that might be located at a distance from the neoplastic
focus in an easily accessible part of the organ. The vision is that this
methodology may enable screening for the major types of cancer, for example,
during an annual physical exam. Examples include identifying patients with
colonic adenomas by analysis of rectal cells, lung cancer by analysis of buccal
cells, pancreatic cancer by analysis of duodenal cells, ovarian cancer through
analysis of uterine or cervical cells and esophageal adenocarcinoma through
analysis of upper-esophageal squamous mucosa. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From the
educational perspective, the project will provide opportunities in truly
interdisciplinary research at the interface of biophotonics, molecular
biophysics and cancer biology for graduate, undergraduate and high school
students with a particular focus on recruitment of women and minorities in
science. The findings will be incorporated into two graduate classes directed by
the PI's. The findings and data generated during the course of the project will
be disseminated to the scientific community. The main findings will also be
disseminated to the general public.