* 0937757
* Collaborative Research:  Forecast Generation and Dissemination for the Record Setting 2009 Red River Flood
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2009,04/30/2011
* Allen Bradley, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 04/30/2011
* USD 56,493.00

Collaborative Research: Forecast Generation and Dissemination for the Record
Setting 2009 Red River Flood.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The
current unprecedented hydrologic conditions on the Red River of the North
provide a rare opportunity to document the role and interactions of human
forecasters in the forecast generation and dissemination process. To respond to
this uncommon opportunity the University of Iowa and the University of Maryland
Baltimore County propose Rapid Response Research to continue our ongoing
collaborative monitoring and documentation of the forecasting process for the
Red River through the spring snowmelt season. The proposed work will capture and
archive key transient information needed to support future research on
hydrologic forecast quality and forecast value for low-probability high-
consequence events. The proposed activities will yield: (1) an archive of
forecast information and operational forecast interpretation by human
forecasters at the NWS, (2) an assessment of the baseline quality of forecast
models and the value-added by the human forecasters, and (3) documentation of
the users of these forecasts, including the participants and information flows
from NWS forecast dissemination conference calls, and forecast uses
institutionalized in emergency response plans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;