* 0937877
* HECURA: A Dynamic Application-specific I/O Architecture for High End Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* William Gropp, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 08/31/2015
* USD 738,000.00

Disk I/O on high-end computing machines continues to be a significant
performance bottleneck. Parallel file systems have been developed to improve
parallel I/O performance. However, most of these methods are application
dependent and their performance varies largely from application to application.
The performance of parallel I/O can be improved with better understanding of I/O
access characteristics at both client and file-server side. There is a great
need for research into next-generation intelligent and application-specific I/O
architectures to meet the demand of highend computing. We propose a dynamic
application-specific I/O architecture that tailors various parallel I/O
optimizations based on I/O characteristics of applications. This architecture is
dynamic in the sense that its underlying optimization strategies are able to
adapt to the variations in different applications for best performance. The
proposed research is twofold: 1) understanding I/O behavior, 2) developing
application-specific optimizations for data layout, prefetching, and caching to
form an integrated application-specific I/O architecture. Several technical
hurdles have been identified, which include I/O access signature, compiler
analysis, global-aware coordinated caching, collective prefetching, data layout
optimization and distribution strategies. Solutions are proposed and detailed
plans are provided to test these newly proposed solutions and techniques under
the PVFS2 parallel file system.