* 0937274
* CCF-AF:  Abstract Medium Access Control Layers
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2015
* Nancy Lynch, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 06/30/2015
* USD 848,200.00

The study of algorithms and lower bounds for wireless radio networks is
complicated by the diversity and complexity of assumptions about network
behavior, for example, about time synchronization, device reliability and
mobility, signal propagation characteristics, and transmission collisions. This
project will simplify this study by defining simple abstract models for Medium
Access Control (MAC) layers in wireless networks. These layers will provide
reliable local broadcast communication, with delays that are bounded by
functions of the local contention. Algorithm designers should be able to develop
and analyze algorithms in terms of these abstract layers, independently of the
physical network behavior and the MAC layer implementation, yet obtain results
that are realistic in terms of the physical networks. Likewise, theoreticians
should be able to use these layers to prove simple but meaningful lower bounds.

Specifically, the project will define and evaluate several possible abstract MAC
layers, varying according to whether their guarantees are worst case or
probabilistic, how they model signal propagation characteristics, and what they
ensure in the presence of failures and other network changes. It will
demonstrate how these layers can be implemented in physical radio networks,
using a variety of contention-management methods such as carrier-sensing,
collision detection, random transmission and backoff, and network coding. It
will use these layers to study many problems in wireless networks, including
basic problems such as neighbor discovery and regional leader election;
intermediate problems such as network-wide communication, maintenance of network
structures, and resource allocation; and high-level problems that arise in robot
control and data-management applications.