* 0937852
* RAPID: Resilience of Coral Reef Ecosystems
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2011
* Russell Schmitt, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 06/30/2011
* USD 150,000.00

In this project, investigators will take advantage of a large-scale, natural
disturbance at the NSF-sponsored Moorea Coral Reef LTER site in French Polynesia
to explore resilience characteristics of coral reef ecosystems to sets of pulse-
press disturbance combinations that alter different attributes of the reef
ecosystem. Resilience is the capacity of an ecosystem to return to its previous
state following a pulse disturbance such as a cyclone or temperature excursion.
Understanding what influences resilience is becoming ever more critical in light
of forecasted alterations in disturbance regimes (pulse events) and
environmental drivers (press events) associated with global climate change.
Global environmental change not only is altering the intensity of press events,
it also is changing the frequency and strength of pulse disturbances. Given
these complexities, the ability to forecast how ecosystems will respond to or
recover from projected changes in pulse and press events is an important
scientific challenge. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An unanticipated natural disturbance
that is now occurring at the Moorea Coral Reef LTER site provides a propitious
opportunity to resolve several key questions regarding resilience, including the
trajectory of the system following disturbances that affect different components
of the ecosystem, and the existence and strength of positive feedbacks that
might produce alternate persistent states. The source of the disturbance is an
outbreak of crown-of-thorns seastars (Acanthaster planci) on the reefs
surrounding Moorea that has reduced the cover of living coral from ~60% to ~5%
cover over large areas. The widespread elimination of just living coral tissue
(with coral skeletal structure left intact) provides us the opportunity to
manipulate additional features to mimic qualitatively different types of
disturbances, and to cross these treatments with various combinations of other
environmental stressors. The investigators will conduct surveys and carry out a
large field experiment to explore how and why resilience is affected by
structural heterogeneity, grazing, corallivory and composition of the microbial
community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the project will be far
reaching because the scientific community and the public have tremendous
interest in and concern about conservation of coral reef ecosystems. Results
will greatly increase understanding of these systems, and as such, will inform
government officials, resource managers and others charged with conservation and
management of coral reefs. Scientific findings and technical information from
the project will be broadly disseminated through the MCR LTER website
(mcr.lternet.edu), scientific publications and presentations, and in the media.
Data will be managed by the MCR LTER and made available on the MCR website in
accordance with the data policy standards of the LTER Network. Information
derived from this research will be included in MCR LTER outreach activities that
involve K-12 programs in Southern California as well as community and school
outreach in French Polynesia. Undergraduate and graduate students, including
those from underrepresented groups, will be involved in research, team research
experiences, and development of skills needed to carry out interdisciplinary,
collaborative research. The project also will engage in post-doctoral training,
and will build international linkages between US scientists and those in South
Pacific island nations.