* 0937395
* Collaborative Research: Integrating Geological, Chemical, and Biological Processes: Implications for Ecological Succession on the East Pacific Rise
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Breea Govenar, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2011
* USD 112,402.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the Integrated Studies
theme of the Ridge 2000 (R2K) Program is to understand the interdependence of
component linkages of the mid-ocean ridge system, including the impact of
hydrothermal fluid flux on the overlying biological system. In 2003, the
investigators initiated integrated multidisciplinary studies to investigate the
geochemical-biological interactions, faunal succession, and microbial
colonization of basalt at deep-sea hydrothermal vents. Between 2004 and 2005,
they conducted navigated down-looking image surveys, deployed digital time-lapse
camera systems, examined habitat variability using submersible-mounted and
autonomous in-situ chemical sensors, sampled microbial and macrofaunal
communities in diffuse-flow vent habitats chemically characterized and occupied
by different foundation species (i.e., Riftia pachyptila and Bathymodiolus
thermophilus). They also designed and conducted mussel-clearance and exclusion-
cage experiments to investigate the variability of vent fluid flux and chemistry
in controlling ecological succession. However, on-going studies and deployed
experiments were destroyed by seafloor eruption(s) in late 2005/early 2006.
Through the opportunity of this eruptive event, in particular the initiation of
venting and fresh lava substrates for colonization, the investigators continued
their studies of the fundamental linkages and interaction of fluid chemistry,
microbial communities, and macrofauna through additional photographic
documentation, diverse habitat sampling, and deployment of a integrated
colonization experiment. Through continued multi-disciplinary data integration,
they will fully achieve their initial goals by characterizing the pre- and post-
eruption environmental context of chemical, microbial and metazoan colonization
over time, with the additional goal of identifying the relevant scales of
integration and synthesis of our ecological observations and experiments for
future investigations of community dynamics at hydrothermal vents. To maximize
active interaction and integration of our multi-disciplinary data, they have
coordinated their experimental design with seismologists and chemists working at
the R2K EPR ISS and have focused their integrated habitat characterization, in
situ chemistry, and colonization studies on discrete vent fields and regions of
interest to various on-going and proposed programs. More broadly, the continued
integration and synthesis of microbial, faunal, and chemical interactions will
provide information that significantly advances our knowledge on the
establishment, development, and maintenance of populations in patchy and
ephemeral environments and will begin the process of enabling these linkages to
be parameterized in models of energy and mass transfer through vent habitats and
into the ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objectives fit well with the
themes and current goals of the Ridge 2000 Program, and to enable others to
fully integrate our datasets in other synthesis efforts, the investigators have
posted their field data and will continue to upload derived data from shore-
based analyses, including annual reports of diffuse fluid temperature and
chemical variations, vent imagery and analysis, and preliminary results of the
characterization of microbial and metazoan communities to the R2K Data Portal
and participate in upcoming R2K workshops. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All of the PIs
are committed to involvement in educational and public outreach activities,
including the mentorship of students and early-career scientists. They will
continue to provide the R2K Education and Public Outreach coordinator with
curriculum materials (e.g., integrative graphics and lecture presentations) for
the FLEXE (From Local to EXtreme Environments) program, an innovative program
formally partnered with GLOBE, a large-scale, web-based, international science
education program that joins students, teachers and scientists in studying earth
systems science. An additional component of our proposed effort will be
supporting formal and informal education and outreach activities associated with
the IMAX film Volcanoes of the Deep Sea. Over the coming years, the film will be
playing at numerous IMAX theaters throughout the world and a DVD version of the
film has been released and disseminated to K12 educators across the United
States. The investigators understand the necessity of reaching and exciting the
broader public, and envision that the results of their work will provide a
powerful educational supplement to materials already designed to be an integral
part of educational activities to classroom curricula throughout the United
States.