* 0937267
* EAGER: Electronic End-to-End Independently Verifiable (E2E) Voting Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Poorvi Vora, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 09/30/2012
* USD 239,767.00

Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research explores the development of an
electronic voting protocol with two key properties. First, the protocol will
produce an end-to-end independently verifiable (E2E) election outcome; that is,
the verifiability properties of the protocol will apply not to the outputs of
individual voting system components, but to the final system output: the tally,
and its relationship to the system inputs: the votes. Second, the protocol will
be incoercible; that is, a voter will be unable to provide convincing evidence
to a coercer (wishing to force or bribe the voter to vote in a certain manner)
of how the voter voted. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing E2E protocols are paper-
based and hence difficult to administer. This research draws on cryptographic
primitives (implicit and explicit in the paper-based protocols) to develop an
electronic protocol. It defines and rigorously proves protocol properties, using
the techniques of cryptographic proofs. The protocols are implemented to obtain
testable prototypes, and made available to the community through an open-source
software release. Preliminary results about the usability of the prototypes are
also obtained. An electronic E2E protocol is anticipated to have significant
impact on deployed voting systems; election officials have repeatedly requested
electronic protocols over those that are paper-based, as the former are easier
to administer and to make accessible to voters with differing needs.&lt;br/&gt;