* 0937256
* William Rowan Hamilton Geometry and Topology Workshop; September 2009, Dublin, Ireland
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Tao Li, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Yongwu  J. Rong
* 08/31/2010
* USD 18,000.00

The award supports US speakers and invited US junior researchers attending the
fifth William Rowan Hamilton Geometry and Topology Workshop, a 3-day, directed
workshop on Computational and Algorithmic Geometry to be held at the Hamilton
Mathematics Institute in Dublin, Ireland in September 17-19, 2009. Participants
at the workshop include leading researchers, junior researchers and graduate
students from the fields of low dimensional topology, geometric group theory,
and hyperbolic geometry who have a special interest in computational and
algorithmic problems in geometry and topology. Specific topics include the
structure of low-volume hyperbolic 3- manifolds and the theory of random
manifolds. In low-volume hyperbolic 3-manifold theory Gabai-Meyerhoff-Milley
introduced the Mom technology to study low volume hyperbolic manifolds. During
the conference we will consider how far the techniques can be pushed to provide
a clear picture of low volume hyperbolic manifolds. In geometric group theory,
the workshop will consider the general role of curvature and combinatorics in
decision problems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mathematicians who study low
dimensional topology, geometric group theory, and hyperbolic geometry are
concerned about the nature of symmetry. Examples include the symmetries of a
snowflake, frieze patterns in architecture, wallpaper and tiling patterns, and
symmetries of crystal or lattice structures in chemistry. Computers have become
an integral tool in this study, both for proving new results as well as
motivating new directions through experiment and calculation. This award will
enable leading researchers, graduate students and junior researchers from the US
to gather together with researchers from around the world in order to combine
methods and techniques to further this research. This activity will help focus
the research programs of the next generation of researchers, and will deepen our
understanding of the nature of symmetry. This activity supports an ongoing
international workshop dedicated to forging bonds between the US mathematics
community and an emerging mathematics institute (the Hamilton Mathematics
Institute) in the European community.