* 0937784
* Learning from the Best:  How Award Winning Courseware has Impacted Engineering Education
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2010,09/30/2014
* Flora McMartin, Broad-based Knowledge
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 09/30/2014
* USD 148,561.00

This project is exploring the existence of indicators that are evidence of
improved student learning resulting from the National STEM Digital Library
(NSDL). In particular it is studying whether focusing on a particular Library
collection and using multiple methods to measure impact will provide insight
into improving the design of the Library. Evidence of student impact is
difficult to develop. This was the conclusion of a January 2009 "Science"
article, "NSF Rethinks Its Digital Library." This article stated that there is
no evidence to date that the NSDL has improved student learning. Despite this
conclusion, members of this project's study team accumulated anecdotal evidence
of positive impact on student learning while working with the NSDL project,
"Where Have We Come From and Where Are We Going? Learning the Lessons and
Disseminating Exemplary Practices from the Projects of the NSDL."

This study is examining a coherent section of the NSDL, the "Premier Award for
Excellence in Engineering Education Courseware," sponsored by the NSDL
Engineering Pathway. It is employing the case study research method. The
rationale for this approach is to focus on a collection that has a high
possibility of providing data on student impact and, further, that may provide
some useful insight into effects on student learning. Over the last 12 years,
the Premier Award competition, and its precursor (NEEDS), reviewed 100
courseware submissions and selected 21 award winning courseware creations and
eight finalist candidates. The award winning courseware has been disseminated
widely. Premier Award winning materials have been the most frequently downloaded
materials on the NEEDS/Engineering Pathway website. Over 20,000 Premier Award
CDs have been distributed and workshops and seminars for engineering educators
have been held. Hence the case study of the Premier Award has the potential of
discovering a large user population. In general, identifying faculty users has
been a significant challenge for NSDL research. The Premier Award provides an
opportunity to reach a population of users and learn from them. The research is
addressing the following questions: 1. How has receipt of the Premier Award
impacted the awardees' career paths and why? 2. How has the quality of the
courseware submitted changed over time? 3. How has the award winning courseware
affected or impacted student learning? The project is studying the population of
faculty that is using courseware available through NSDL (via the
NEEDS/Engineering Pathway). The findings from this research will lay the
groundwork for future in-depth, longitudinal studies of impact on teaching and
learning that reach across the sciences, technology, engineering and
mathematics.