* 0937018
* Student Travel Support for CSET 2009 Workshop
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2010
* Terry Benzel, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Samuel M. Weber
* 09/30/2010
* USD 10,000.00

Among the major areas cited in the Trustworthy Computing Solicitation is
theevaluation of the security of proposed systems. One approach to evaluation is
through testbeds, such as the NSF-sponsored DETER, ORBIT, and GENI systems. But
having a testbed is just one part of the evaluation process, the other being the
running of believable and credible experiments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
purpose of this workshop is to deliberate on what it takes to create and execute
believable experiments related to security. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop,
called Workshop on Cyber Experimentation and Test (CSET) is the second in a
series that is likely to continue. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI, also the
organizer of the workshop, has identified three classes of experiments, related
to: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; - Scale: by their nature, testbeds will never have
the resources needed for experiments that, say, are of Internet scale. So, the
experiments must be scaled down to reflect the size of the testbed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; - Multi-party nature: Testbeds are becoming increasingly
decentralized, which impacts the approach to running experiments and to
interpreting results.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; - Risk: Security experiments often
involve dangerous code (malware) that must be contained and that must be
guaranteed not to endanger the testbed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These and other
fundamental issues will be deliberated on during the workshop.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The funds requested would be used to reimburse the
expenses of graduate and undergraduate students. The workshop is to take place
on Aug. 10, 2009, in conjunction with USENIX Security, one of the four
preeminent security research conferences. &lt;br/&gt;