* 0937331
* EAGER:  Estrogen Receptors and Neural Stress Circuitry
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Shailaja Mani, Baylor College of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 07/31/2012
* USD 299,998.00

Stressful events cause short- and long-term changes in body functions and
behavior to suppress those that are not critical for immediate survival and
promote those that are. Stress coping is an important adaptive mechanism in
allowing the organism to quickly adapt to challenging circumstances that
threaten survival. Stress influences various organs of organisms, including
especially the brain, to affect processes related to homeostasis, cognition,
immune function, reproduction, and fight-or-flight behavioral responses.
Interestingly, sex differences in stress reactivity have been observed, with
females usually exhibiting higher reactivity to a stressor than males.
Furthermore, it has also been demonstrated that estrogens enhance stress
reactivity while androgens inhibit it. Important to this project are recent
findings from the PI's laboratory that estrogen effects on stress and anxiety
are mediated by the protein estrogen receptor beta (ER-beta) expressed in the
brain. The working hypothesis is that activation of ER-beta within distinct
brain regions is critical for modulation of stress-reactivity, which then
impacts the stress circuitry throughout the body. This EAGER project will create
a unique model in which the protein ER-beta can be manipulated in a specific
cell type and/or at a chosen time in targeted regions of the brain while still
allowing the expression of this key signaling protein in other tissues. This
model system will be utilized to study the role of ER-beta in producing sex
differences in stress reactivity not only in the brain, but also to better
understand how stress affects the organism at the general physiological and
behavioral levels. The findings will impact not only understanding of the
neuroendocrine regulation of stress, but also the areas of developmental
biology, reproductive biology, cognitive neuroscience, and the evolution of sex
differences. The project will provide training experience for students and
fellows in a hybrid area that integrates molecular techniques with physiology
using a comprehensive approach and unique model systems. The goal is to involve
the trainees in all aspects of scientific research including advanced technical
approaches in molecular biology and genomics, data interpretation and analysis,
research ethics, presentation of data at national meetings, and publication of
their findings.