* 0937043
* Collaborative Research: Acquisition, Allocation, and Utilization of Carbon in Bleached and Recovering Corals
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2008,01/31/2010
* Tamara Pease, The University of Texas at Brownsville
* Standard Grant
* David L. Garrison
* 01/31/2010
* USD 86,700.00

Drs. Grottoli and Pease will investigate the underlying mechanisms influencing
coral recovery and mortality during bleaching by studying carbon acquisition,
allocation and utilization of the coral host. During bleaching, when corals
loose their symbiotic algae and their supply of photosynthetically fixed carbon
is dramatically reduced or lost, they must rely on other sources of energy such
as stored lipids and carbohydrates, or heterotrophically acquired carbon to
sustain their energetic demands. If (1) corals are better able to acquire carbon
by increasing heterotrophic feeding, they may be more likely to survive
bleaching and fully recover. Alternatively, if (2) corals are able to store
larger amounts of excess energy reserves during non-bleaching periods (e.g., as
lipids), they may be able to sustain themselves by utilizing these reserves
until fully recovered. If (3) corals are more efficient at utilizing these
stored energy reserves, they may be more likely to recover from bleaching. All
three of these strategies are hypothesized mechanisms used by corals to promote
recovery following bleaching.

In order to evaluate each mechanism, these investigators will perform a series
of 13C-pulse labeling experiments designed to track the source of the fixed
carbon, its allocation and storage within the host, and its utilization in
bleached Montipora capitata and Porites compressa corals over the course of 14
months of recovery (relative to non-bleached controls). The experimental design
allows for simultaneously measured variables to be comprehensively interpreted
within the overall picture of the coral-algal symbiont-skeleton system relative
to a control group.

The results of this research will contribute to a better understanding in
fundamental biology of coral bleaching by experimentally evaluating the
physiological and biogeochemical responses of corals to temperature-induced
bleaching stressors both during bleaching and recovery. This work will build the
framework for understanding the causes and consequences of bleaching on corals.

This project involves the training of two PhD students (one with each
collaborating investigator), a Postdoc, and two undergraduate students. Both
investigators will incorporate research results from this project in their
teaching and present the research in public lectures and through established
K-12 outreach and teacher in-service training workshops.