* 0937060
* Computing Innovation Fellows Project
* CSE,CCF
* 05/15/2009,04/30/2014
* Ran Libeskind-Hadas, Computing Research Association
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 04/30/2014
* USD 14,988,394.00

&lt;br/&gt;Title: The Computing Innovation Fellows
Project&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Objective: We propose an NSF Computing
Innovation Fellows Project to enable new computing PhDs to obtain one-to-two
year positions at academic institutions and industrial research organizations.
This project will forestall a permanent loss of research talent likely to occur
if new PhDs are forced to seek employment outside of the field due to the sharp
cuts brought about by the recent budget crisis. It will also allow new PhDs to
develop experience to make them more effective researchers and/or teachers. In
two years, increasing enrollments in both undergraduate and graduate computer
science programs may create pent-up demand for hiring at university computer
science and related departments. As the economy improves and budget adjustments
are made, these departments will try to satisfy this demand for additional
faculty. The Computing Research Association, through its Computing Community
Consortium, will carry out the project and oversee its management. Together CRA
and CCC will track its broader impacts and disseminate its outcomes to the
community.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: As a nation, we have invested time,
energy, and funding in the training of these PhDs. Now, more than ever, we need
to find ways to realize a payoff for that investment. The NSF Computing
Innovation Fellows (CIF) project will enable this payoff and make it possible
for new PhDs to embark on advanced research and teaching careers. The project?s
goal is to create a new cadre of researchers, selected by a community process
that aggressively balances the often-competing goals of personal development,
diversity, and institutional advancement. Because of these diversity goals, CIF
may provide a way not only to rescue talent, but also to materially improve the
field of computing research and education.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: CIF
addresses the Broader Impact goals of the National Science Foundation. The
scholars will remain in research positions, enabling them to advance the field
while simultaneously gaining an opportunity for further training and learning.
The selection process will actively seek applications from women and
underrepresented groups; it also will identify scholar candidates from a cross-
section of institutions. As a result, we envision that a broad range of host
institutions will strengthen their research groups and labs, thereby improving
the national infrastructure and research workforce.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;