* 0937133
* Formal Models, Algorithms, and Visualizations for Storytelling Analytics
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Francis Quek, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2014
* USD 710,100.00

Modern direct manipulation and visualization systems have made key strides in
bringing powerful data transformations and algorithms to the analyst's desktop.
But to further promote the vision of powerful visual analytics, wherein
automated algorithms and visual representations complement each other to yield
new insight, we must continually increase the expressiveness with which analysts
interact with data. This project focuses on the task of storytelling, that is to
say the stringing together of seemingly unconnected pieces of data into a
coherent thread or argument. To support storytelling, which requires both human
judgment and algorithmic assistance, the PIs will first develop a new theory of
relational redescriptions that provides a uniform way to describe data and to
compose data transformation algorithms across a multitude of domains. Using this
theory, the PIs will be able to define stories formally as compositions of
relational redescriptions. They will develop scalable and steerable algorithms
for storytelling that will respond to dynamic user input, such as preferences
and constraints, and they will contextualize their use in interactive
visualizations that harness the power of spatial layout. Finally, they will
investigate how analysts engage in sense-making using the new storytelling
algorithms and visualizations, in the hope of finding answers to questions such
as: How do analysts achieve insight and advance their conceptualization of
patterns derived from datasets? Project outcomes will include the formal
conceptualization of storytelling as well as the compositional approach to
building complex chains of inference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This
research will make it easier for analysts to interactively explore connections
in large-scale heterogeneous datasets. The PIs will work with the FODAVA-lead
team at Georgia Tech and PNNL's NVAC to investigate applications of relational
redescriptions and storytelling to domains of interest to NSF and DHS, and will
develop in consultation with real users across these groups a layered software
framework for storytelling (both analysis and visualization) capabilities; the
framework will be released into the public domain under the GNU GPL/Lesser GNU
GPL license, and APIs will be provided that allow analysts to tailor it to suit
their needs. Although this project will focus on cyber-analytics scenarios such
as those motivated by the VAST 2009 challenge, project outcomes will generalize
across other domains such as bioinformatics, systems biology, electronic
commerce, and social networks. The unified notion of redescriptions will help
integrate multiple data sources (numeric, symbolic, textual, and categorical),
and situate them on a common footing for visual analytics; it will also enable
visual analysts from different application domains to use a common vocabulary
while interacting with one other.