* 0937978
* Collaborative Research, RedToL - Phylogenetic and Genomic Approaches to Reconstructing the Red Algal (Rhodophyta) Tree of Life
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Max Hommersand, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 08/31/2015
* USD 548,312.00

Last Modified Date: 06/23/09 Last Modified By: rmccourt &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Abstract &lt;br/&gt;Red algae (Rhodophyta) are important aquatic
primary producers that are one of the most anciently diverged eukaryotic phyla
with fossil remains dating back to 1.2 billion years ago. The red algal plastid
is widespread in the tree of life as an engine of photosynthesis in
microorganisms such as diatoms and red-tide forming dinoflagellates. Red algae
are also sources of important human foods such as dulse and sushi wrap and have
a multitude of pharmaceutical and industrial applications (e.g., agarose and
carrageenans). In spite of their obvious importance, the evolutionary tree of
life for red algae is poorly known. The aim of this research is to sample
broadly across the major groups of red algae and reconstruct their phylogenetic
history. To accomplish the aims of RedToL, the project will: 1) reconstruct a
robust phylogeny of 471 red algal species using a combined dataset of 2 nuclear,
4 plastid, and 2 mitochondrial genes, 2) obtain complete sequences for a series
of 16 plastid genomes that represent the taxonomic breadth of red algae, 3) make
freely available red algal multi-gene and genome data via release to GenBank and
a project-specific web site. The RedToL team, which consists of prominent red
algal specialists from several generations and who use different methods (from
morphology to phylogenomics), will address fundamental questions of red algal
evolution and their place in the tree of life. &lt;br/&gt;This grant will
support training of undergraduates, graduates, and post-doctoral fellows from
underrepresented groups, including three international graduate students. The
project results will be published in scientific papers and they will be
discussed in two grant-supported summer workshops and two advisory board
meetings. The workshops will focus on training students to become the next-
generation of red algal taxonomists. The project team will also contribute to
outreach efforts through various lectures and a dedicated RedToL website.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;