* 0937964
* Streamlining High-End Computing with Software Persistent Memory
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2013
* Raju Rangaswami, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 12/31/2013
* USD 759,999.00

Current high-end computing (HEC) applications explicitly manage persistent data,
including both application state and application output. This practice not only
increases development time and cost, but also requires an application developer
to be intimately aware of the underlying platform-dependent storage mechanisms
to achieve good application I/O performance. Such vertical development also
makes the application software less portable.

The Software Persistent Memory (SoftPM) project builds a lightweight
infrastructure for streamlining data management in next generation HEC
applications. SoftPM eliminates the duality of data management in HEC
applications by allowing applications to allocate persistent memory in much the
same way volatile memory is allocated and easily restore, browse, and interact
with past versions of persistent memory state. This simplifies the
implementation of three broad capabilities required in HEC applications --
recoverability (e.g., checkpoint-restart), record-replay (e.g., data-
visualization), and execution branching (e.g., simulation model-space
exploration).

The SoftPM project is organized in three modules. The first module builds an
evolvable SoftPM API and addresses memory management issues. The second module
addresses high-performance I/O and the atomicity of persistence points for local
storage and parallel file systems. The final module builds several HEC
application case-studies to illustrate the different capabilities supported by
SoftPM in HEC environments.