* 0937997
* EFRI- BSBA: Novel Microsystems for Manipulation and Analysis of Immune Cells
* ENG,EFMA
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2014
* Tingrui Pan, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 07/31/2014
* USD 2,199,561.00

ABSTRACT &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EFRI- BSBA: Novel Microsystems for Manipulation
and Analysis of Immune Cells &lt;br/&gt;PI: Prof. Alexander
Revzin&lt;br/&gt;Lead Institution: University of California, Davis
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
the proposal will be the development of novel microsystems for analysis and
manipulation of immune cells. Immune cells serve as sentinels of infections,
malignancies and autoimmune disorders afflicting an individual. Therefore, these
cells may be used to gain diagnostic information as well as to enhance
understanding of mechanism of immune disease progression. Analysis of immune
cells (leukocytes) represents a singular challenge because there is multiple
cell subsets present in the body that are often distinguishable only based on
the secreted products. This is true for T-lymphocytes that can be categorized
into T-helper 1, T-helper 2 or T-helper 17 phenotype based on the secretion of
specific proteins (cytokines). Similarly, B-cells represent a heterogeneous
population of cells that are distinguished solely based on the production of
specific antibodies. Single cell-level, real-time analysis of products secreted
by live T-cells and B-cells is not currently possible due to the lack of
appropriate bioanalytical tools. To address this shortcoming, this proposal will
develop novel microsystems allowing to arrange immune cells in high density
single cell arrays and then monitor production of secreted proteins at a single
cell level. In addition, they will develop a "sense-and-release" electrode array
system for identifying immune cells based on the secreted product and
subsequently sorting/releasing these cells. The microsystems developed in this
proposal will be used for the analysis of T-cells from normal and autistic
children with the goal of helping to identify correlates between immune function
and behavioral aberrations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An individual cell is the smallest living building block
of tissues and organs. Therefore, analysis of single living cells has been at
the frontier of biological/life science research for the past decade and half.
The use of green fluorescence protein (GFP) and other fluorescent proteins to
report on dynamics of how and when genes get turned on in individual cells has
revolutionized the field of biological and medical sciences. However, the
requirement of having to get GFP-encoding DNA into cells limits application of
reporter gene technology to the most robust and easy to transfect cells. In
addition, reporter gene technology monitors gene expression as opposed to
protein production. The vision of this proposal is to develop novel and
transformative bio-microsystems for non-invasive, dynamic monitoring of protein
production in difficult-to-transfect primary cells. This proposal will focus on
the analysis of leukocytes and will develop biosensors and microsystems for
monitoring cytokine production of individual T-lymphocytes. The
interdisciplinary team of investigators will provide surface engineering and
microfabrication-based solutions to challenges that currently confound single
cell analysis, including: 1) creating high-density single cell arrays, 2)
integrating multi-analyte sensors with single cells, 3) co-localizing sensing
elements with single cells to ensure high local concentration of secreted
metabolite. The novel biosensors to be developed in this proposal will be
translatable to other cellular systems (e.g. circulating as well as anchorage-
dependent cells) and will be broadly applicable in bioengineering, biotechnology
and life sciences fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interdisciplinary
collaboration of researchers with a diverse expertise in this project provides a
unique opportunity and framework for interdisciplinary education and training of
secondary school through postdoctoral students at the frontiers of engineering
and the life sciences.