* 0937309
* Collaborative Research: Development of Numerical Models Linking Fluid Geochemistry and Biological Communities in Mid-Ocean Ridge Hydrothermal Environments
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Thomas McCollom, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 08/31/2013
* USD 142,747.00

This research is novel in that its creates a first-of-a-kind model that accounts
for the effects of fluid transport and microbial metabolic processes in fluid
mixing environments at seafloor hydrothermal vent systems. Hydrothermal vents
are some of the most interesting and important extreme environments on the
planet and the microbes that inhabit them are potential targets for new
compounds for natural products studies from which new and important
pharmaceuticals might be derived. This project links together for the first
time, the chemosynthetic hydrothermal vent biological communities and the
geologic/geochemical processes taking place in the subsurface. The resulting
mathematical and computational models portray chemical environments that account
for the impact of microbial metabolism on evolving fluid chemistry during the
mixing of seawater and hydrothermal fluid and could be used to direct
bioprospecting. Models will be constrained by reported compositions of high-
temperature, focused and low-temperature diffusively venting fluids as well as
microbial distribution in seafloor hydrothermal environments collected during
the RIDGE 2000 program. The broader impacts of the work include creating
modeling codes for reactive transport modeling which explicitly include
reactions mitigated by microbes, student training, and the development of a
workshop on modeling bioenergetic reactions.