* 0937112
* GSE/DIF: Fast-Track Math for Women
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/2009,10/31/2012
* Madeleine Fish, University Enterprises, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 10/31/2012
* USD 250,000.00

Intellectual Merit: Fast Track Math for Women (FTMW), a train-the-trainer
program, will create a cadre of math educators with both a heightened awareness
of gender equity in STEM fields and the knowledge to implement a successful math
intervention program. FTMW is designed to certify a core set of teachers to
become FTMW Administrators, who in turn will train other teachers to administer
FTMW programs in their geographic locales. The project will convert the Fast-
Track Math teaching as well as a unique curricular segment, Gender Equity in
STEM (GES), into professional quality, "diffusible" materials: 12 flash-
animated, web-based concept modules and accompanying training manuals. In summer
2010 up to 5 teams of FTMW Administrators will be trained, using videos of the
2009 course, the flash-animated modules reinforcing new math pedagogy, manuals,
student progress management software, and a two-week on-site practicum. Through
the GES module, FTMW applies findings from existing gender equity research that
indicate that special programs such as FTMW can increase girls' and women's
interest and persistence in math, science and engineering. The curricular
elements of the GES module of the program have been developed by a gender expert
in curriculum development; the math program is based on a 10-year-old proven
intervention, with its developer among the project collaborators. With feedback
from the first cohort of FTMW Administrators received during the 2010-2011
academic year, the program will be modified to include an additional component
to train new FTMW Master Facilitators capable of training future FTMW
Administrators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: FTMW advances current
knowledge on gender equity research to a broader practitioner community. The
program will demonstrate that a multidisciplinary approach to STEM education can
be extraordinarily effective. FTMW has the potential to reach thousands of women
and girls and train them in the necessary math skills and confidence to persist
in STEM disciplines, potentially leading to an increase in women?s recruitment
and retention rates in STEM disciplines. The FTMW program has been designed to
enable it to continue in ensuing years to use the materials developed through
this grant to train FTMW Administrators and Master Facilitators at educational
sites across the nation.