* 0937763
* Proposal for EarthScope Pre-meeting Workshop Support: Leveraging USArray - Opportunities for Onshore/Offshore Experiments and USArray and EarthScope Science in Alaska
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2011
* Anne Tr√©hu, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 05/31/2011
* USD 20,788.00

EarthScope Pre-meeting Workshop Support: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"Leveraging
USArray: Opportunities for Onshore/Offshore Experiments"&lt;br/&gt;Workshop
Organizers: &lt;br/&gt; Dayanthie S. Weeraratne (California State University,
Northridge) &lt;br/&gt; Anne M. Trehu (Oregon State
University)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"USArray and EarthScope Science in
Alaska"&lt;br/&gt;Workshop Organizers:&lt;br/&gt; Jeff Freymueller and Doug
Christensen (both at University of Alaska
Fairbanks)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two pre-meeting workshops
prior to the 2009 EarthScope National Meeting are focused on "Leveraging
USArray: Opportunities for Onshore/Offshore Experiments" and on "USArray and
EarthScope Science in Alaska." These workshops are being held on the morning and
afternoon of May 12, 2009, respectively, and workshop reports will be posted on
the EarthScope web site. Potential contributions of offshore seismic
instrumentation towards achieving Earthscope objectives at the edges of North
America are discussed during the morning workshop. The objectives are to
identify scientific goals that can be uniquely addressed on the continental
margins of North America and discuss instrumentation needs for achieving these
goals. The afternoon workshop focuses on EarthScope scientific targets in
Alaska, in preparation for the arrival of USArray in Alaska. Among the
objectives are to update and refine scientific goals of EarthScope in Alaska,
seed new interdisciplinary collaborations and provide information to IRIS so
that logistical and operational decisions for USArray deployment are informed by
scientific needs. There is strong synergy between these two workshops as Alaska
is one of the three regions targeted by the onshore/offshore group, and any
discussion of scientific targets in the coastal regions of Alaska should
consider how offshore data have the potential to contribute towards achieving
scientific goals. This synergy is reflected in the large fraction of
participants attending both workshops.