* 0937221
* Investigating the Role of Ocean Circulation in Climate Change During the Last Ice Age Using 231Pa/230Th
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2010
* Jerry McManus, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 03/31/2010
* USD 104,152.00

ABSTRACT 0602384

The last ice age was characterized by dramatic climate oscillations that appear
to be linked to changes in the oceans meridional overturning circulation (MOC).
Direct evidence for changes in the rate of MOC remains limited because
traditional tracers can only provide snapshots of past water mass configurations
without information about property transport. In this project, a new dynamical
tracer of water circulation, Pa/Th, will be used to produce high-resolution,
continuous 60,000-year record of MOC in the Atlantic Ocean during marine isotope
stage 3. This research will be conducted on two high-quality cores from the
subtropical and subpolar North Atlantic Ocean and will be carried out in
parallel with complementary sedimentological and geochemical analyses as well as
modeling studies. These data will explore linkages and phasing within the ocean-
climate system and provide theoretical constraints on the interpretation of
Pa/Th as a circulation proxy. This project will involve students in their
research and in teaching at MIT/WHOI, and through NSF-funded and voluntary
efforts to provide undergraduates with research experience in their studies. The
PIs will continue outreach through presentations at college campuses and
discussions in media such as newspapers and radio broadcasts. All data will be
archived and made available to the scientific community as well as to the
general public through web-based access at WHOI and NGDC.