* 0937025
* International Symposium on Mathematical Programming 2009; Chicago, IL; August 2009
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Stephen Wright, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Rosemary Renaut
* 06/30/2010
* USD 20,000.00

This project supports travel by graduate students,
postdoctoral&lt;br/&gt;associates, and young faculty members from US
institutions to the&lt;br/&gt;International Symposium in Mathematical
Programming (ISMP), to be held&lt;br/&gt;on August 23-28, 2009, in Chicago,
Illinois. This year's ISMP is the&lt;br/&gt;twentieth conference in a series
that began in 1949 and is held about&lt;br/&gt;every three years. ISMP is the
major conference for the optimization /&lt;br/&gt;mathematical programming
community and is a must-attend event for&lt;br/&gt;researchers in the area
worldwide. The attendance has grown from about&lt;br/&gt;40 participants in 1949
to over 1400 at more recent gatherings. About&lt;br/&gt;every second or third
ISMP is held in the US. Further information on&lt;br/&gt;ISMP 2009 can be found
at http://www.ismp2009.org. ISMP provides the&lt;br/&gt;main forum for the
exchange of ideas in optimization, and in&lt;br/&gt;particular for cross-
fertilization between the discrete, continuous,&lt;br/&gt;and stochastic aspects
of the discipline. The major professional&lt;br/&gt;prizes in optimization,
which are decided by juries assembled by MPS&lt;br/&gt;and co-sponsoring
societies AMS and SIAM, are awarded during the&lt;br/&gt;opening ceremony of
ISMP. Particularly notable is the Tucker Prize,&lt;br/&gt;which is awarded to
the best student thesis written during the three&lt;br/&gt;years preceding ISMP.
It has been a long-standing tradition to hold a&lt;br/&gt;technical session at
ISMP during which the three student finalists&lt;br/&gt;present their work; this
session is always a highlight of the
meeting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project provides reimbursement of
travel costs for at least 25&lt;br/&gt;graduate students and young researchers
from US institutions to attend&lt;br/&gt;ISMP 2009, to a level of up to $800 per
participant. ISMP is the&lt;br/&gt;premier conference in optimization, held
triennially. Optimization is&lt;br/&gt;a field of mathematical and computational
research that concerns&lt;br/&gt;itself with finding the best way to operate a
system subject to&lt;br/&gt;restrictions on the choices that can be made. It has
applications in a&lt;br/&gt;great many areas of science, engineering, and
commerce, which are&lt;br/&gt;illustrated by the following three examples.
First, optimization is a&lt;br/&gt;vital tool in designing radiation treatment
plans for cancer patients,&lt;br/&gt;where the goal is to irradiate and thus
destroy tumors while sparing&lt;br/&gt;healthy tissue. Second, optimization is
used in designing mechanical&lt;br/&gt;parts for vehicles and machines that have
minimum weight and cost&lt;br/&gt;while meeting certain strength and robustness
requirements. Third,&lt;br/&gt;optimization is used in budget planning for
businesses, to allocate&lt;br/&gt;resources in a way that maximizes expected
profit in an uncertain&lt;br/&gt;economic environment. Support of attendance by
young US researchers at&lt;br/&gt;ISMP will be of great benefit to their careers
and research&lt;br/&gt;programs. It will eventually have important positive
benefits for US&lt;br/&gt;industry, science, and technology. Applications for
support will be&lt;br/&gt;solicited and reviewed by a committee of
optimization&lt;br/&gt;researchers. Awardees will be chosen to ensure breadth
and diversity&lt;br/&gt;of individuals and institutions represented, and to
ensure&lt;br/&gt;participation of women, minorities, and persons with
disabilities in&lt;br/&gt;ISMP 2009.&lt;br/&gt;