* 0937229
* RAPID: Role of Ephemeral Bottom Roughness Patches in Unpredictable Recruitment of Surfclams on the Continental Shelf
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2011
* Gary Taghon, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 04/30/2011
* USD 99,989.00

Surfclams must settle and recruit in large numbers to produce a year-class of
adult clams because of heavy predation pressure on new recruits. In sandy
sediments, dense but ephemeral shell-hash patches provide bottom roughness that
may affect the fluxes of larvae and food to the bed and provide recruits with
shelter from predators. The objective of this RAPID project is to determine how
the presence and persistence of ephemeral shell patches that alter the bottom
roughness affect the recruitment, growth, and survival of surfclams. This rapid-
response study capitalizes on a rare, high-density settlement and recruitment
event of surfclams which occurred last year at the Long-term Ecosystem
Observatory (LEO-15) in the Mid-Atlantic Bight. The investigators will survey
the Beach Haven Ridge area of LEO-15 in the spring of 2009, using an autonomous
underwater vehicle (REMUS) equipped with Side Scan Sonar to identify areas of
shell accumulation, to chart their location and extent, and to measure
turbulence above and outside the areas. Weekly core-sampling by divers and
surfclam size measurements will be used to determine and compare surfclam
survival and growth inside and outside of shell patches. Surveys and sampling
will be repeated in the fall of 2009 to examine the persistence of the shell
areas and to determine how these shell patches affect abundance and growth of
2008 and 2009 summer recruits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will enhance
knowledge of the ephemeral nature of shell aggregations, and their effects on
surfclam settlement, mortality, and early growth. These results will contribute
to understanding the morphodynamic and physical processes influencing surfclam
population dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results of this work will inform
habitat-based management strategies and will aid in monitoring and management of
an ecologically and commercially important shelf species. Undergraduate students
will be involved in this work through the NSF-funded REU (Research Internships
in Ocean Sciences) program. Results will be presented in a peer-reviewed
scientific journal and at a national scientific conference.