* 0937275
* EAGER: Detecting Structural Changes During an ETS Event: Proof of Concept
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2010
* Paul Silver, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 04/30/2010
* USD 45,209.00

&lt;br/&gt;Arguably the most interesting new phenomenon in Earthquake seismology
is the discovery of Episodic Tremor and Slip events. This phenomenon consists of
seismically recorded tremor events with characteristic frequencies of 1-6 Hz,
coupled with slow slip events observed by global positioning systems and
strainmeters, with durations of order weeks. Both tremor and slip have been well
documented in a variety of environments worldwide, such as subduction zones in
Japan and Cascadia. Although the seismic community continues to make interesting
observations, the underlying physical process remains poorly understood. There
have been many proposed mechanisms, several of which invoke fluids, but thus
far, there is little data with which to evaluate these ideas. This problem is
being addressed in this project by determining whether or not there are
structural changes in the crust and upper mantle associated with this
phenomenon. If there are such changes, they would provide an important new clue
in understanding the Episodic Tremor and Slip phenomenon. The method of time-
dependent seismology is being applied to this problem, to determine whether
there are changes in the seismic wavefield during or after such events. The
focus is on the slab interface, due to its likely central role in the Episodic
Tremor and Slip process, to look for structural changes that may reflect the
migration of fluids or other related changes in the medium. A controlled-source
approach is being used to look for such changes by conducting a time-dependent
seismic imaging experiment in Cascadia. Cascadia was chosen because the well-
known periodicity of Episodic Tremor and Slip events permits experimental
deployments. Controlled sources are a promising approach, because of superior
time resolution and repeatability, compared to other types of sources (e.g.
repeating earthquakes, ambient noise tomography). This deployment is designed to
demonstrate to the community that it will be possible to observe and utilize the
seismic phases of interest, namely those that interact with the slab interface.
This is a modest proof-of-concept deployment that, if successful, will lead to
an expanded deployment for the 2010 event. The experimental configuration being
used permits the clear observation of slab-interaction phases where ETS is
strongest. This source-receiver geometry corresponds to a Northwest-Southeast-
oriented line through the Olympic Peninsula. The source is being deployed at the
southern end of this line, permitting the use of data from the Earthscope-funded
Array-of-Arrays deployment (185 stations), which will deployed to the north for
both the 2009 and 2010 events. An additional 50 stations is also being deployed
through this project that connects the source to the Array of Arrays receivers
along the seismic line. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;