* 0937539
* EAGER: Thermoacoustics: Active Feedback Control Enabling a New Generation of Energy Conversion Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Bassam Bamieh, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2010
* USD 95,644.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective is to design, optimize and build
a new class of thermoacoustic energy conversion devices. The new feature of
these devices is the extensive use of active acoustic feedback, and
sophisticated controller design that optimizes power conversion efficiency while
trading off control effort. The use of such feedback control can overcome two
significant challenges in current thermoacoustic devices, namely (a) the narrow
range of operating parameters required for high efficiency, and (b) the
mechanical design complexity incurred due to acoustic impedance requirements.
The use of active feedback control can create virtual acoustics and thus satisfy
impedance requirements over a much larger parameter regime than non-feedback
devices. In addition, feedback can create new thermoacoustic instabilities in
operating regimes where they would not naturally exist. This new device concept
moves significant complexity from the mechanical design of the device into the
design of the feedback electronics, where it can be much more easily
implemented. This is to be done while trading off the additional power required
for acoustic control, through optimal feedback control design. The ability to
operate over a large parameter regime would enable the use of thermoacoustics in
more varieties of energy conversion devices, especially in solar powered
ones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although
certain limited types of thermoacoustic energy conversion devices have existed
for some time, fundamental limitations have prevented them from being used for
more than highly specialized applications. Smart Thermoacoustics has the
potential to be a transformative development in this technology, enabling its
use for a wide variety of applications. The approach is to investigate control-
oriented thermoacoustic modeling together with optimal feedback and learning
control design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thermoacoustic devices are currently unable to operate
using highly variable heat power sources such as solar power, and have therefore
not yet been used to harness solar energy. Active feedback control enables
thermoacoustic devices to adapt to a wide range of heat power inputs, and could
thus enable an entirely new category of solarpowered energy conversion devices.
This would be a significant contribution to the renewable and clean energy
sector.