* 0937392
* Collaborative research at the Lau ISS: integrating microbial diversity with geochemistry using heat and mass transport models
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2009,12/31/2011
* Margaret Tivey, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 12/31/2011
* USD 158,346.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Seafloor hHydrothermal vents that expel
fluids with temperatures from ~2ºC to &gt;400ºC, provide habitats for a
diversity of microbes that subsist off geochemical fluxes from Earth's interior
as opposed to making food from sunlight. Many vent micro-organisms feed off the
energy from chemical disequilibria that results when reduced vent fluids
interact and mix with oxic seawater on the seafloor. As a result hydrothermal
vent chimneys form important and unusual habitats that sustain significant
microbial diversity. This research combines microbial diversity data obtained in
the field from vent deposits at the Ridge 2000, Lau Basin Integrated Study Site
with computer calculations that represent the physical and geochemical
environments from which the samples were taken. Both molecular finger printing
data and a small subset of 454 (pyre) sequencing data (V6 region of the 16S
reran gene) from hydrothermal chimney and flange deposits are combined with
computer models of vent heat and mass transport to produce estimates of
temperature gradients, pore fluid compositions, and local advection rates
present in the chimneys and flanges. Measured exterior and interior vent chimney
temperatures, mineral compositions and textures (including porosity) are used as
constraints. The work helps improve our understanding of these unique and
productive seafloor ecosystems. Broader impacts of the work include significant
public outreach, student training, and support of two PIs whose gender is under-
represented in the sciences.