* 0937323
* EFRI-BSBA: Learning from Plants -- Biologically-Inspired Multi-Functional Adaptive Structural Systems
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Kon-Well Wang, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 08/31/2014
* USD 2,050,000.00

EFRI-BSBA: Learning from Plants -- Bio-Inspired Multi-Functional Adaptive
Structural Systems &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI Name: Kon-Well
Wang&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
MI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal No:
0937323&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project is a collaborative
interdisciplinary study to create a transformative multifunctional adaptive
engineering structure concept through investigating the characteristics of
plants. The investigators propose to explore new bio-actuation/bio-sensing ideas
building upon innovations inspired by the mechanical, chemical, and electrical
properties of plant cells. It has been observed that plant nastic actuations
(e.g., rapid plant motions of Venus Flytrap or Mimosa) occur due to directional
changes in plant cell shape facilitated by internal hydrostatic pressure,
achieving actuations with large force and stroke. It is also known that plants
can adapt to the direction/magnitude of external loads and damage, and
reconfigure or heal themselves via cell growth. The ability to concurrently
achieve distributed large stroke/force actuation, significant property change,
self-sensing, reconfiguration, and self-healing has long been the dream of the
adaptive structures researchers. The bio-sensing/ actuation features of plants
can provide engineers with valuable knowledge and opportunities for
interdisciplinary intellectual advancements that could lead to a new paradigm of
adaptive structures and impact the joint field of bioscience and engineering
significantly. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project is
that the multidisciplinary research team will push forward advancements in
various disciplines at their interfaces (plant and cell biology, materials and
manufacturing, chemical transport, mechatronics, and structural dynamics and
controls) and utilize the synergy to create a significant leap in fundamental
knowledge for future adaptive materials and structures. By physiological
characterization of how plant cell wall organization influences cell shape
changes during rapid plant motions, the team will investigate the wall fibrillar
networks and the orientations of plant cells that can achieve the most effective
nastic actions. Building upon and advancing from the investigators? study of the
promising fluidic flexible matrix composite (F2MC) concept, F2MC cells will be
created that emulate functions of plant cells based on our improved
understanding of the cell wall response to pressure, loading, and damage.
Advanced nanofiber networking capability will be explored for the F2MC
materials. Inspired by the plant cell membrane transport phenomenon, a
microstructure will be developed that generates pressure to actuate the F2MC
cells, senses and regulates pressure, detects damage, and heals. Through
structural analysis and control synthesis, F2MC cells will be assembled to form
a hypercellular topology resembling a circulatory network for global actuation
and structural control, energy harvesting, thermal management, and self healing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcome of this project is expected to impact the
society broadly and significantly. The findings could become the building blocks
of future mechanical, civil, transportation, and aerospace systems with enhanced
functionality and performance. The next generation of air, marine, and land
vehicles, intelligent machines, and smart infrastructure will benefit greatly
from the knowledge discovery. The investigators will integrate the emerging
frontier research with educational programs to achieve broad impact on learning
at various levels, contributing to the workforce training on multidisciplinary
systems crossing biology and engineering.