* 0937895
* EFRI-HyBi Green Aromatics by Catalytic Fast Pyrolysis of Lignocellulosic Biomass
* ENG,EFMA
* 08/01/2009,09/30/2013
* William Conner, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* George J. Antos
* 09/30/2013
* USD 1,998,601.00

Abstract

PI Name: George Huber Institution: University of Massachusetts Amherst Proposal
Number: 0937895

EFRI-HyBi Green Aromatics by Catalytic Fast Pyrolysis of Lignocellulosic Biomass

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)

Intellectual Merit Cellulosic biomass has tremendous potential as a feedstock to
produce liquid fuels due to its low cost, sustainable production and abundance.
The PIs have recently developed a new process, called catalytic fast pyrolysis
(CFP), to convert solid biomass directly into gasoline range aromatics. The
advantages of CFP include short residence times (2-10 s), reaction that occurs
in one single step, inexpensive catalysts, and fuel products that already fit
into existing infrastructure. The objective of this project is to investigate
the underlying physical and chemical mechanisms that control the CFP of biomass
to fuels. CFP involves the direct conversion of solid biomass into gasoline-
range aromatic compounds in a fluidized bed reactor. This complex process
involves thermal decomposition of the biomass particles, transport of the
resulting gaseous species and reactions in the gas phase surrounding the
particles, and transport and reactions of the pyrolysis products inside the
zeolite catalyst particles to yield gasoline-range aromatic compounds. The
complexity of the process requires an interdisciplinary approach that will
enable a better understanding of the underlying physical and chemical phenomena
and lead to the development of accurate multi-scale reaction-transport models
that can be used to guide reactor design, scale up, and optimization. The PIs
have assembled a multi-disciplinary research team that includes experts on
catalysis, reaction engineering, theoretical chemistry, fluid mechanics, gas-
particle flows, heat transfer, cogeneration, and transport phenomena, aiming to
understand the fundamental mechanisms underlying the CFP of biomass to fuels.
They will also develop a cogeneration strategy that integrates a CFP process
with a power cycle for maximum utilization of the energy content of the biomass
feedstock. They propose a combination of kinetic and hydrodynamic experiments
that will enable validation of multi-scale reaction-transport models. These
models will accurately represent microscopic interactions occurring in the pores
of catalyst particles and couple them to reactor-level descriptions of momentum,
energy, and mass transport. The ultimate objective is to develop more efficient
catalysts and design new reactors for CFP of solid biomass to fuels and
cogeneration of electricity. The researchers in the team have a broad range of
complementary research expertise to effectively address the challenges posed by
the complexity of the proposed project.

Broader Impacts The proposed program integrates research on biofuels with an
educational and outreach component that are designed to demonstrate the
importance of engineering in the area of biofuels and renewable energy. While it
is generally accepted that biology and biotechnology are vitally important for
biofuels production, it is less well known that catalysis and reaction
engineering are equally important. The PIs? research on biofuels has received
significant media attention and provides an opportunity to educate the public on
the topic and excite interest in high school students to pursue careers in
science and engineering. They plan to host in their laboratories underprivileged
students from Springfield, MA, area high schools and collaborate with science
teachers to develop teaching modules on sustainable energy. They also plan to
recruit, mentor and support minority graduate students by collaborating with the
Northeast Alliance for Graduate Education and the Professoriate (NEAGEP) at
UMass, which supports efforts to recruit and mentor doctoral students from
population groups that are underrepresented in science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics (STEM) fields.