* 0937721
* EFRI HyBi: Algal Oils to 'Drop-in' Replacements for Petroleum-derived Transportation Fuels
* ENG,EFMA
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* JoAnn Burkholder, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* George J. Antos
* 07/31/2013
* USD 1,999,172.00

Abstract

PI Name: William Roberts Institution: North Carolina State University Proposal
Number: 0937721

EFRI: EFRI HyBi: Algal Oils to 'Drop-in' Replacements for Petroleum-derived
Transportation Fuels

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)

NC State?s EFRI HyBi will develop the technical feasibility and demonstrate
scalability of a unique, multi-step catalytic process to convert a wide range of
fats/oils/lipids into replacement transportation fuels that are chemically and
physically similar to their petroleum counterparts, thus dramatically reducing
infrastructure complications. Algal oils are an ideal feedstock for biofuels
production, offering very high production density and the ability to use
marginal water (municipal waste, brackish water, etc) and reuse CO2 emitted from
coal-fired power plants. However, there are a number of technical challenges
associated with efficiently exploiting algae?s inherent advantages as a
feedstock. Using a tightly coupled synergistic approach employing both
engineering and biology faculty, the team will: a) use a synthetic biology
approach to genetically alter a marine microalgae species (Dunaliella) to
produce the most desirable feed stocks and optimize the production for
conversion to transportation fuels, b) develop innovative and transformative
approaches to extracting these lipids and fatty acids from the algae, c)
optimize the decarboxylation catalyst, and d) optimize the entire biorefinery
process including maximizing thermal efficiency and utilization of co-products
and by-products.

Intellectual Merit New technologies to transform non-food, renewable feedstock
into high quality hydrocarbon biofuels for the transportation sector will
broaden scientific discovery and create the framework, synergy and momentum for
biologists and engineers to further explore potential alternative fuels. Genetic
enhancement and environmental controls will be used to maximize the production
of the most beneficial lipids, including synthetic biology approaches to enhance
fatty acid synthesis. Exploration of innovative and very efficient means for
lipid extraction, including transformative continuous extraction of produced
fatty acids, will transform the scientific development of algae as a biofuels
feedstock. Key advantages of our proposed biofuels process are its feedstock
flexibility, output flexibility/control, and very limited hydrogen requirement.
Biorefinery architecture optimization and investigation of multiple strategies
to use byproducts (glycerol) efficiently will advance knowledge in the
alternative fuels industry, creating more efficient mechanisms to exploit co-
products (nutraceuticals, animal feed, etc).

Broader Impacts The prospect of hydrocarbon biofuels that are fully compatible
with all existing infrastructure, coupled with the fully realized potential of
algae as a biofuels feedstock, offers tremendous economic and environmental
impact by reducing the transportation sector?s reliance on fossil fuels.
Innovative and transformative enabling technologies that will permit the
conversion of algal oils into high-value transportation fuels in an economically
viable process will bring significant environmental and economic benefits to the
nation through the development of an efficient, high-yield alternative energy
source. This interdisciplinary research between chemical, mechanical, and
bio/agricultural engineers, phycologists, molecular and synthetic biologists,
and microbiologists provides unique training opportunities for undergraduate,
graduate and postdoctoral scholars to bridge disciplines and become the new
generation of scientists and engineers to develop renewable energy for future
generations.