* 0937306
* GSE/DIF- Enhancing Engineering Society Outreach For All Girls (EESO) Workshop Project: Empowering Professional Engineering Societies through Expertise in and Use of Best Practices
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2014
* Barbara Bogue, Society of Women Engineers
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 06/30/2014
* USD 350,000.00

Intellectual Merit: This project will support engineering professional society
engineering and STEM educational outreach efforts by bringing together
engineering society outreach leadership to learn more about effective outreach
practices that have the ability to reach girls, including those from
underrepresented populations. A primary emphasis of the project is to encourage
professional societies to integrate practices that work with diverse audiences
into K-12 engineering outreach activities. Enhancing Engineering Society
Outreach for All Girls (EESO) will build awareness and identify best practices,
based on the research literature and the programming experience of societies
that serve underrepresented groups, and share these with EESO participants;
those who are leaders in developing and implementing engineering society
outreach. A national workshop and an accompanying, sustained web site are the
vehicles for delivery. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The EESO national workshop and
continued online access provides a framework to support continuous improvement
of engineering outreach activities and a basis for engineering societies to
develop and enforce quality control for outreach efforts. EESO will add to the
outreach knowledge base through identification of outreach cases on proven
practices in STEM outreach that emphasize reaching diverse populations,
providing practitioners and researchers alike with a single place to identify
practices that are effective and also provide STEM outreach modules that can be
modified and tested in future studies. It will benefit researchers interested in
engineering outreach, in general, and for underrepresented populations and
increase researchers? ability to collect and access meta-level data by building
capacity to provide a national and comparable data set on the effectiveness of
outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project?s objectives
address these needs: &lt;br/&gt;1. Build outreach capacity among society staff
and volunteers developing and offering programs &lt;br/&gt;2. Engender a culture
of assessment in the society outreach community by building assessment capacity
among those developing and offering outreach activities &lt;br/&gt;3. Create
cultural awareness and integrate proven practices for underrepresented groups
into professional society outreach strategic planning and implementation
&lt;br/&gt;4. Create a network of knowledgeable society staff and
members/leaders committed to developing effective K-12 outreach activities with
measurable outcomes &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: EESO creates a cohort
of individuals with a knowledge and resource base upon which to develop and
implement effective engineering outreach activities for girls. EESO and
supporting activities will provide engineering outreach program stakeholders
with access to the assessment and capacity building resources they need to be
successful by offering a comprehensive workshop and complementary web-site that
introduce proven practices, including proven assessment practices and emphasizes
integration of diversity into all engineering outreach. Access to these data
will allow the implementers of professional society engineering education
outreach make better decisions and focus resources to pursue the goal of
increasing the numbers of practicing women engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project includes a Broadening Participation Partnership that consists of EESO
leadership in the Society for Women Engineers (SWE), the American Indian Science
and Engineering Society (AISES), the Society for Hispanic Professional Engineers
(SHPE) and the National Society of Black Engineers (NSBE). This partnership is
positioned to work directly with discipline specific engineering societies to
ensure that effective diversity objectives and practices are integrated into all
outreach planning and activities.&lt;br/&gt;