* 0937196
* Collaborative Reserch:  Sensor Fusion For Comperhensive Health Monitoring of  Complex Infrastructure Systems - An Internatinal Testbed Opportunity
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/31/2009,08/31/2011
* Ming-Liang Wang, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 08/31/2011
* USD 77,924.00

Deterioration of large infrastructure systems is a common, yet complex problem
that requires innovative sensor technologies to address. This collaborative
project is focused upon the integration of five emerging sensor technologies
that when fused into a structural health monitoring (SHM) system, have the
potential to accurately identify structural distress. At the local-scale,
piezoelectric paint is proposed for passive acoustic emission sensing of
fracture. In addition, piezoelectric ceramic elements will be explored for
active ultrasonic inspection of steel elements prone to cracking. Elasto-
magentic (EM) sensors to monitor dynamic stress in steel cables will be
researched. At the global-scale, "smart" wireless sensor networks will be
adopted to monitor global system responses. Finally, a vision-based system using
video cameras will measure structural displacements. To fundamentally address
the challenging issues of formulation of a comprehensive SHM system, an
international collaboration is formed with a leading team of SHM researchers
from Korea, led by Korea Advanced Institute of Science & Technology. The
international collaboration facilitates unfettered access to Korean highway
bridges in which loading and structural conditions can be monitored and
controlled. Education is an integral element of the ollaboration; US students
will be trained in international research via student and educator exchanges
between the US and Korea. Finally, a diverse group of students at all levels
will be engaged including underrepresented graduate and undergraduate students
as well as regional underprivileged K-12 students.