* 0937559
* RAPID:  Shared Novel/Challenging Activities and Relationship Quality: Testing Key Theoretical Mechanisms and Moderating Variables in a Large Sample of Returning Combat Soldiers.
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2009,04/30/2012
* Arthur Aron, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Sally Dickerson
* 04/30/2012
* USD 166,983.00

Close relationships are central to health and happiness. Most research has
focused on relationship problems that interfere with well-being. However, a
number of recent, rigorous studies have found that it is also important that
couples associate their relationship with a sense of growth, that relationship
boredom can be a major cause of marital distress, and that relationship quality
is enhanced when a couple does things together that are novel and exciting. Yet,
the research to date has not examined this important process in a significant
real-life context, has not yet identified the fundamental underlying principles
of just how this process operates, and has not yet delineated the conditions
under which this process is particularly likely to operate. This research takes
advantage of a unique opportunity to advance knowledge by addressing exactly
these issues, issues that have been almost impossible to test with standard
research methods and populations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is a
unique collaboration between Dr. Arthur Aron and colleagues at SUNY Stony Brook
and a non-profit organization called Welcome Home Troops (WHT). WHT provides
thousands of U.S. soldiers returning from combat deployments with tickets to
exciting events (e.g., NASCAR races, concerts) to attend with their spouses. WHT
hopes to help reduce the high divorce rate in this population by giving them a
positive, high energy, shared experience, as a couple. WHT is helping the
research team connect with 2,000-5,000 married soldiers to better understand how
and why their approach might be working, while also providing a unique platform
to test basic theory on the role of shared experiences in relationship health.
Soldiers and their spouses, along with a matched comparison group, will complete
surveys and indirect measures before and immediately after the event, as well as
six months later. The findings will illustrate the specific processes that
promote relationship health and satisfaction within married couples who have
experienced recent separation and stress. Additionally, the work might directly
benefit returning soldiers and their families by promoting relationship health
and marital satisfaction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;