* 0937715
* Collaborative Research: American National Election Studies (ANES) 2009-2013
* SBE,SES
* 01/15/2010,06/30/2015
* Gary Segura, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Brian Humes
* 06/30/2015
* USD 3,684,177.00

Why did America vote as it did on Election Day? The core mission of the American
National Election Study (ANES) is to inform explanations of election outcomes by
providing data that support rich hypothesis testing, maximize methodological
excellence, measure many variables, and promote comparisons across people,
contexts and time. The ANES serves this mission by providing researchers with a
view of the political world through the eyex of ordinary citizens. Such data are
critical, because these citizens' actions determine election
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research continues the ANES mission for the
next four years, but in new and better ways than before. It builds on an ANES
history that has mde the project a valuable resource to generations of social
scientists. As has been true for past presidential election in the ANES times
series, a presidential year pre- and post-election study will be conducted using
face-to-face interviewing of a nationally representative sample of adults. This
study will include questions specific to the election of 2012 and also questions
that augment the ANES time series, which is now in its sixth decade. In
addition, scholars will be able to add questions onto the instrument through
competitions in the Online Commons, which was an innovation of the previous ANES
award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Like previous ANES awards, this project continues to
provide innovations in the data collection process as well as the study of
substantive subjects. With regards to the former, a parallel internet based
survey will done in conjunction with the face-to-face time series. This will
allow for a mode comparison between the two methods. With regards to the latter,
project will conduct additional phone and internet based surveys during the
midterm election period and the primary season leading up to the presidential
election. The specifics of these studies will be determined by an array of
scholars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By generating large multifaceted datasets of high
quality, the ANES will equip researchers to learn new and important lessons
about the world of politics. These data will be distributed widely and quickly
to serve thousands of scholars and to be used in classrooms around the world to
enrich research and education. The ANES will help to inform the nation about
itself, exploring the causes and consequences of voting behavior andelectoral
outcomes. With such knowledge, the policy will be better equipped to nurture and
refine its system of government.