* 0937699
* RAPID: Impact of ENSO Climate Shifts on Atoll Islets
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2010
* Eugene Rankey, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 07/31/2010
* USD 29,626.00

Coastal systems are dynamic and changing, and their behavior is particularly
important to low-lying island nations,such as the Republic of Kiribati in the
equatorial Pacific, which are vulnerable to sea-level rise from climate change.
The aim of this project is to test the hypothesis that shifts in weather
patterns and climate caused by El Nino/Southern Oscillation (ENSO) lead to
significant changes in shoreline morphology on Kiribati atoll islets. This study
will use remote-sensing data to compare shoreline characteristics at the end of
the last El Nino phase with the present waning La Nina phase. The remote sensing
data will be checked by field observation in order to establish a La Nina
baseline against which the details of future changes can be evaluated. Results
are expected to show that: 1) stable shorelines are directly linked to geologic
factors, lagoon size and depth; 2) west-facing shorelines have been more stable
during the recent La Nina phase because of stronger trade winds from the east,
but that as climate shifts to an El Nino phase and winds shift to the west, they
will become locations of more pronounced erosion; and 3) variability in changes
of vegetation health as mapped through remote sensing data is intimately linked
to island and shoreline topography. This pilot study represents a first attempt
to integrate remote sensing and detailed field data to systematically unravel
the potentially important role of ENSO on equatorial islet stability and
dynamics.

Sea-level rise is a concern for many coastal nations, but it is a huge problem
for coral islands in the middle of the Pacific that are barely a few meters
above sea level. Storm surges could easily inundate these locations with even a
small rise in relative sea level. Some locations, such a the Republic of
Kiribati, do not have to be overly concerned about typhoons, but here weather
patterns are closely linked to the El Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) cycle. It
is conceivable that coastal processes are heavily dependent upon this cycle,
which itself may undergo significant changes in duration and intensity in the
future. Consequently, it is very important to document how the coastal
environments are responding to the present levels of ENSO in order to develop
rational models for future analysis. This project will gather data on the
immediate state of the shoreline during the extant La Nina phase before it
shifts to an El Nino pattern, which is likely in the next few months.