* 0937254
* IRES: Research Opportunities in Extensional Dynamics for US Undergraduate and Graduate Geosciences Students in Western Turkey
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2011
* Elizabeth Catlos, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Edward Murdy
* 12/31/2011
* USD 91,998.00

0728519&lt;br/&gt;Catlos&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is to support an IRES
for US-Turkey Collaboration on the extensional dynamics for U.S. undergraduate
and graduate geosciences students in Western Turkey. The US PIs are Dr.
Elizabeth Catlos, Dr. Estella Atekwana and Dr. Ibrahim Cemen, Department of
Geology, Oklahoma State University (OSU), Stillwater, Oklahoma. The foreign
collaborators are Dr. Cemal Goncuoglu, Middle East Technical University (METU)
in Ankara and Dr. Mete Hancer, Pamukkale University, Denizli, Turkey. Since
2005, the PI has been conducting NSF-supported research in western Turkey in
collaboration with co-PI Cemen and with Dr. Cemal Goncuoglu at Middle East
Technical University and Dr. Mete Hancer, Pamukkale University. The
collaborative efforts have centered on field and geochemical studies of the
Menderes Massif in western Turkey. Two Master's level graduate students from OSU
have participated in the project and have conducted intensive field work and
training in Turkey. In this project the PIs will take advantage of ongoing
research activities and the expertise of a new OSU faculty member (Atekwana) to
provide research and training opportunities for 9 US students (6 undergraduates
and 3 graduate students). The proposal will focus on the teaching and training
of students that are traditionally underrepresented in science, technology,
engineering and math (STEM) fields. Over three years, these students will
partner with peers at METU and Pamukkale University to conduct field-based
research within a multidisciplinary framework focused on investigating the
dynamics of extension within the Earth's lithosphere. The goal is to provide
talented and motivated US students with hands-on field experience in geophysical
surveying, field mapping, GPS mapping, sampling, as well as the tools necessary
to make geochemical and petrologic observations. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merits:
The scientific focus of this proposal is to develop a better understanding of
the creation and evolution of the planet's largest metamorphic core complex, the
Menderes Massif. The mechanism(s) that created extension in this region, and,
consequently, how the Menderes Massif relates to other extensional domains in
the Aegean Region is unclear. The tectonic history of this large and fundamental
component of the Aegean is important, as it lends considerable insight into the
large-scale processes that control and facilitate extension of the Earth's
lithosphere. Proposed models for the creation of the massif include subduction
roll-back, orogenic collapse, and extrusiontectonics. These concepts are often
discussed in a variety of Geoscience courses. The topic of lithospheric
extension is also a subject of current investigation and active discussion by
numerous researchers in the field and laboratory as evidenced by recent NSF and
Geological Society of America workshops.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project
integrates field and geochemical research activities into the education of OSU
undergraduate and graduate students. The proposal is geared towards students who
are underrepresented in the Physical Sciences. The PI will partner with
researchers and educators in OSU's relevant "diversity" offices to recruit and
fund students. The project will provide access and support for the OSU Electron
Microprobe and the UCLA Ion Microprobe Laboratory. The OSU and UCLA labs are
sites of research and mentoring for a large number of students. Students will be
encouraged to present the results of their research at professional meetings,
including those geared towards advancing minority participation. With the Middle
East likely to become one of the most crucial regional arenas for U.S. foreign
policy in the coming years, and with Turkey singled out as a key country where
the training pipeline should be expanded at every level, this project provides
benefits by developing international partnerships and improving the Turkish
language skills of US students. Funding is provided by the Office of
International Science and Engineering and the Division of Earth
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;