* 0937285
* Collaborative Research: Linking stress changes and hydrothermal activity during a non-eruptive spreading event.
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Douglas Toomey, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 08/31/2013
* USD 177,576.00

Mid ocean ridges are sites of creation of new ocean floor, a process that is
characterized by high seismicity (earthquakes) and active volcanism, and
vigorous hydrothermal circulation. The latter is evidenced by jets of super
heated water rising from vents in the sea floor (the now-famous black smokers)
that support exotic biological communities. An important scientific goal is
understanding the dynamics of these systems. Earthquakes occur within the upper
brittle crust in response to stresses and their distribution in space and time
is a primary source of information about dynamic subsurface geologic processes.
These earthquakes are associated with both the tectonic and magmatic events that
account for plate spreading and they create fractures that influence the
patterns of hydrothermal circulation, heat extraction and water-rock reactions.
As such, long duration studies of micro-earthquakes are key to multidisciplinary
studies of the dynamic processes are mid-ocean ridges. The objectives of this
project are to infer spatial and temporal patterns of stress changes associated
with the earthquake swarms in late January and February 2005, to understand the
impact of the associated regional spreading event on the characteristics of
hydrothermal systems and magmatic segmentation, and to determine how stress
changes associated with the regional spreading event affect seismic anisotropy
and tidal triggering.