* 0937613
* EFRI-HyBi: Fungal Processes for Direct Bioconversion of Cellulose to Hydrocarbons
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Gary Strobel, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 08/31/2014
* USD 1,998,849.00

Abstract &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI Name: Brent Peyton &lt;br/&gt;Institution:
Montana State University&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
0937613&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EFRI: EFRI-HyBi: Fungal Processes for Direct
Bioconversion of&lt;br/&gt;Cellulose to Hydrocarbons&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public
Law 111-5)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An interdisciplinary team from Bio/Chemical
Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Biochemistry, and Plant Science at Montana
State University (MSU) and Yale University will focus on a recently emerging
biotechnology for direct production of hydrocarbons (chemically equivalent to
petroleum) from waste cellulose feedstock. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gliocladium
roseum (NRRL 50072) is an endophytic fungus recently isolated from Northern
Patagonia by Gary Strobel (MSU). G. roseum produces and excretes "mycodiesel",
an extensive series of straight chained and branched medium chain-length
hydrocarbons, including heptane, octane, undecane, dodecane and hexadecane. This
organism has the potential to produce petroleum directly using a cellulose
fermentation process that is essentially carbon neutral. Peyton (MSU) and G.
Strobel will oversee the characterization and optimization of G. roseum to
obtain quantitative bioprocessing parameters to maximize diesel-range
hydrocarbon production. This will also provide a baseline for calibration of
metabolic flux analysis models and comparison for efforts focused on improving
hydrocarbon production rates and yields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Yale's Scott
Strobel will focus on annotating the existing G. roseum genome to support the
development of the metabolic flux analysis model which will in turn guide
experiments to maximize hydrocarbon yields and production rates. Ross Carlson
(MSU) will develop these numerical metabolic flux models to allow in silico
predictions of effects of culturing conditions on cell yields and hydrocarbon
production. Mitchell Smooke (Yale) will provide detailed evaluations of the
fuel/burning characteristics of component hydrocarbons produced in the
mycodiesel mixture. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The proposed
research challenges the current prototype for fuel production from waste
cellulose. In contrast to ethanol systems, by potentially eliminating separate
saccharification processing, this proposed fungal technology can bypass one of
the most costly and energy intensive steps of waste cellulose conversion.
Further, while much national effort has focused on ethanol production, beyond
characterization of cellulolytic fungal enzymes, very little research has
examined the potential role of fungi in renewable fuel production. This
interdisciplinary team will utilize state of the art molecular, bioengineering,
metabolic modeling, and fuel analysis techniques to characterize and optimize G.
roseum for direct cellulose to fuel conversion processes and to enhance fuel
hydrocarbon yield. Overall, through direct conversion of cellulose to petroleum,
the proposed research will significantly change the paradigm for production of
renewable fuels and has the long term potential to yield a large variety of
renewable chemicals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Only 15% of current
fuel needs could be met if all U.S corn was converted to ethanol. Obviously,
alternatives to corn are needed. In Montana alone, the estimated the annual
supply of forest residues is 1,317,000 dry tons per year (USDA and USDOE, 2005)
and it was estimated the U.S. could sustainably produce 368 million dry tons of
forest biomass. Clearly, a novel technology that could directly convert waste
biomass into fuel grade hydrocarbons would be a significant paradigm shift in
current renewable fuel strategies. The PIs propose an integration of
microbiology, molecular biology, metabolic modeling, and bio/chemical
engineering that will educate, develop, and exchange students from both Montana
State University and Yale University. The team will make presentations at the
public science lecture series in Bozeman, participate in the "Scientist for a
Day" program targeting rural community kids, contribute to the "Frontiers of
Science" program designed to expose high school juniors and seniors to leading
edge scientific research at Yale, and will present guest lectures on both
campuses on Energy and Sustainability. Funding is also included in the proposal
to integrate Native American undergraduate students into the project through
MSU's American Indian Research Opportunities (AIRO) and Montana's Tribal
Colleges. MSU has a long-term history of supporting American Indian students in
research positions, and this has been a successful program for improving Native
American B.S. degrees at MSU. This project would open many new doors to an
important and relatively unexplored alternative to meeting our renewable fuels
needs.