* 0937353
* Research Integrating Molecular and Environmental Science (RIMES) Program
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2011,04/30/2013
* Bruce Jackson, Massachusetts Bay Community College
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 04/30/2013
* USD 10,000.00

Dr. Bruce Jackson created the Research Integrating Molecular and Environmental
Sciences (RIMES) Program to address the exceedingly poor record of attracting
and retaining ethnic minorities into the field sciences. For ten years the
program has successfully guided nontraditional scholars into STEM careers
particularly in the field sciences. The RIMES Program provides nontraditional
undergraduate scholars from the University of Massachusetts (UMASS), minority
serving institutions, and community colleges nationwide with rare, stimulating
and extensive research experiences on the volcanic Caribbean island of
Montserrat (British Lesser Antilles). The unique geological records of
Montserrat provide opportunities for interdisciplinary research on environmental
stress, restoration and species adaptation, and form the backdrop for
captivating research experiences for underrepresented students that foster
enthusiastic participation and elevate the chances that their career choices
will fall within these disciplines. Undergraduate scholars in the RIMES Program
conduct two consecutive years of highly interdisciplinary research with an
international consortium of scientists, headed by Dr. Jackson, studying the
environmental impact of Montserrat?s active Souiffre Hills volcano on the
terrestrial, aquatic and marine ecosystems of that island. Of great importance,
the RIMES Program also positively impacts the scientific careers of faculty from
historically black colleges and universities and community colleges as well as
the research prowess of their respective institutions. The RIMES Program also
provides extensive research experiences seldom afforded to scholars from two-
year colleges. RIMES scholars are also supported by an enveloping mentoring
program that constantly monitors and sustains their academic endeavors and
integrates their research and scholastic activities. The RIMES Program has a
retention rate of ninety percent. The RIMES model has demonstrated its ability
to increase participation by underrepresented groups in the field sciences.
RIMES Scholars and their faculty mentors work together to investigate the impact
of volcanic activity on the ecosystem of Montserrat and make a significant
intellectual contribution to multiple scientific disciplines and the island. The
RIMES Program has demonstrated high success and is a proven, highly replicable
model that stimulates the interest of nontraditional scholars for the field
sciences. The RIMES Program disseminates its findings to the global scientific
and lay communities via publications; conferences, seminars, ReefCheckÂ®, and the
program web site (http://www.uml.edu/rimes/). In 2008 under a Fulbright
Scholarship, Dr. Jackson worked to replicate his successful mentoring Model at
the Catholic University of Portugal, Porto and bring that institution into the
RIMES consortium.