* 0937312
* Pastoralists and the State in Iron Age and Medieval Sweden
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Timothy Chevral, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2012
* USD 209,197.00

With NSF support, Dr. Tina Thurston and colleagues from the United States,
Sweden, and Great Britain will conduct three and a half years of fieldwork on
Sweden's Småland Plateau, seeking to understand how autonomous pastoral peoples
are encapsulated by states and incorporated into state political and economic
systems, often against their collective will. Local-state relations in Småland
were "high-conflict" in nature: successive phases of independence,
confederacy/hegemony, and forced "pacification" with varying impacts on ethnic
identity, political cohesion, and economic strategies.

Between AD 600 and 1550, twelve Plateau polities were incorporated into the
Svear (later Swedish) state. Sketchy ethnohistories concern activities of social
and political elites, incorporating real people and events and politically
embroidered legends supporting later Svear agendas and identity. Of the local,
ethnically-distinct forest pastoralist population, virtually nothing is known,
except that the early historic state recorded non-cooperation, tax evasion, and
"illegitimate" treaties with Sweden's enemies, culminating in 16th century armed
rebellion.

Cereal cultivation was impracticable on the marginal Plateau, though pastoralism
was viable, as was exploitation of iron ore and wood, for charcoal used in
smelting. To exploit the resources of this hostile region, beginning around AD
1100, state power was increased through sequential establishment of local state
outposts, concurrent with rising taxation and labor demands. Did economic shifts
accompany new demands? Was there intensification? If so, was it broad-based or
limited to areas near royal centers? Did animal production increase, were new
species added, were cereals introduced? Did quality of life and livelihood
change over time? The project will document conditions as the state brought
pressures to bear, significant enough to foment violent conflict. Critical to
questions about this largely prehistoric context is the timing and extent of
agricultural expansion waves, recognizable through the establishment of
pioneering hamlets and the opening of new forest pasturage, assessed through
datable sites and clearance features. Pedestrian survey, soil chemical survey,
and test excavations will establish dwelling, farming, and industry locales, AD
500 to 1550, within the former autonomous Småland kingdoms of Tveta and Vista,
determining sites appropriate for further investigation. Extant and new faunal
assemblages, microregional pollen profiles, macrobotanical analyses, and the
survey and dating of iron production features will further chart economic
change.

The ultimate intellectual contribution is a case study of state-pastoralist
relationships, as contemporary and historic pastoralists have played important
roles in state politics and economies, but typically have contempt for central
authority and are unafraid of the subsequent conflicts, due to strong ethnic
identity and sociopolitical cohesion. Pastoral peoples can have significant
power, and the sequence through independence, hegemony, encapsulation, and
subsumption is neither inevitable nor unidirectional. Most "encapsulation
sequences" occurred long before the social sciences developed, and while
contemporary outcomes are much-studied, the process is largely undocumented. The
Plateau, with its full sequence, is ideal for studying the relationships between
successive generations of rulers and subjects. The broader impacts of continued
archaeological training and research opportunities afforded a multinational
student cohort will have a positive impact on general and region-specific
material and theoretical understandings.