* 0937629
* QIC: Query in Context for Educational Collections
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Min Song, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Herbert H. Richtol
* 09/30/2012
* USD 149,985.00

With its accessibility and explosive growth of content, the NSDL repositories
are in a prime position to provide quality material teachers and other knowledge
seekers need. Still, studies show teachers' dissatisfaction with online
resources. They are frustrated with the time-consuming manual effort to retrieve
and review each link when searching for appropriate material. This often leads
to settling for good enough content. To sustain and increase the utilization of
NSDL's quality resources, it is important a more sophisticated methodology for
query and retrieval be developed. Query in Context for Educational Collections
(QIC) is a research project utilizing context sensitive retrieval, semantic
query analysis, and concept extraction techniques to create QIC's portable
unified knowledge discovery system. QIC minimizes human intervention in the
extraction process and reduces the number of contextually inaccurate results
displayed. It revolutionizes individual search by shifting the burden of
information overload from the user to the computer. QIC's functionality extends
NSDL's NCore search services without significant changes to the format and
organization of digital collections or extensive additional user provided data.
With QIC, teachers find relevant information in the initially retrieved entries,
thereby increasing satisfaction through reduced time and effort. This
effectiveness improves digital library utilization, encourages knowledge
seeking, and idea exploration. This contributes to the sustainability of NSDL
and partner collections. QIC's long-term goal is to provide personalized
information retrieval by discovering information in multiple formats and
incorporating Web2.0 tools to improve the display and relevance of results.