* 0937206
* US Support for the International START Secretariat
* GEO,GEO
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2015
* Hassan Virji, American Geophysical Union
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 09/30/2015
* USD 4,706,402.00

The International START Secretariat will target its coordination of activities,
targeted primarily to enable regional-scale global change research, observation,
assessment, and capacity building, and their integration into international
science and policy efforts. The objectives will be to: (1) advance knowledge and
observational information that is directly relevant to strategic research
questions of the U.S. Global Change Research Program (USGCRP) about global
environmental change causes, consequences, and response strategies at regional
and sub-regional scales, with an emphasis on developing country regions; (2)
enhance scientific input to policy responses through regional and sub-regional
assessments that are recognized by national, regional and international
stakeholders as having salience, credibility, and legitimacy; (3) improve
integration of developing country research, observation and assessment with
international research, observation, and assessment programs; (4) promote
international collaboration for all the above, including increasing the
participation of U.S. scientists and institutions; and (5) sustain and increase
human and institutional capacity for all the above, the latter objective being
integral to all the others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The coordination activities to
be performed by this Secretariat in support of these objectives include
initiation and provision of scientific management support for: (a) existing
collaborative research and observation programs and projects that engage
multiple institutions and countries and address regional science priorities; (b)
regional assessments that engage stakeholders from science, policy, civil
society and private sector communities to address regional policy priorities;
and (c) science-driven capacity building programs. The latter will encompass
small grants for early career scientists, postdoctoral fellowship programs,
conferences, training workshops, graduate and undergraduate curriculum
development, participation in research, observation, and assessment programs,
and enhancement and maintenance of a network of regional research
centers;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;START will also act as a liaison between START?s
partners and participants in developing country regions and the agencies that
participate in the U.S. Global Change Research Program, well as with
international programs and organizations such as the Earth System Science
Partnership (ESSP); the World Climate Research Program (WCRP); the International
Geosphere-Biosphere Program; the International Program on the Human Dimensions
of Global Change Research (IHDP); Diversitas, the global change program
dedicated to biodiversity science; and the Intergovernmental Program on Climate
Change (IPCC).&lt;br/&gt;