* 0937036
* Synthesis and Characterization of Supported Metal Sub-nanoparticles for Applications in Catalytic Reactions of Alkanes
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Jenny McCahill, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 08/31/2011
* USD 200,000.00

The Division of Chemistry supports Jenny McCahill of the University of
California - Santa Barbara as an American Competitiveness in Chemistry Fellow.
Dr. McCahill will synthesize metal sub-nanoparticles from molecular precursors,
and investigate the reactions of supported particles in catalytic reactions with
alkanes. McCahill will work in collaboration with scientists at University of
California - Santa Barbara, and with collaborators at Argonne National
Laboratory, the Materials Research Collaborative Access Team (MRCAT) and the
Advanced Photon Source. In her plan for broadening participation, Dr. McCahill
will work with junior-high school level students and teachers, teaching them
about new frontiers in the chemical sciences, including the catalytic
applications of nanoscience, through hands-on activities. She will collaborate
in this activity with Robert Cota and Phyllis Brady of the Mathematics,
Engineering and Science Achievement (MESA) program at UCSB. Junior high schools
selected will be ones in Santa Barbara and Ventura counties with a high
population of Hispanic students.

Research like that of Dr. McCahill is aimed at developing new kinds of materials
for catalysis. Catalysts are important in industry, since they allow the
synthesis of molecules and materials with desirable properties at reduced cost.
The ultimate aim of research like this is to develop better catalysts for
industrial processes. The efforts at broadening participation being pursued by
Dr. McCahill are aimed at increasing the participation of young people from
underrepresented groups in the sciences.