* 0937397
* RAPID:   Responses of herbaceous annual plants to material deposition from the urban atmosphere under contrasting conditions of antecedent drought and winter rainfall
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Sharon Hall, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 08/31/2010
* USD 29,904.00

Deserts are notoriously variable environments, with some years of (relatively)
abundant rainfall and others of very dry conditions. The growth and abundance of
annual herbaceous plants, which grow each year from seeds deposited in previous
years, are directly affected by this high variability. Besides providing
beautiful desert landscapes, annual herbaceous plants also are important
contributors to the cycling of nutrients and build-up of organic material in
desert soils. Researchers have been investigating how air pollutants such as
nitrogen oxides produced by automobiles in metro Phoenix, Arizona affect long-
lived shrubs of the Sonoran Desert, but were presented with a rare opportunity
to explore pollutant effects on desert annual plants because two years of above-
average winter precipitation occurred in 2008 and 2009, following a decade of
drought. Thus, for the first time, the combined effects of high rainfall and
urban pollution on the abundance, kinds, and chemical makeup of annual
herbaceous plants will be studied, and this will help advance theory and
understanding of how multiple factors affect plant growth singly and in
combination. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developing an understanding of the impact of
human activities (largely transportation-related) in urban areas on desert
processes both within and downwind from the urban environment. Undergraduate
students will gain invaluable experience through their exposure to ecological
research in the habitat in which they live.