* 0937322
* Zooniverse U.S.-UK Planning Meeting: Bringing together Science and Education Teams
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Pamela Gay, Adler Planetarium
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Tran
* 08/31/2010
* USD 19,955.00

OISE 09-37322 Lucy Fortson Adler Planetarium



This project supports the travel of five senior staff and three graduate
students to London to participate in a Zooniverse planning meeting at the Royal
Observatory Greenwich. Zooniverse builds on the success of Galaxy Zoo, a web-
based citizen science project based at Oxford University in the United Kingdom.
The primary purpose of the meeting is to give the project teams the momentum to
take Galaxy Zoo and Zooniverse extensions to the next level and push the field
of citizen science forward. Citizen science projects by their very nature
provide opportunities to engage the users in activities that encourage a deeper
appreciation and understanding of the scientific method. To gain the full
educational potential while at the same time maximizing the peer-reviewed
science output from citizen science projects requires that all of the
stakeholders ? scientists, educators and technologists ? be present and able to
cross-communicate, weigh-in, collaborate, discuss, elaborate, and synthesize
their needs, the needs and abilities of their customers, and the constraints of
the process and system they see. At this stage of development of Zooniverse, it
is important that the science and education teams develop a common understanding
of each team?s needs and resources so that the fully built Zooniverse will have
education and science objectives seamlessly integrated through-out.

This project will advance, through widespread public participation, NSF?s twin
goals of discovery and education.