* 0937847
* EFRI-BSBA: Biology Inspired Intelligent  Micro Optical Imaging Systems
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Christopher Murphy, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2014
* USD 2,000,000.00

ABSTRACT for EFRI BSBA: Biology Inspired Intelligent Micro Optical Imaging
Systems&lt;br/&gt;PI: Hongrui Jiang, UWI, Madison;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
interdisciplinary research seeks to realize bio-inspired intelligent micro
optical imaging systems. Six types of natural eyes are selected to provide
inspirations to meet those challenges: camera-type eyes (e.g., human eyes),
apposition compound eyes (e.g., flies), eye arrays (spiders), non-circular
shaped pupils (e.g., rays), reflecting superposition compound eyes (e.g.,
shrimps), and bi-fovea retinas (e.g., hawks). This research incorporates the
useful elements of natural visual systems into integrated, intelligent, micro
imaging systems without anatomic and physiological constraints. This research
has the following main tasks: 1) Development of spherical multi-micro-camera
arrays (MMCA) integrating light field photography. This integration enables
miniaturized systems to acquire panoramic videos with large depth of field. 2)
Development of artificial reflecting superposition compound eyes (ARSCE) by
coupling a spherical micro-mirror-box array and a spherical photodetector array.
This integration enables high-transmittance and low-chromatic-aberration imaging
over a wide spectrum. 3) Development of bio-inspired multi-fovea coordination
software as a general framework for efficient processing of visual information
and a simulation platform for verification of hypotheses in bio-vision research.
4) Validation of developed hardware and software prototypes through computer
simulation and physical experimentation. The PIs also propose a coherent and
comprehensive education and outreach plan that includes curriculum improvement
and development, mentoring graduate, undergraduate and underrepresented students
(especially those with learning disabilities), creation of and participation in
interdisciplinary educational programs, and dissemination and outreach to the
local community and general public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is transformative and novel
and has the potential to broadly impact many scientific disciplines, including
electrical engineering, mechanical engineering, computer science and
engineering, materials science and engineering, biomedical engineering,
ophthalmology, visual sciences, and optics. This study will enhance the
understanding in comparative vision, ophthalmology, visual neuroscience and
neurophysiology, and might contribute to the grand task of realizing artificial
vision. This research can also make significant contribution to research in
micro optics in optical imaging and microanalytics, which have wide applications
in medical diagnostics, biophotonics and lab-on-a-chip
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
interdisciplinary research will generate significant educational
&lt;br/&gt;opportunities for students at both college and K-12 levels.
Accomplishments will lead to development of new courses and greatly benefit
existing ones in multiple areas, such as microelectromechanical systems,
microsensors, microdevice and integrated circuit fabrication, integrated circuit
design, computer vision, comparative vision, physiological optics,
neurophysiology, ophthalmology and veterinary ophthalmology, electronic
materials, polymer physics, and mechanics of polymers. This project will provide
opportunities for undergraduate and underrepresented students to conduct
transformative and novel research.