* 0937461
* A Leadership Workshop to Meet the Challenge of Global Climate Change
* GEO,GEO
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2011
* John Mutter, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 05/31/2011
* USD 143,686.00

Climate change is now widely agreed to be both inevitable and global in scale,
but uneven in its consequences for ecosystems on land, in the oceans and for
people. Human responses to impending changes, by choice or by necessity will be
equally uneven and perhaps more difficult to predict than the physical and
ecological changes driving them. As evidence from the past archive has built and
models have improved in their ability to simulate the present and project into
the future, so the evidence has accumulated increasingly clear signs that change
is under way. Changes are spatially uneven, effecting climate zones and climate
dynamics differently in different parts of the planet. Regions where changes are
expected to be extreme lie close to places where little change is expected.
These physical changes imprint themselves on a world where human welfare and
development progress is also spatially uneven, sculptured by many forces of
global change including the continued growth of population, especially in the
poorer countries, the re-shaping of landscapes through human appropriation and
the relentless depletion of natural resources. The outcomes for people and their
ecological support systems throughout the world are extremely difficult to
predict, but as expected the poorer parts of the world are where we see the most
severe early.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Responses to climate change by national
governments, international organizations like the UN, and NGOs have been
inconsistent and incoherent. Proposed policy options and engineering remedies
are diverse and occasionally bizarre. The public is ill informed and deeply
divided. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will organize a one-day high-level
community leadership workshop to start to shape such a response. They will
assemble national research and education leaders as well as those involved at a
high level in the economic and policy debates to deliberate on how to re-shape
the country's consciousness on global climate change. The meeting will involve
one full day and a preceding evening discussion. To ensure the effectiveness of
the process the discussions will be moderated by a professional facilitator who
will be responsible for delivering a succinct outcome document in a timely
manner shortly following the meeting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
The intellectual merit of such a workshop will be the setting of an agenda for
research and education, agreed upon by the countries' leading actors in agencies
and institutions that can effect change to meet the
challenge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Such an agenda will broadly
impact the research community throughout the country to create a coherent and
focuses effort in global change studies.