* 0937070
* FODAVA: Collaborative Research: Foundations of Comparative Analytics for Uncertainty in Graphs
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Lisa Singh, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2014
* USD 199,308.00

This is a collaborative research effort bringing together expertise of Lise
Getoor, University of Maryland College Park (0937094), Alex Pang, University of
California-Santa Cruz (0937073) and Lisa Singh, Georgetown University
(0937070).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In today's linked world, graphs and networks
abound. There are communication networks, social networks, financial transaction
networks, gene regulatory networks, disease transmission networks, ecological
food networks, sensor networks and more. Observational data describing these
networks can often times be obtained; unfortunately, this graph data is usually
noisy and uncertain. In this research, we propose a formalism which allows us to
capture and reason about the inherent uncertainty and imprecision in an
underlying graph. We begin by proposing probabilistic similarity logic (PSL), a
simple, yet powerful, language for describing problems which require
probabilistic reasoning about similarity in networked data. We also introduce
the notion of visual comparative analysis of PSL models derived using different
evidence and assumptions, and illustrate its utility for the analysis of graphs
and networks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dealing with noise and uncertainty in
complex domains, and conducting comparative analytics are core capabilities
required for the Foundations on Data Analysis and Visual Analytics (FODAVA)
mission. This research focuses on integrating representation, comparative
analysis and visualizations methods into an open source toolkit that supports
the representation, comparison and visualization of PSL models. In addition to
producing the toolkit, the research team is working with researchers in a
variety of interdisciplinary domains to validate the utility of our approach,
and also developing tutorial and training materials for the tools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key broader impact of the work is that the methods for
reasoning about sources of noise and uncertainty in graphs, and understanding
their impact on results are general and fundamental to the intelligent analysis
of today's rich information sources. Results, including open source software
will be distributed via the project Web site (
http://www.cs.umd.edu/projects/linqs/fodava/ ).