* 0937187
* RIG/CAA: Effects of the Trade-off between Visual Acuity and Visual Fields on Anti-predator Behavior in Social Foraging Birds
* BIO,IOS
* 02/16/2009,03/31/2011
* Esteban Fernandez-Juricic, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Karen A. Mesce
* 03/31/2011
* USD 142,070.00

Organisms benefit from collecting information because it allows them to assess
alternative environmental conditions (relative to food, predators, mates, etc.)
before making decisions. One of the main gaps in evolutionary ecology is to
understand how the configuration of visual systems influences the costs and
benefits of information gathering. This is particularly interesting in visually
oriented animals that live in groups, such as birds, because their visual
environments are complex, as they can use two sources of information (personal
and social) that can affect an individual's fitness (e.g., predator detection),
and eventually social interactions (e.g., group size, neighbor distance). For
instance, an animal can detect a predator through its own vigilance behavior
(personal information) or through the anti-predator behavior of flock mates
(social information). The goal of this project is to study how two key visual
capacities (visual acuity and the extent of the visual fields) affect anti-
predator behavioral responses in social foraging scenarios using four bird
species as models: House Finch Carpodacus mexicanus, House Sparrow Passer
domesticus, Brown-headed Cowbird Molothrus ater, and European Starling Sturnus
vulgaris. The general hypothesis is that the degree to which visual social
information is used to minimize vulnerability to predation will depend upon a
trade-off between visual acuity and visual fields. Two predictions will be
tested. First, species with relatively wide and less acute vision will exhibit
less high-quality (head-up) scanning than species with relatively narrow and
more acute vision due to greater visual coverage. Second, predator detection in
species with relatively wide and less acute visual systems will be limited by
the distance to the predator due to their reduced depth of vision; whereas in
species with relatively narrow visual fields and more acute vision, predator
detection will be limited by body posture and head-orientation due to their more
constrained visual coverage. This study will enhance our understanding of the
mechanisms involved in anti-predator behavior in species with different visual
systems, which may have influenced the evolution of vision in passerine birds.
New knowledge bringing together sensory biology and behavioral ecology will be
produced and communicated to the scientific community through inter-disciplinary
peer-reviewed journals and meetings, involving graduate and undergraduate
students as coauthors, and to lay audiences through a non-technical publication.
Research will be integrated with teaching through different activities with the
general goal of heightening the interest of minorities in evolutionary biology.
First, minority high school, undergraduate, and graduate students will be
involved in the project. Second, new lecture and lab modules will be developed
on the evolution of avian sensory systems. Third, outreach seminars will be
given at high schools in communities with high representation of minorities to
show the similarities and differences between human and avian vision and how
these affect behavior. Fourth, a webpage will be developed emphasizing the
relevance of inter-disciplinary research in sensory and behavioral ecology to
understand the evolution of visual systems.