* 0937992
* EFRI-HyBi: The Science and Engineering of Microalgae Hydrothermal Processing
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Adam Matzger, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* George J. Antos
* 08/31/2013
* USD 2,059,528.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI Name: Phillip Savage&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of Michigan&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
0937992&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EFRI-HyBi: The Science and Engineering of
Microalgae Hydrothermal Processing&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded
under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;Two major barriers in
conventional approaches for converting microalgae to liquid fuels on a large
scale are the needs to cultivate algae with high oil content and to dry the
algae and extract the oil components. The PIs propose to develop the scientific
and engineering knowledge needed to implement a different approach that shatters
both barriers. This approach involves integrated hydrothermal-catalytic-
microbial processing. The hydrothermal (elevated pressure and temperature,
aqueous phase) process is not limited to converting only algae with high oil
content. It can also convert the biomass carbohydrates and proteins into bio-
oil. Algae with high oil content are not required. Secondly, with this
hydrothermal process, no algae drying or oil extraction is needed. The biomass
is processed as a whole in its high-moisture state. The research contains four
broad objectives. The PIs will determine the reaction products, pathways,
kinetics, and mechanisms operative during hydrothermal conversion of microalgae
to molecules that constitute a crude bio-oil. This task will include the use of
Raman spectroscopy for the first in situ analysis of these chemical changes.
They will work at the molecular level to develop and design heterogeneous
catalysts for engineering the molecular composition of the liquid hydrocarbons.
Thus, significant progress will be made in adapting heterogeneous catalysis for
oil upgrading under hydrothermal conditions. The PIs will also make scientific
advances in the use of microbial pathways for utilization of solid and aqueous-
phase byproducts from hydrothermal processing. Finally, they will maintain a
systems perspective throughout and couple chemical process design, economic
evaluation, and life cycle assessment to screen alternate process configurations
and guide the research. The broader sustainability performance of hydrothermal
processing options will be studied through life cycle modeling of upstream algae
production and downstream biosolids and wastewater processing/utilization. The
proposed research could overcome key barriers in the algae-to-hydrocarbons field
and potentially transform the landscape for commercialization of this promising
biomass feedstock.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;A new
technological approach for producing drop-in renewable transportation fuels from
microalgae could be an outcome of this research. The strategy could also be used
for processing other types of high-moisture biomass. Thus, the research could
play a major role in our transition toward energy independence and reduced CO2
emissions from the energy sector. Five PhD students will be trained by an
interdisciplinary team working on cutting edge research on a topic of intense
international interest. These students will be involved in lab rotations to
ensure their training will be interdisciplinary. Upon graduation, they will be
well prepared for leadership positions in industry, government, or academia.
Master?s students will see aspects of this research integrated into the
curriculum of the Engineering Sustainable Systems dual degree program between
the College of Engineering and the School of Natural Resources and Environment.
Students in graduate elective courses in sustainability and in industrial
ecology (which are taught by two of the PIs) will work on projects related to
the research. Moreover, each PI will include undergraduate students in their
laboratories. They will engage undergraduates in the research, and they will
participate in the University?s UROP and WISE programs, which provide mentoring
and research experiences for underrepresented minorities and women students,
respectively. They will also participate in the College of Engineering outreach
to science and math students in a local high school that has a high percentage
of underrepresented minority and socio-economically disadvantaged students.
Thus, the project integrates research and teaching and contributes to human
resource development. The results obtained from the research will be
disseminated via participation of project personnel in conferences and via
publications in scholarly journals.&lt;br/&gt;