* 0937044
* Visualization of Analytical Procsses
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Marija Ilic, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 09/30/2013
* USD 497,401.00

There is currently a major discrepancy between the dramatic improvements in
hardware for sensing, communication, and storage of raw data and the capacity of
humans to analyze and act on this data in a meaningful way. There is every
reason to believe that this development will continue in the near future, given
the revolutionary changes to hardware and software in the World Wide Web, the
Sensor Web, the network of hand-held and mobile devices, and the Smart Grid. The
PIs argue that improvements in the science and technology for integrating and
combining analytical processing and human-computer interaction are urgently
needed, so that human decision making is not overwhelmed by the flood of raw
data. With that goal in mind, in this project they will develop novel
mathematical, computational, and visualization methods, such that analytical
processing is done partly by the computer and partly by the human, with
visualization playing a central role in the communication and collaboration
between the two parties. Specifically, the PIs will explore ways to integrate
mosaic-based visualization and analytical processing by means of graphical
models that contain thousands or millions of random variables, so as to both
improve analytical learning and monitoring by human decision makers. The PIs
will create feature transformation and data synthesis techniques based on
probabilistic graphical models including Bayesian networks, and emphasizing
multi-objective abstraction and refinement. The domain-independent techniques to
be developed will be applied to electrical power systems as a test bed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: It is difficult for humans to reason
under uncertainty, all the more so when they are under time pressure or stress
and when there are massive amounts of data to cope with. Visualization of
uncertainty has been shown to improve human performance, and there has been
substantial progress in the areas of learning and reasoning using probabilistic
graphical models, including Bayesian networks and Markov networks. By
integrating uncertainty visualization and uncertainty processing, this research
will dramatically compress the time it takes humans to make decisions under
uncertainty in complex domains, will improve the quality of the decisions made,
and will reduce the effort or cost associated with these analytical processes.
The project's focus on electrical power system is due to the domain's importance
in aerospace vehicles as well as to the urgency of creating a smart electrical
grid in response to the climate change and energy crises.