* 0937245
* GSE/EXT: Girls RISE (Raising Interest in Science and Engineering) Museum Network
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2015
* Judy Brown, Museum of Science, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 09/30/2015
* USD 2,599,849.00

Intellectual Merit: Based on nearly two decades of museum programming for low-
income Hispanic and African American girls at the Miami Science Museum, this
extension service project employs a train-the-trainers approach to build a
network of museum-based Extension Agents dedicated to helping informal science
educators attract the interest and support the persistence of minority girls,
grades 6-12, currently underrepresented in STEM studies. Led by the Miami
Science Museum, the collaboration brings together an experienced group of
institutions with representation from the informal science, gender research, and
engineering communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the Museum, the
Expert Project Team consists of key staff from the Association of Science-
Technology Centers (ASTC), and SECME Inc. (formerly the Southeastern Consortium
of Minorities in Engineering), who serve as the conduit for the participation of
minority engineering professional organizations. An advisory/research panel of
researchers in gender in STEM, whose work complements those of the project
investigators, works closely with the Expert Project Team to prepare Extension
Agents from ten geographically dispersed museums, who in turn provide a range of
training and peer mentoring services to the practitioner community of informal
science educators in science-rich institutions nationwide. Participating museums
include: Connecticut Science Center (Hartford, CT), New York Hall of Science
(New York, NY), Maryland Science Center (Baltimore, MD), Miami Science Museum
(Miami, FL), COSI (Columbus, OH), St. Louis Science Center (St. Louis, MO),
Louisville Science Center (Louisville, KY), Sci-Port (Shreveport, LA), Explora
(Albuquerque, NM), and California Academy of Sciences (San Francisco,
CA).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific objectives of the project are to:&lt;br/&gt;-
Utilize the national network of science centers and museums to raise awareness
and broaden access for girls underrepresented in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;- Develop
linkages among organizations with the common purpose of increasing the pipeline
of minority female engineers.&lt;br/&gt;- Facilitate the translation of gender
and diversity research into practice through a unified training
program.&lt;br/&gt;- Provide ongoing services, access to program materials, and
tools to broaden the ability of science centers and museum practitioners to
provide relevant and engaging programming for girls.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Girls Rise Network's program of change is tightly focused on increasing the
capacity of science centers and museums to interest girls from underrepresented
populations in the engineering sciences. It consists of three major
processes:&lt;br/&gt;1. Assessing organizational climate with respect to gender,
race and ethnicity.&lt;br/&gt;2. Identifying and building community resources
related to recruiting, serving and retaining girls in the engineering
pipeline.&lt;br/&gt;3. Optimizing the informal science learning environment to
engage minority girls in engineering precollege competitions and related
programming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The extension services
provided through the Girls RISE Museum Network enable museum practitioners to
reach a more diverse population, potentially impacting hundreds of girls; and
contribute to broader efforts to reduce barriers to minority girls?
participation in STEM activities, courses, and majors. In addition, the informal
science educators participating in the project benefit from increased awareness
and knowledge of cultural differences, resulting in a network of culturally
competent educational leaders within the informal science learning community.
The project draws from Expert Project Team resources to provide a central
repository of high-quality resources for engaging girls, particularly Hispanic
and African American girls, in engineering.