* 0937400
* Changes of Rainfall Seasonality and Drought Severity over Amazonia and Their Connections to Global Climate Change
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2009,11/30/2014
* Rong Fu, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 11/30/2014
* USD 555,231.00

The rain forest of the Amazon accounts for roughly 15 percent of the Earth's
terrestrial photosynthesis, and there is concern that anthropogenic global
warming could lead to reduced rainfall and a "die-back" of what is arguably the
world's greatest forest. Such a die-back could have serious implications for the
biodiversity of the Amazon, and it could also lead to a substantial increase in
global airborne carbon dioxide. But whether or not such die-back will occur is
highly uncertain, and climate models show a wide range of projections for global
warming-induced rainfall change over the Amazon. This project will address the
question of future rainfall change by examing Amazon rainfall variability and
associated dynamical mechanisms over the period of available observations, and
determining the extent to which these mechanisms are correctly represented in
climate models. The work has three main objectives: 1) to determine
observationally whether or not rainfall seasonality and drought severity have
changed significantly over the Amazon during the past few decades and, if so,
what mechanisms have caused these changes; 2) to determine whether the observed
rainfall changes are mainly attributable to natural climate variability or to
forcing by anthropogenic emissions; 3) to validate the physical processes that
control rainfall seasonality and drought severity in climate models, in order to
reduce uncertainty in projections of future climate change in the Amazon. The
work is based on the hypothesis that drought severity has increased over the
past few decades due to more late onsets and early endings of the rainy season.
A further hypothesis is that wet season onsets have been occurring later and wet
season terminations earlier in recent decades over the southern Amazon due to
warming of the tropical esastern Pacific and northern tropical Atlantic. Delays
of the wet season onset are also hypothesized to occur as the result of a
polward shift of the Southern Hemisphere subtropical jets, and because of
agricultural burning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Aside from the benefits of the
research for understanding and anticipating drought in the Amazon, the project
will support education and the advancement of science education in the United
States and in countries of the Amazon region. The present work will 1) support
climate research and education programs in Amazonian countries by training PhD
students, especially women from Amazonian countries, and collaborating with
newly formed climate programs in that region; 2) support outstanding minority
high school students from rural Texas and undergraduate students in climate
science; 3) communicate research results and general climate science to the
public.