* 0937048
* Metallo(4-aminophenyl)porphyrin Polymer Films on Si Microrod arrays for Photocatalytic Hydrogen Evolution &amp; New Solar Energy Experiments for Students at John Muir High School
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2011
* Michael Walter, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 08/31/2011
* USD 200,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Chemistry supports
Michael Walter of California Institute of Technology (CalTech) as an American
Competitiveness in Chemistry Fellow. Dr. Walter will investigate the preparation
and characterization of metal treated aminophenylporphyrin films deposited onto
silicon microrod arrays, which show promise as catalytic structures for solar
water-splitting. Dr. Walter will work in collaboration with scientists at
CalTech as well as at the Advanced Photon Source (APS) of Argonne National
Laboratory. In his plan for broadening participation, Dr. Walter will work with
chemistry teachers and students at John Muir High School in Pasadena,
California. Specifically, he will develop a number of hands-on activities for
students to teach them about solar energy and nanotechnology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research like that of Dr. Walter is aimed at developing
new materials for the conversion of solar energy to technologically useful
fuels. The ultimate goal of research like this is to develop replacements for
fossil fuels. The efforts at broadening participation being pursued by Dr.
Walter are aimed at increasing the participation of young people from
underrepresented groups in the sciences.&lt;br/&gt;