* 0937759
* Personalized Access to NSDL
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Madeleine Rothberg, WGBH Educational Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Lee Zia
* 08/31/2014
* USD 509,996.00

The WGBH National Center for Accessible Media is embedding the capacity to
transform and customize presentation of NSDL resources based on individual user
profiles. The project focuses on making middle school resources more accessible
to support students with disabilities during the critical transition in STEM
learning that occurs in the middle school years. The Integrated Service offered
by this initiative builds on collaborative work embodied in the custom NSDL
Access For All portal standard which enables digital delivery systems to match a
user's specific accessibility needs to the characteristics of a resource. The
service benefits any collection that provides Access For All metadata to the
NSDL Data Repository and thereby greatly extends the usefulness of NSDL by
enabling students and teachers with disabilities to independently access and
benefit from NSDL resources. This system-wide application enables the use of
universal design features for all NSDL resource collections for diverse
learners. The schema is documented for use by all collections. Training sessions
support catalogers in evaluating accessibility of existing resources and in
making new resources accessible as they are added to the data repository.
External evaluation is concurrently documenting the effectiveness of project
activities and outcomes on partner collections. Evaluation includes assessing
the impact on NSDL, other digital repositories and on educators and
organizations supporting learners with disabilities. A publicly documented
metadata schema, recorded in the NSDL community, ensures that new collections
can add Access for All metadata at any time and is automatically promoted in the
NSDL Access For All portal.