* 0937985
* EFRI-BSBA:  Multifunctional Materials and Devices for Distributed Actuation and Sensing
* ENG,EFMA
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2014
* Alexey Vertegel, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Garie Fordyce
* 09/30/2014
* USD 2,019,878.00

EFRI-BSBA: Lepidoptera proboscises as prototypes of multifunctional fluidic
devices with distributed actuation and sensing&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI Name:
Konstantin Kornev&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Clemson
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal No. 0937985
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Butterflies and
moths, constituting the order Lepidoptera, have inspired decades of engineering
research in aerodynamics, optics, and navigation. This project focuses on the
lepidopteran proboscis, which is poorly explored from an engineering
perspective. The goal is to develop fundamental principles of fiber-based
microfluidics inspired by the lepidopteran fluidic system, and apply these
principles to the design, fabrication, and manipulation of a new class of fiber-
based devices capable of transporting and probing a previously impossible range
of liquids. These principles will be validated using biological data from
Lepidoptera. Through collaboration of engineers, chemists, and biologists,
bioinspired proboscises will be fabricated by taking advantage of modern fiber
technology, which offers fiber multifunctionality such as
mechanical/electromagnetic memory, improved absorbency, and controlled
wettability. A biomimetic approach will be developed for actuation, sensing, and
control of the synthetic proboscis. The advantages will be illustrated for an
artificial proboscis to probe fluids from individual vascular smooth muscle
cells. The lepidopteran fluidic system is envisioned as shifting the current
microfluidic paradigm from stationary channel-like structures to fiber-based
microfluidic devices, providing distributed actuation, sensing, and manipulation
with minute amounts of fluids. The project will serve as a catalyst for
development of novel science, engineering, and technology at the interface of
biology, chemistry, materials science, and mechanical, electrical, and
bioengineering. The basic principles, identified by a multidisciplinary group,
will impact multiple fields, including (i) integrative biology by providing
insight into the physical function of the lepidopteran fluidic system, (ii)
materials science by offering new knowledge on fluid-fiber interactions and
relevant fiber design parameters, (iii) robotics and control by developing
biomimetic methods for shape and fluid control, and (iv) bioengineering by
developing proboscis-inspired tissue-fluid probes. The basic principles can be
applied to the design of a wide range of future devices, as in applications
requiring low-volume fluid retrieval and analysis coupled with controlled
manipulation, such as environmental monitoring and biomedical and forensic
probing.