* 0937004
* Top-Down Constraints on North American Biogenic Volatile Organic Compounds (VOC) Emissions From Tall Tower Measurements and Lagrangian Particle Dispersion Modeling
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* John Lin, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 09/30/2013
* USD 462,185.00

Atmospheric volatile organic compounds (VOCs) are precursors of tropospheric
ozone, carbon monoxide (CO), formaldehyde, and organic aerosol, and play a
central role in hydrogen oxides (HOx) and nitrogen oxides (NOy) cycling.
Terrestrial ecosystems are the dominant source of VOCs to the global atmosphere.
This research will advance scientific understanding of biogenic VOC (BVOC)
emissions and their atmospheric effects by addressing the following core
questions: What is the landscape to regional-scale distribution of BVOC fluxes,
and how do they respond to environmental forcing and phenology? What is the
seasonal impact of BVOCs on CO and other key atmospheric species? What roles do
BVOCs play during spring and fall in driving a chemical transition between NOx
and VOC-limited regimes for ozone production? The research applies a new
measurement-model approach linking tall tower BVOC measurements with Lagrangian
and inverse modeling. Work will focus on isoprene, methanol, and acetone - three
of the most ubiquitous and important BVOCs. Specific tasks will include: 1)
Measure BVOC and CO concentrations at an Ameriflux tall tower (244 m) in the US
Midwest. Measurements will span two full annual cycles. 2) Analyze the VOC
concentrations and variability in relation to upstream sources, landcover, and
season. This unique dataset will yield new insights into the controls on
atmospheric VOC abundance and chemical impacts on timescales from minutes to
years. 3) Relate the measurements quantitatively to regional sources using the
Stochastic Time- Inverted Lagrangian Transport (STILT) model and state-of-
science emission inventories. 4) Apply a formal Bayesian inverse analysis to
place new constraints on landscape-to-regional scale (~ 100 - 1,000 km) BVOC
sources. 5) Explore the seasonal dependence of emissions and the resulting
photochemical effects on CO and other key species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impact and outreach components of the work include: 1) Broadening the
participation of underrepresented students in Earth Science research through a
partnership with the McNair Scholars program; 2) Training graduate students in
cutting-edge atmospheric chemistry measurement and modeling tools; 3) Developing
a new model-measurement tool that should be broadly useful to the scientific
community; 4) Active dissemination of scientific findings through conference
presentations and scientific publications. Finalized data will be made public
and readily available online.