* 0937800
* Collaborative Research: Cyberlearning at Community Colleges (C3): Faculty Scholarship, E-science, and Open Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 11/01/2009,09/30/2013
* John Jungck, Beloit College
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 09/30/2013
* USD 169,925.00

Biological Sciences (61)

The objective of this project is to provide structured professional development
opportunities that engage undergraduate biology faculty in exploring
contemporary teaching practices. Biology, microbiology, anatomy and physiology
faculty participate in twelve workshops emphasizing collaborative curriculum
development and in project-based online group work. Professional development
activities are built around the effective use of existing and publicly
accessible digital library materials; networked computing and communications
technologies; and E-science resources.

This project, conducted jointly by the University of Pittsburg and Beloit
College, engages biology faculty in cyberlearning experiences and prepares them
to help their students take advantage of cyberlearning opportunities. This work
provides insights into the ways that science educators take advantage of new
knowledge-sharing tools to make their own learning accessible, and how enhancing
the collective understanding in professional teaching communities informs the
use of these same tools in classrooms.

This project addresses challenges faced by community college science educators
by helping biology faculty enhance science teaching and learning by effectively
using publicly available materials and tools. By partnering with teaching
societies and digital libraries that actively reach out to two-year faculty the
project has access to workshop attendees and large numbers of teachers who
participate in online faculty development projects.