* 0937041
* Collaborative Research: Interactions Among Deposit-Feeding, Organic Matter Diagenesis andAnimal Nutrition
* NONE,NONE
* 12/12/2008,10/31/2009
* Tamara Pease, The University of Texas at Brownsville
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 10/31/2009
* USD 29,843.00

The global effects of deposit feeding on carbon burial are profound. Even though
they consume only a small fraction of sedimentary organic matter (OM), deposit
feeders influence the rate and extent of OM diagenesis by increasing oxygen
penetration into sediments, redistributing particles, and stimulating diagenetic
activity throughout the mixed layer. Sedimentary organic resources
simultaneously determine, and are determined by, the activities of the benthic
infauna. Understanding how deposit feeding and OM diagenesis interact is
critical to developing realistically coupled biological/chemical models of
carbon cycling in marine sediments.

In this study, investigators at the Skidaway Institute of Oceanography and the
University of Texas at Austin will study linkages and feedbacks between OM
diagenesis and deposit-feeder ecology by examining the foraging behavior of a
conveyor-belt feeding orbiniid polychaetes (Haploscoloplos robustus) in
experimental microcosms. Effects of sedimentary OM concentrations on individual
feeding rates, patch density, and rate x density interactions will be examined
from an optimal foraging perspective. Documenting the dynamic balance among
individual functional responses, sediment mixing, microbially-mediated organic
transformations, and nutrient assimilation is a major focus of the proposed
study. To study the coupled organism-microbe-sediment system, a novel
isotopomer-based 13C tracer experiment is proposed. Bacterial co-metabolism of
sedimentary carbon and labeled OM additions will lead to the formation of
bacterially-synthesized OM having molecular 13C isotopic signatures that are
distinct from both the (12C) sedimentary carbon and the added (13C) OM.
Measurement of the incorporation of added label into a bacterial amino acid and
fatty acid pools and subsequently deposit feeder biomass will be used to trace
the fate of carbon as a function of H. robustus feeding rate and population
density. Feedbacks among OM diagenesis, microbial production, and worm foraging
behavior and growth will be quantified by independently manipulating organic
supply, population density, and sediment mixing rate.

In terms of broader impacts, this research project will feature several inter-
institutional collaborations and will involve the training one graduate student
(at UT) and two undergraduate students from the SkIO/Savannah State CIRE
internship program.