* 0937467
* AGU Chapman Conference on Examining Ecohydological Feedbacks of Landscape Change along Elevation Gradients in Semiarid Regions, 5-9 October 2009
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2010
* Brenda Weaver, American Geophysical Union
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 09/30/2010
* USD 15,000.00

Chapman Conference on Examining Ecohydrological Feedbacks of Landscape Change
along Elevation&lt;br/&gt;Gradients in Semiarid Regions, October 5-9, 2009, Sun
Valley, Idaho, USA&lt;br/&gt;Chapman Conferences are topical meetings sponsored
by the American Geophysical Union (AGU)&lt;br/&gt;and are designed to promote
opportunities not normally available through larger meetings.&lt;br/&gt;The AGU
Chapman Conference on Examining Ecohydrological Feedbacks of Landscape Change
along&lt;br/&gt;Elevation Gradients in Semiarid Regions takes place 5-9 October
2009, in Sun Valley, Idaho.&lt;br/&gt;Ecohyrdology is an emerging and rapidly
evolving science. Several books on this topic have&lt;br/&gt;been published
since 2002, in addition to special features in journals. This Chapman
Conference&lt;br/&gt;will examine the ecohydrological changes taking place in
semiarid landscapes, across elevation&lt;br/&gt;and precipitation gradients. The
conference goal is to help scientists from different
disciplinary&lt;br/&gt;backgrounds and land managers better understand and
address the substantial changes occurring&lt;br/&gt;in semiarid landscapes. This
conference builds on the success of a previous Chapman
Conference,&lt;br/&gt;Ecohydrology of Semiarid Environments, held in
2002.&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that approximately 100 participants will
attend this conference, with a&lt;br/&gt;mix of 20% by invitation, ~80%
contributed, and about 25% will be young scientists and students.