* 0937939
* Collaborative Research: Adaptive Techniques for Achieving End-to-End QoS in the I/O Stack on Petascale Multiprocessors
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* John Dennis, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 08/31/2012
* USD 70,102.00

Abstract Emerging high-end computing platforms, such as leadership-class
machines at the petascale, provide new horizons for complex modeling and large-
scale simulations. These machines are used to execute data intensive
applications of national interest such as climate modeling, cosmic microwave
background radiation, and astrophysical thermonuclear flashes. While these
systems have unprecedented levels of peak computational power and storage
capacity, a critical challenge concerns the design and implementation of
scalable I/O (input-output) system software (also called I/O stack) that makes
it possible to harness the power of these systems for scientific discovery and
engineering design. Unfortunately, currently, there are no available mechanisms
that accommodate I/O stack-wide, application-level QoS (quality-of-
service)specification, monitoring, and management.

This project investigates a revolutionary approach to the QoS-aware management
of the I/O stack using feedback control theory, machine learning, and
optimization. The goal is to maximize I/O performance and thus improve overall
performance of large scale applications of national interest. The project uses
(1) machine learning and optimization to determine the best decomposition of
application-level QoS to sub-QoSs targeting individual resources, and (2)
feedback control theory to allocate shared resources managed by the I/O stack
such that the specified QoSs are satisfied throughout the execution. The project
tests the developed I/O stack enhancements using the workloads at NCAR, LBNL and
ANL systems. It also involves two efforts in broadening participation: CISE
Visit in Engineering Weekends (VIEW) and NASA-Aerospace Education Services
Project (NASA-AESP) at the Center for Science and the Schools (CSATS).