* 0937307
* Is there a Hierarchy of Social Inference? Intentionality, Mind, and Morality
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2009,02/28/2013
* Bertram Malle, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Rosanna Guadagno
* 02/28/2013
* USD 203,732.00

Whenever people encounter another person's behavior, they have to process a
bewildering amount of information: What is the person's gender, age, role,
social group membership? Is the behavior intentional? What is the person's goal,
what is she thinking, what is he feeling? Is this behavior good or bad? And does
it reveal the person's personality? Answers to these questions demand social
inferences: conjectures about the other person's intentional behavior, thoughts
and feelings, and morality. Previous research has provided some insight into
each of these inferences, but they were always studied in separation. In real
life, different types of social inferences occur simultaneously within the human
perceiver and must also be studied simultaneously in research. This project's
first objective is therefore to investigate the relationships among these
multiple inferences. Is there a hierarchy of social inferences -- a priority by
which people infer intentionality, mind, and morality? (For example, do people
assign blame to somebody even before they infer the person's specific goal?) How
frequently and how fast are these inferences made, and do some inferences
compete with each other or speed each other up? (For example, are inferences
about goals faster than those about personality and do inferences of
intentionality speed up inferences about blame?) The project's second objective
is to investigate which information contained in an observed behavior triggers
the various inferences -- that is, exactly what do people look at when they
infer a behavior's intentionality, the actor's emotion, or the blameworthiness
of the action? To conduct this research, the PI developed a theoretical model
and experimental paradigm for the simultaneous examination of multiple social
inferences. Unlike previous research that used written sentences to elicit
social inferences, the present project presents videotaped human behaviors as
dynamic experimental stimuli. Thus, while perceivers make social inferences as
they normally would in real life, the researcher uses computerized presentation
and measurement to assess the frequency and exact timing of these inferences.
Moreover, with a fine-grained tracking of the perceiver's eye movements while
watching the behaviors, the researcher can capture the specific information on
which these inferences are based.

By providing a clearer understanding of the fundamental social capacities
involved in inferring intentionality, mental states, and morality, this project
will inform legal processes, models of autism (where these capacities have been
shown to be deficient), relationship counseling, and cross-cultural
communication. Illuminating the exact processes by which people interpret each
other's behavior will help meet a key challenge in contemporary society: to
improve communication and avoid misunderstandings in personal, business, and
political interactions. Furthermore, the theoretical and methodological
innovations in this proposal will provide scientists with valuable new tools for
the study of human social cognition. Finally, because many of the proposed
studies can be conducted on a portable laptop computer, they permit recruitment
of diverse community members who would normally not enter the psychologist's
laboratory. The proposed research will be integrated into training and teaching
of undergraduate and graduate students, benefit from national and international
collaborations, and will be disseminated in scientific publications and
communities across multiple disciplines.