* 0937057
* EAGER Proposal: The construction, calibration and field testing of new devices for measuring fluid flow at seafloor hydrothermal vent sites
* GEO,OCE
* 05/15/2009,12/31/2013
* Leonid Germanovich, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 12/31/2013
* USD 120,367.00

The PIs have requested an EArly-Concept Grants for Exploratory Research (EAGER
to construct, calibrate, and field test new devices for making discrete
measurements of high-temperature and diffuse flow at seafloor hydrothermal
vents. The eventual goal of this research is to construct, test, and make
available devices that can be used routinely in studies of seafloor hydrothermal
systems from either ROV or submersible platforms. The PI?s plan to field test
the new devices on two cruises. These cruises will enable the PI?s to test the
devices on both submersible and ROV platforms. Moreover, the PI?s have collected
fluid flow and heat flux data from this area with previous generation of
devices, hence providing the opportunity for comparative measurements. By
determining the utility as well as the limitations of the devices in these
abbreviated field environments, the PI?s will be able to perfect the designs if
necessary before requesting funding to use these devices as part of a full field
program.

Broader Impacts

Having a suite of robust, easy to use, ease to maintain devices for measuring
fluid flow in seafloor hydrothermal systems has broad-ranging implications for
multidisciplinary, integrated investigations of these processes. The research
will support one female Ph.D. student to the completion of her degree. The
research performed under this grant will be presented at meetings, incorporated
into classroom teaching, and published in peer reviewed literature.