* 0937657
* EFRI-HyBi: Lignin Deconstruction for the Production of Liquid Fuels
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Mark Meier, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* George J. Antos
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,984,322.00

Abstract &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI Name: Rodney Andrews&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of Kentucky Research Foundation&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
0937657&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EFRI-HyBi: Lignin Deconstruction for the Production
of Liquid Fuels&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;The utilization of
lignin as a resource for the production of biofuels is presently hampered by its
resistance to chemical and biological manipulation, and consequently, by a lack
of selective and cost-efficient processes for its conversion to fuels and
chemicals. The overarching goal of this project is the development of new
processes for the direct conversion of lignin to liquid fuels, based on a sound
understanding of the chemistry of lignin deconstruction. This will require the
integration of bio-engineering, chemistry, catalysis and chemical engineering,
with the following specific objectives: &lt;br/&gt;i) Critical properties will
be designed into plant cells in order to facilitate the downstream processing of
lignin ? implementing drivers of evolution that are totally different from those
in natural systems. This will involve the utilization of research tools for
chemical biology combined with directed molecular engineering of critical crop
properties; specifically, lignin composition will be targeted, with the aim of
optimizing plant metabolism and identifying chemical probes and engineering
strategies that stimulate maximal interunit linkages among lignin structures
that are most readily cleaved. &lt;br/&gt;ii) The deconstruction of lignin will
be studied at the molecular level, to guide both the foregoing lignin
engineering activity and the development of improved processes for lignin
utilization. These studies will help to shed light on the chemistry involved in
the thermal and chemical deconstruction of the important but poorly studied â-5
linkage in lignin, as well as revealing how critical bonds in lignin can be
cleaved in low temperature oxidative processes. Through this research, improved
catalytic processes will be developed for the efficient processing of lignin
into fuels, as well as valuable chemicals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;While much attention has focused on the use of biomass to
produce ethanol, high capacity processes are required for the production of
hydrocarbon fuels and chemicals from lignocellulosic biomass. This follows from
the fact that relative to crude petroleum, ethanol is of limited use in chemical
manufacturing and has lower energy density. Furthermore, the development of
biological pathways for the conversion of cellulosic biomass to fuels will
result in the generation of huge quantities of lignin residues. Lignin is also
of interest as a feedstock due to the fact that it is more energy-dense than
cellulose or hemicellulose. Hence, if efficient methods can be found for lignin
deconstruction, a new paradigm would be created, i.e., that of biofuels
production from (engineered) lignin-rich plants. Lignocellulosic biomass could
potentially produce over 60 billion gallons of fuel per year, replacing nearly a
third of the gasoline used in the US. However, existing pyrolysis processes for
lignin deconstruction require high temperatures, making the overall energy
balance less favorable. The proposed research will therefore contribute to the
national effort to design efficient, cost-effective processes for utilization of
our abundant biomass resources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An additional outcome of
this project will be the training of students in key aspects of biofuels design
and production. Collaboration between the academic departments involved in the
project and the Center for Applied Energy Research will not only allow students
to receive traditional graduate and undergraduate education, but will also
result in their exposure to a broad range of disciplines in the field of energy
research. Emphasis will be placed on giving practical experience in the chemical
and engineering aspects of the project to those working on plant design and
manipulation, and vice versa.&lt;br/&gt;