* 0938451
* Individual PAESMEM Nomination of Dr. Isaac Crumbly, CDEP Program
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2011,04/30/2013
* Isaac Crumbly, Fort Valley State University
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 04/30/2013
* USD 10,000.00

Dr. Isaac J. Crumbly is Vice President for Career and Collaborative Programs and
the Founder and Director of the Cooperative Developmental Energy Program (CDEP)
at Fort Valley State University. He has developed a science and engineering
pipeline program that begins in the 9th grade and continues through college to
employment or to graduate school. Over the past 25 years, Dr. Crumbly has
created and directed two outstanding STEM programs at Fort Valley State
University: the dual-degree CDEP (Cooperative Developmental Energy Program, in
partnership with six other universities), and MSEA (Mathematics, Science and
Engineering Academy), both of which have provided significant financial support
for hundreds of underrepresented minorities and women from grade 9 through the
baccalaureate. In 1992, Dr. Crumbly converted CDEP from an energy internship
program for minorities into a dual degree science and engineering mentoring
program. The conversion was accomplished by forming dual degrees in Science and
Engineering programs with six universities. The objective of CDEP is to develop
a mutually beneficial long-term synergistic relationship between Fort Valley
State University and the private and governmental sectors of the nation's energy
industry by creating a technology-oriented labor base for minorities and women.
For seventeen years, Dr. Crumbly has recruited, mentored, and graduated minority
students in science and engineering (S&amp;E) disciplines. He diligently
assembled and has maintained on-going partnerships with six major universities
and numerous corporations and federal agencies. As of January 2009, Dr. Crumbly
had recruited, mentored, and graduated 68 minority engineers, 23 geoscientists,
and four health physicists. Over 500 9th-12th graders have participated in MSEA,
and over 300 undergraduates have participated in CDEP. His efforts have resulted
in producing 95 S&amp;E graduates along with approximately 100 students
currently participating in the pre-college mathematics, science, and engineering
academies program, and approximately 70 students currently enrolled in the dual
degree portion of the pipeline, which attests to the intellectual merit of the
activity.