* 0938889
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Women's Pathways to Mental Health: Comparing Psychiatry and Mystical-Spiritual Healing In Urban North India
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2010
* Rebecca Lester, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 07/31/2010
* USD 7,025.00

Doctoral student Anubha Sood (Washington University in St. Louis), supervised by
Dr. Rebecca Lester, will undertake research in India to investigate why women
experiencing mental ill health invest greater faith in mystical-spiritual
healing traditions than state-supported biomedical psychiatry. While Indian
epidemiological data reveal that men outnumber women three to one at public
health psychiatric clinics, the predominance of women in mystical-spiritual
healing sites is equally well-documented. Explaining why women prefer seeking
help at the temple rather than attending a similarly affordable and accessible
psychiatric facility will help to advance theories of health-seeking behavior
when notions of both self and health are in flux as countries modernize and
expand mental health care systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researcher will
employ ethnographic methods to compare the experiences of women attendees
seeking care in two popular settings in urban North India, a public health
psychiatric clinic and a Hindu healing temple. The research methods will include
person-centered interviews to understand women's subjective treatment
experiences; participant observation of diagnoses and therapeutic practices at
the two facilities; cultural domain analysis to understand local knowledge of
mental health and healing; and vignette technique to understand help-seeking
strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many developing countries, despite the
overwhelming popularity of traditional systems, espouse biomedical psychiatry as
the better choice for mental health care. This research is important in
understanding how frictions between local health understandings and Western
models of care in transitioning developing world contexts impact the health
needs of underserved populations such as women. Funding this research also
supports the education of a social scientist.