* 0938611
* Orographic Influences on Lake-Effect Precipitation
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/2010,05/31/2014
* W. James Steenburgh, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Edward L. Bensman
* 05/31/2014
* USD 471,147.00

Orography has a dramatic influence on lake-effect snowstorms, not only in
regions with major mountain barriers such as the Great Salt Lake Basin of
northern Utah, but also in the eastern United States and Canada where more
modest relief is found around the Great Lakes. For example, over the Tug Hill
Plateau of northern New York, which lies downstream of Lake Ontario, annual
snowfall increases 25-50 mm for every 100 m rise in elevation and storm-total
accumulations have reached 360 cm in extreme lake-effect events. Orography also
modifies the morphology of lake-effect snowstorms by altering the relationship
between the large-scale flow and the development of precipitation structures
such as broad-area precipitation shields and shoreline bands. Knowledge of lake-
orographic precipitation processes is important not only for weather prediction,
but also applications in hydrology, ecology, and
geomorphology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of the project is to
improve understanding of lake-orographic precipitation processes and their
influence on the weather and climate of lake-effect regions. Key questions to be
investigated include: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) to what extent does orography
modify the morphology of lake-effect snowstorms, &lt;br/&gt;(2) which orographic
processes and phenomena are responsible for these modifications, and
&lt;br/&gt;(3) to what degree do lake-orographic precipitation processes
contribute to the hydroclimate of lake effect regions?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These questions will be addressed in a three year research
program that examines two regions where there are strong orographic influences
on lake-effect precipitation. The first is the Great Salt Lake basin of northern
Utah where the Wasatch Mountains and other ranges rise up to 2000 m above lake
level. The second is the Tug Hill Plateau of northern New York, which provides a
broad upland region 400-500 m above Lake Ontario. The research will produce a
synthesis of results from a radar-based climatology, a field campaign, and
numerical modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: &lt;br/&gt;The
research will advance knowledge and understanding of the physical processes that
control lake-effect and orographic precipitation and, in turn, the influence of
these processes on the hydrometeorology of lake-effect regions. Efforts to
establish a relationship between the large-scale flow and lake-effect morphology
have proven challenging, with previous workers specifically identifying the need
to better understand the role of orography in altering structural transition
zones. Project results will address this need.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts: &lt;br/&gt;The project addresses the societal need to improve weather
and climate prediction in lake-effect regions. Other broader impacts
include:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) the infusion of research findings into
undergraduate and graduate courses, training courses, and web-based educational
modules, &lt;br/&gt;(2) the mentoring of two graduate students and the
broadening of the participation of women in NSF-sponsored programs, and
&lt;br/&gt;(3) the enhancement of public scientific understanding through
collaborations with an NSF GK-12 graduate fellowship program that involve
graduate student researchers in K-12 classrooms to teach discovery based
environmental science in Salt Lake City school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Further, this research program will likely
engender broad scientific interest in other allied research communities such as
hydrology, ecology, and geomorphology.