* 0938504
* EAGER: Subsequent Similar Cases to Unexpected, Exceptional Cases
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2011
* Edwina Rissland, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Pamela L. Jennings
* 06/30/2011
* USD 162,149.00

Given that change is ubiquitous, it is necessary to understand how systems can
learn in response to unexpected, exceptional, and provocative events. This
project addresses reasoning about strikingly novel, perhaps disruptive cases, so
that subsequent cases similar to the harbinger case do not take an intelligent
agent by surprise; rather, the agent can guard against harm and/or lay
groundwork to reap reward. The project explores similarity assessment among
novel, possibly high-impact cases and uses hypothetical reasoning to explore the
space of possible future cases and the implications of these cases on an agent's
environment. The extent in time and quality of this exploration (e.g., to
include representation change) are conditioned on the costs and benefits
associated with anticipating (or not) new events like the original disruptive
event.

These issues are being explored in two application domains: (1) law where there
are numerous areas with apt historical episodes of surprising exceptional cases
provoking dramatic change (e.g., warrantless search), and (2) multi-agent
distributed resource planning that allow controlled experimentation with models,
model-revision policies, and hypothetical problem scenarios (e.g., the Producer-
Consumer-Transporter domain).

The research is a fundamental step in understanding and representing the
actionability facet of concepts, particularly in the face of problematic or
atypical instances. It contributes to efforts to promote critical thinking by
showing how critical cases can provoke change. It furthers our knowledge of how
insightful hypotheticals, so called 'what if' situations, can be used to shed
light on the ramifications of actions, classifications, and policy decisions.