* 0938334
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: "Discovering China: Science, Imperialism, and Nationalism in the Chinese Frontier"
* SBE,SES
* 01/15/2010,12/31/2010
* Hsiao-pei Yen, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 12/31/2010
* USD 15,000.00

This dissertation research improvement grant, which was funded by way of the
Science, Technology and Society program, will be used to explore the
intellectual works and varied expeditions of foreign and Chinese scientists
between 1911 and 1951. The research will focus on scientists who researched the
geology, paleontology, anthropology, and archaeology of China's northwestern and
southwestern frontiers. This vast space, encompassing Xinjiang, Mongolia, Gansu,
Qinghai, Tibet, Sichuan, and Yunnan, had historically not only been a
geographical border zone, but also a zone of cross-cultural encounters. The
research of foreign and Chinese scientists in the frontier in the first half of
the 20th century resulted in the discovery of prehistoric cultures and the
famous Peking Man, as well as in pioneering work in ethnological studies on the
frontier regions non-Han people. This project examines how concerns with human
civilization, the individual search for intellectual identity, and national
interests motivated these scientists to explore the Chinese frontier; and how
ideas were exchanged and shared among scientists in certain intellectual
networks. Ultimately, it highlights the tensions between participating in global
scientific community and the desire for the indigenization of imported knowledge
systems experienced by Chinese scientists. This project argues that ideas and
debates in the international scientific arena had a great impact on the
formation of the concept of modern "China" as originated in North China and the
notion of "Chinese" as a multi-ethnic group. Moreover, it contends that Euro-
American scientific imperialism and Sinocentrism were not antagonistic. The
approach of this project elucidates the entangled histories of Chinese
nationalism and scientific imperialism, and demonstrates that the frontier is a
space for contestation against the "myth" of China. It also sheds new light on
the intellectual history of science and social history of scientists of modern
China.