* 0938344
* EAGER:Incremental and Distributed Learning in Nonstationary Environments with Applications to Wind Forecasting
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Anthony Kuh, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 08/31/2013
* USD 150,251.00

Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;This proposal examines novel on-line kernel learning
algorithms for applications in renewable energy. The PI has experience and
previous funded NSF research in the machine learning and signal processing
areas. The PI is now moving into new areas of renewable energy (specifically
wind forecasting) attempting to do both basic and applied research in this area
by applying machine learning and signal processing knowledge. This EAGER
proposal provides an opportunity to move into this area of renewable energy and
sustainability that is of key importance both nationally and in the state of
Hawaii (with the Hawaii Clean Energy Initiative (goal of having 70% of energy
generated from renewable sources and energy efficient practices by 2030). This
proposal will also assist the PI in becoming a technical and administrative
leader in the renewable energy area as he collaborates with other University of
Hawaii researchers and industry leaders in pursuing more research and
educational opportunities. Intellectual Merit: The PI has previously studied
least squares kernel algorithms, but there are still concerns about their
implementation. This proposal addresses many of these issues by considering
algorithms that balance performance, space complexity, and computational
complexity. We develop a suite of on-line kernel algorithms varying from
subspace least squares algorithms to variants of kernel LMS algorithms. The on-
line kernel algorithms work in the dual space where dimensionality of systems
increase as we add training examples. Data must be windowed. For subspace
algorithms the number of support vectors, and the dimensionality of the
matrices, LS is controlled to balance performance and complexity. We also
develop distributed on-line kernel algorithms combining results from signal
processing and machine learning. The distributed algorithms are ensemble
learning algorithms that are well suited for operation in sensor networks where
information is gathered in a distributed manner. The sensor networks may have
physical constraints (communication and energy costs) associated which make
distributed processing and learning more attractive. To understand these
different algorithms we analyze their performance and determine the complexity
of the different algorithms. A system identification approach is used to analyze
the mean and mean squared error performance of algorithms. We also study the
convergence properties of the adaptive on-line learning algorithms. Distributed
learning algorithms performance, complexity, and physical costs are studied and
analyzed. Some of the distributed learning algorithms are similar to boosting
and we study the convergence behavior of these algorithms. We also look at the
performance of learning algorithms in nonstationary environments. A focus will
be on studying the performance of on-line kernel learning algorithms in drifting
environments. With a development and analysis of the on-line kernel learning
algorithms we will be in a better position to apply the learning algorithms in a
variety of applications. In particular we look at applying these algorithm to
wind forecasting. We have some preliminary results in this area that show that
on-line kernel algorithms can accurately make short term wind prediction. We
will consider prediction from multiple sensors using distributed kernel
algorithms and longer term prediction. Distributed on-line kernel algorithms are
also well suited to extract other information from sensor networks. Broader
Impacts: The proposal is an integrated research and educational effort that can
have major impacts to machine learning, signal processing, and renewable energy.
Research from this proposal will add to the understanding and adoption of
adaptive on-line nonlinear kernel algorithms in different application areas. As
the United States and Hawaii move towards more clean energy solutions (renewable
energy and energy efficiency) more intelligence will need to be deployed in
making decisions about energy storage and usage. This proposal shows how machine
learning algorithms combined with signal processing can be used for accurate
wind prediction. The proposed research will also have major educational benefits
to both undergraduate and graduate students at the University of Hawaii. Special
effort will be given to work with the Native Hawaiian Science and Engineering
Mentorship Program (NHSEMP) in the College of Engineering to encourage Native
Hawaiian, Pacific Islander, and women students to enter graduate research
programs. This proposal will complement other group proposals that the PI has
recently written in the renewable energy area. A goal is to have the University
of Hawaii, College of Engineering being a leader player in using information
technology in the development of clean energy solutions. The PI will also look
at collaborations with international researchers in Imperial College, London and
Japan.