* 0938439
* Organizational:  Grinnell Science Project
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2011,03/31/2014
* James Swartz, Grinnell College
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 03/31/2014
* USD 10,000.00

The Grinnell Science Project (GSP) is a multi-disciplinary program aimed at
increasing the success in science of students from groups traditionally
underrepresented in the sciences, and to make the sciences accessible and
relevant for all Grinnell College students. The project was introduced in 1992,
in response to internal studies that indicated that students, particularly those
of color, female, and first-generation college students, were entering college
with an avowed interest in pursuing degrees in the sciences, but abandoning
their academic goals when they failed to do well in introductory science
courses. Science Division faculty and student life administrators developed a
program aimed at addressing three barriers to success in the sciences
experienced by underrepresented students; unsuccessful acclimation to college
life, learning styles that do not respond to traditional pedagogy, and a lack of
mentoring and role models. To address these issues, GSP was devised over a
series of years. It has involved curricular changes, activities and structures
that foster a community of scientists, and improvement of student achievement.
GSP is committed to developing the talents of all students interested in science
and mathematics, especially those from groups underrepresented in the sciences,
such as students of color, first-generation college students, and women in
physics, mathematics and computer science. Enrollment is offered to students
from underrepresented groups who express interest in science or math and who
will be first-year students at Grinnell. The main goal is to help students get
an effective start at Grinnell. A primary tool for accomplishing GSP goals is
weaving a "web of mentoring," not only close mentoring of students by their
teachers, but also student to student and faculty to faculty. GSP was also
greatly influential in the design of new science facilities at Grinnell College,
which are a national model. By promoting student achievement and excellence in
teaching and learning, GSP addresses the issue of increasing the diversity of
the STEM workforce, using a range of activities all of which are rooted in
intensive mentoring, and building a community of scientists (students and
faculty alike) that supports persistence in science through and after
graduation. Prior to the Grinnell Science Project, from 1992-1994, an average of
42 science majors graduated annually who were women and eight who were students
of color. By 2008, those numbers had increased to 90 women (a 114% increase) and
21 students of color (a 162.5% increase). Over 500 students have participated in
the pre-orientation program and earned higher average grades compared with those
who were invited but did not attend. Thousands of other students have benefited
from the curricular and pedagogical changes, as well as from the mentoring
relationships that have been established. GSP has been used as a model by a
number of institutions of higher education, including Bowdoin College and Brown
University. Efforts continue to accommodate the requests for assistance in
initiating similar programs on other campuses.