* 0938157
* EFRI-HyBi: Bioengineering a System for the Direct Production of Biological Hydrocarbons for Biofuels
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Basil Nikolau, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 08/31/2014
* USD 2,059,528.00

Abstract

PI Name: Jacqueline Shanks Institution: Iowa State University Proposal Number:
0938157

EFRI: EFRI-HyBi: Bioengineering a system for the direct production of biological
hydrocarbons for biofuels

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)

Intellectual merit: This project will develop new bio-engineering technology for
transforming the current liquid fuel industry from using fossil-carbon
feedstocks to using biorenewable feedstocks that are at the chemical level
identical to gasoline and diesel fuels, namely biologically-generated
hydrocarbons. The engineering system envisioned is a photosynthetic-based
organism that will have the bio engineered ability to chemically-reduce
atmospheric CO2 to simple hydrocarbons (e.g., n-alkanes and n-alkenes), using
sunlight as the source of renewable energy. Such metabolic conversions are known
to occur in discreet places in the biosphere, e.g., the epidermis of plants and
insects, and as a carbon/energy-storage mechanism by certain algae. The goal is
to conduct multidisciplinary studies that will identify the mechanisms and
genetic elements that encode the biocatalyst(s) that generate these hydrocarbons
in biological systems. The PIs will explore the use these isolated genetic
elements to establish to bio-engineer crops or bioengineer photosynthetic
microbes as the production platform to realize the vision of producing a
biological hydrocarbon based fuel. The proposed research will for the first time
lead to fundamental knowledge concerning the structure and mechanism of the
biocatalyst that generates biological hydrocarbons. And, the efficient use of
this novel biocatalyst in a production biological host will require the
optimization of bioengineering principles so as to proficiently integrate the
biocatalyst into a pre-existing metabolic network without compromising the
biological competence of the host. These later optimizations will integrate
concepts of biological control principles with engineering proficiencies.

Broader impacts: This project brings together a collaborative of biologists and
engineers to demonstrate a paradigm of how fundamental molecular biological
research can be integrated with disciplines of engineering to generate new bio-
engineered organisms that can be used as a sustainable production platform to
meet the global demands for new liquid biofuels. This multidisciplinary team-
approach will be an ideal venue for training and educating new cadre of students
and researchers of the synergy that is gained from the novel combination of
biological and engineering research. This type of training, which integrates
biological, genetic and biochemical research with quantitative engineering ad
economic perspectives is increasingly important to meet the grand challenges of
the 21st century, in which increased global population demands will tax the
natural system's ability to maintain a sustainable human societal
infrastructure. In this context, the PIs will foster an international
collaborative (the International BioHydrocarbon Group) that will be a venue for
trainee exchanges, which will provide students and post-docs an international
perspective in their research-based training. In addition, they will incorporate
an REU program that will recruit undergraduate students from institutions that
serve primarily under-represented groups, and foster their scientific and
engineering development through research-based education. Thus, the PIs will be
able to exhibit within this project that meeting an emerging global challenge
will demand new intellectual perspectives and solutions from the brightest young
engineers and scientists, and these will need to be developed in an increasingly
globally integrated manner. Hence, the dissemination of the combined research
outcomes generated by the biological and engineering students and post-docs of
the project will impact the respective training and education communities by
setting precedence for optimally training and mentoring young investigators and
thus transforming an emerging field.