* 0938763
* CPATH-2: Computational Thinking as a Foundation for Interdisciplinary Undergraduate Education
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Joaquin Ruiz, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2013
* USD 800,001.00

Computational concepts, techniques, and ideas have spread through many
?traditional? disciplines in recent decades, resulting in fields such as
Computational Biology and Computational Linguistics that explicitly acknowledge
their computational aspects. At the same time, however, most students in such
disciplines receive a relatively narrow education that does not expose them to
the wide range of computational concepts and techniques pertinent to their
fields of study. The University of Arizona aims to address this situation via a
campus-wide collaborative effort to train students in all fields in information
science and computational thinking. This project develops, implements, and
evaluates core components of the undergraduate curriculum for the School of
Information Sciences, Technology, and Arts (SISTA) at the University of Arizona.
The vision of SISTA is to identify how ideas in computational thinking,
information sciences, and technology apply across a variety of disciplines; to
provide a broad foundation in information science and computational thinking for
students in many majors; and to foster students? awareness of interdisciplinary
relationships starting with their first year at the university. Additionally,
new relationships between departments across campus will be formed by engaging
faculty in contributing to seminars on issues in computational thinking in their
disciplines and in bringing together and supporting multi-disciplinary faculty
teams to design, implement, and teach the new courses. The model is intended to
be transferable to other institutions. Results and evaluations will be broadly
disseminated.