* 0938308
* Symposium on Nanomaterials for Energy Applications at the 2009 American Association for Aerosol Research (AAAR) Annual Conference
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2010
* Junhong Chen, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia J. Ekstein
* 05/31/2010
* USD 5,000.00

0938308&lt;br/&gt;Chen&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the Symposium on
Nanomaterials for Energy Applications at the 2009 American Association for
Aerosol Research (AAAR) Annual Conference is to bring together aerosol
researchers who are studying aerosol nanomaterials (nanoparticles, nanotubes,
nanowires, and nanofilms, etc.) for energy applications, which include, but are
not limited to, solar-to-electricity conversion, hydrogen production by
splitting water, catalysis, fuel cells, batteries, capacitors, thermoelectric
devices. The symposium will be held at the 28th AAAR Annual Conference, October
26-30, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA. The objective of this project is to support
graduate and undergraduate students, who are choosing their future research
field and would otherwise not be able to make the AAAR conference and this
symposium. This symposium provides a unique venue for communications among
aerosol researchers who would otherwise attend conferences more generally
focusing on the materials and/or applications and therefore would not otherwise
come into close contact. In the aerosol community, traditionally there are more
researchers working in the field of controlling aerosol particles as a pollution
source. However, aerosol technology is also an enabling technology to produce
interesting materials. Selected aerosol and other researchers who are currently
leading the field will be invited to speak at the symposium. The symposium thus
also serves as a catalyst to attract more aerosol researchers to direct their
studies toward energy and particularly renewable energy
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF funding will be used to support the
participation of graduate students and undergraduate students. Participation of
graduate students and undergraduate students in the symposium will not only
benefit the students in their career development but also benefit our society by
training competent future workforce in the energy area. Particular efforts will
be made to attract and support female researchers and members of minority groups
underrepresented in science and engineering.