* 0938117
* Collaborative Research: Sustaining the Pathway for K-Gray Engineering Education
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2009,09/30/2012
* Alice Agogino, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Lee Zia
* 09/30/2012
* USD 470,997.00

The K-Gray Engineering Pathway (EP) serves as the engineering "wing" of the
National Science Digital Library (NSDL) and provides resources and services to
users and collection developers from a broad spectrum of engineering
constituencies. During the last several years EP substantially grew its user
base and number of catalog records in both content and functionality. This two-
year NSDL Pathway II project focuses on the following goals: 1) Stewardship -
Continue to provide stewardship over the Engineering Pathway metadata, search,
library services, currency of resources, and evaluation; 2) Economic
Sustainability - Realize a sustainable income stream by offering value-added
educational digital library services, with increased linkages to the NSDL, to
professional societies, publishers, companies, government agencies and new
collection developers; 3) Workshops, Outreach and Dissemination - Offer a
portfolio of in-person workshops and webinars using a "train the trainer" model
and NSDL Resource Center (RC) services; 4) Evaluation and Improved Evaluation
Metadata and Tracking - Provide improved mechanisms for documenting student and
teacher usage of EP's top tier of resources; and 5) Move to Open Source Platform
and Services - Convert from proprietary digital library services to open source
platforms with support and tools provided by the Technical Network Services
(TNS) team of the NSDL, thereby increasing accessibility and reducing future
operation costs of EP.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This Pathways II project is
enhancing knowledge and understanding within and across all disciplines of
engineering by capitalizing on educational components of cutting-edge
engineering research including for example, biotechnology, energy,
sustainability, security, nanotechnology, water resources, and new modes of
communication with a new focus on the National Academy's Grand Challenges. These
resources are being reviewed and linked to educational scholarship. EP continues
to offer its prestigious "Premier Award for Excellence in Engineering Education
Courseware" and its new "Premier Curriculum Award for K-12 Engineering" in a way
that provides in-depth understanding of learning outcomes and impact. All
relevant resources continue to be tagged with K-12 and ABET standards and
pedagogical innovations (e.g., inquiry-driven, projects-based, active, engaging,
learning-outcomes driven, gender/culturally-sensitive) in the cataloguing and
metadata fields.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Many important studies continue to
stress the importance of increasing the number and quality of engineering
graduates to meet the demands of the future and to stimulate the innovation
needed to improve U.S. competitiveness and address key engineering challenges.
EP provides educational resources for K-12, undergraduate, graduate,
professional and general public education. The EP community focuses considerable
attention to issues of diversity in higher education and inclusion of
underserved communities. Several collections in EP are specifically targeted to
K-12 and broadening participation.