* 0938918
* ARI-MA: Informatics Aided Design of Inorganic Scintillator Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Krishna Rajan, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 08/31/2011
* USD 400,000.00

The objective of this research award is to develop an informatics based approach
to the accelerated design and discovery of new radiation detector materials. The
research will integrate the formal methods of statistical learning in
information theory to first-principles and mesoscale modeling, measurements of
radiation detection characteristics, and novel high throughput screening and
modeling studies of defects in inorganic scintillator materials. The
experimental component of the program will introduce a novel atomic scale
combinatorial screening technique for dopant diffusion and charge transport
analysis to identify the interaction between crystal chemistry and defects, and
their role in affecting signal efficiency and energy resolution. The
experimental data will be used to refine our statistical learning predictions,
as well as provide critical insight into mechanisms that will guide the
interpretation of the statistical learning analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is
expected that this project will lead to new materials with optimized properties
that can significantly improve radiation detector performance beyond those
presently available. This research will also contribute to a better
understanding of the relationship between materials chemistry, crystallography,
defects and diffusion, and radiation detection characteristics. This
interdisciplinary, collaborative work will be facilitated by a
cyberinfrastructure for data sharing between Iowa State University (ISU), Case
Western Reserve University (CWRU) and Los Alamos National Laboratory (LANL. This
cooperative effort will be used to develop a ?Materials Design Traineeship
Program? for graduate students and post doctoral fellows in cooperation with
LANL to train the next generation of national facilities scientists with both
materials informatics and facility-specific expertise. Educational activities
include the development of novel teaching materials for high schools and
undergraduate courses that demonstrate the connections between statistical
learning and materials science. Teaching activities to engage and promote
students and faculty from underrepresented groups will also be developed as part
of this program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;