* 0938185
* DRU  -- Collaborative Research -- An Econophysics and Behavioral Approach to Financial Fluctuations
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Xavier Gabaix, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2011
* USD 58,002.00

DRU Collaborative Research: An Econophysics and Behavioral Approach to Financial
Fluctuations&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;H. Eugene Stanley, Boston
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;David I. Laibson, Harvard University and
NBER&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Xavier Gabaix, MIT and NBER&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
nature of the problem can be described as follows. Various measures of stock
market activity exhibit puzzling "universal" features that have recently
attracted much research attention. These features include the power law
distributions of return, volume, number of trades, assets under management of
trading institutions, and other power law relations linking them. These
universal features not only present a challenge to models of market
fluctuations, but their specific power-law nature also suggests new modeling
directions, which include ideas from statistical physics which proved useful in
understanding similar relationships that occur in the physics of critical
phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We seek to understand the origins of these
regularities, by exploring the following hypotheses: (i) Large returns arise
when a few large institutions trade in a market of fairly small liquidity. (ii)
Large returns arise when market liquidity drops, independent of the size of the
institutions involved. (iii) Large returns arise because of volatility feedback
mechanisms can also give rise to power law distributions, and generate short and
long term correlations in trading activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We approach
this problem by developing simple rational and boundedly rational models, and
analyzing extremely large data sets. This synergy between compact tractable
models and the exploration of vast data sets has been the prime method of our
research group. Our empirical research will study the joint distributions of
returns, volume, number of trades, and liquidity. This includes studying in
detail the price impact of trade and its variations under different market
conditions. The modeling will involve designing models of financial decision
making, that can provide testable implications that our empirical research will
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential impact of our work includes the
following. First, we will understand what creates large economic fluctuations.
In particular, our work will delineate between competing hypotheses that seek to
explain the power-law distribution of returns, and systematically explore the
role of volume and liquidity in explaining the specific exponent value. Second,
more generally our work may give some insight into quantifying and understanding
collective human behavior using concepts of statistical physics, behavioral
finance, and psychology. We will also show that a useful way to formulate the
models is to draw from research in decision making in complex environments,
which itself draws from cognitive psychology.&lt;br/&gt;