* 0938072
* EFRI-BSBA: Nanoactuation and Sensing of Neural Function for Engineering Future Biomimetic Retinal Implants and Therapies
* ENG,EFMA
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2017
* Scott Shippy, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 07/31/2017
* USD 2,399,920.00

ABSTRACT for EFRI-BSBA: Nanoactuation and Sensing of Neural Function for
Engineering Future Biomimetic Retinal Implants and Therapies &lt;br/&gt;PI:
Laxman Saggere, Mechanical and Industrial Engineering, University of Illinois at
Chicago (UIC) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Retinal degenerative diseases such as age-related macular
degeneration (AMD) affect over 10 million people in the US alone, causing a
significant decline in the quality of their lives. Currently available therapies
are at best only somewhat effective. Over the last two decades, several groups
around the world have been pursuing the development of a retinal prosthesis,
with the goal of providing a restorative aid for patients affected by retinal
diseases due to photoreceptor degeneration. Nearly all of the current retinal
prosthesis developments rely on the principle of stimulating the retina
electrically, which is conceptually simple; however, a number of challenges
still remain to be overcome in this approach and fully functional, long-lasting
devices are not on the immediate horizon. On the other hand, a widely occurring
mechanism of intercellular communication in the normally functioning retina as
well as elsewhere in the nervous system is the chemical synapse. Inspired by the
nature's complex mechanism of transducing visual information into chemical
signals via the chemical synapse, the applicants envision an unconventional, but
rational, approach to restore the lost functionality of photoreceptors: a light
modulated chemical interface at the retina. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Toward this
long-term vision of a chemically based retinal implant, the proposed project
seeks to understand how the retina and retinal neurons respond physiologically
to controlled focal presentation of chemical stimuli in vitro so that a general
engineering framework for developing a prosthetic system based on the
functionality of the diseased neurons can be further explored. There exist two
distinct classes of chemicals, viz. native neurotransmitters and tethered
synthetic biomolecules, that are promising as transmitters, and each offers
certain unique advantages. Therefore, in this project, they propose to
investigate the efficacy and feasibility of eliciting physiological responses of
retinal neurons when focally stimulated by both types of chemicals delivered by
means of specially engineered micro- and nanoscale delivery devices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This novel approach is fundamentally different from the
more common approach of electrically stimulating retinal neurons, and distinct
from chemical-based strategies recently proposed by other groups. Thus, the main
intellectual merit of this proposal lies in generating new scientific and
technical knowledge that could be transformative to the development of a
biomimetic retinal implant to restore lost or damaged retinal function.
Ultimately, if successful, this research could lead to a new paradigm and
breakthroughs in retinal prostheses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project, if successful, could break new
ground in the area of visual prosthesis and someday help provide vision
perception to millions of people affected by retinal degenerative diseases. The
devastating complications associated with vision loss, and the progressive aging
of the US population with a corresponding increased incidence of AMD in
otherwise healthy individuals, emphasize an urgent national need to develop
effective prostheses and therapies for retinal degenerative diseases. Beyond the
impact on vision health, this research could also lead to other novel drug
delivery strategies and biomimetic therapies for treating a variety of
neurological disorders such as Parkinson's. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
interdisciplinary collaboration of researchers with a diverse expertise in this
project provides a unique opportunity and framework for interdisciplinary
education and training of secondary school through postdoctoral students at the
frontiers of engineering, neuroscience, and medicine. Four graduate students and
one postdoctoral student will undertake interdisciplinary research addressing
the tasks involved in this project in the investigators' labs across three
different colleges at UIC. Several educational activities integrated with the
proposed research including undergraduate research and outreach will be
implemented.