* 0938135
* Conference:  The Gordon Research on 2009 DEVELOPMENTAL BIOLOGY; Proctor Academy, Andover, New Hampshire
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2010
* Claude Desplan, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Heinz De Couet
* 05/31/2010
* USD 12,000.00

Developmental Biology is at the center of the Life Sciences. Its goal is to
understand how the fertilized egg grows and is transformed into an adult
organism. Developmental biologists have uncovered the basic biological processes
of embryogenesis and pattern formation that led to the Nobel Prize awarded in
1995. They also study the formation of organs, of the nervous system and how sex
is determined. They have also discovered the process of aging and how cell death
can be programmed to shape an organism (Nobel 2002). Developmental biologists
were also the first to clone animals. They have discovered microRNAs (that led
to the Lasker award in 2008) and have analyzed the major signaling pathways
whose mis-regulation leads to cancer. Developmental biologists have also
developed important technological advances, from genome manipulation (Nobel
2007) to RNAi (Nobel 2006) and in vivo imaging using fluorescent proteins (Nobel
2008). They have provided the foundations for stem cell biology and tissue
engineering and have created the context to understand human birth defects and
disease. The impact of the field is a result of the study of whole organisms
(rather than isolated cells) using a wide variety of technological and
intellectual approaches. As these studies expand into new areas such as tissue
regeneration and systems biology, major contributions can be expected in the
coming years. Developmental Biology is thus a core discipline of the Life
Sciences and is transforming the Medical Sciences. Over 120 developmental
biologists will meet on June 21-26 at the Gordon Research Conference to discuss
recent progress in the field and exchange ideas. The conference will include
minorities and a large proportion of women that reflects their high
representation in the field. Emphasis was given to inviting a number of young
speakers and to avoid repeats of previous conferences held in the same field.