* 0938995
* CPATH-1:  Asserting Parallel Computational Thinking into Undergraduate 4-year Computer Science Curriculum
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Edusmildo Orozco, University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* Continuing Grant
* Nina Amla
* 09/30/2013
* USD 299,633.00

Technological advances enable creation of systems on such large scales that
design, analysis, and implementation require expert skills. These skills must
include analytical and algorithmic thinking, the ability to abstract complexity,
and the capacity to understand concurrency. To strengthen these skills in
graduates of the computer science undergraduate program offered at University of
Puerto Rico - Rio Piedras, and to create professionals that are better equipped
to face the new professional and academic realities, our program will be
redesigned to incorporate Parallel Computational Thinking (PCT) concepts
throughout most of its curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The seven members of our
faculty will undergo development in Computational Thinking (CT) and parallel
concepts. This will empower us to redesign CS core courses by infusing PCT
concepts. We will develop assessment tools that will measure student aptitudes
and attitudes toward PCT. A parallel computation platform will be implemented
locally and access to remote supercomputing centers will be established.
Seminars on topics using CT and PCT will be sponsored and open to the general
K-20 community. This project represents the first building block for the
successful integration of CT into our undergraduate curriculum. Hence it
provides a foundation for further growth toward a CT-centric and
interdisciplinary Computer Science program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our efforts
will result in an undergraduate program that reflects current computational
practice in academia and in the private sector, and that ultimately produces
professionals better equipped to tackle technological and scientific challenges.
All project activities will be documented and made publicly available through
external publications and through the department web page. Therefore our
experience will serve as an information source for institutions that consider
similar changes to their computer science curricula.