* 0938199
* Collaborative Research:   Integrated Study of an Exceptional Avifauna from the Eocene Green River Formation: New Data on Avian Evolution and Taphonomy
* GEO,EAR
* 01/03/2009,12/31/2011
* Julia Clarke, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 12/31/2011
* USD 116,107.00

The pattern and timing of the emergence of all living birds remain some of the
most contentious questions in vertebrate systematics. Avian fossils are
increasingly sought as calibration points for molecular divergence dating and
used to test macroevolutionary hypotheses. This project will investigate the
best-preserved early Paleogene avian assemblage from North America to forward
rapidly our understanding of Cenozoic avian evolution and taphonomy. The
assemblage comprises a rich sample of exceptionally preserved, but largely
uncharacterized, fossils deposited in less than ~2000 years in distinct, mapped,
and sedimentologically characterized sub-environments of a single lake. The
deposits are tightly dated to 50.2+-1.9 Mya and occur in the Fossil Butte Member
in Wyoming. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is the first to integrate
systematic analyses and an investigation of preservational biases that impact
fossil evidence from key lake assemblages. The results are essential to gaining:
1) a global perspective on early Paleogene avian biodiversity; 2) an
understanding of the timing and paleobiogeographic patterns of the avian
radiation; and 3) answers to fundamental questions of how birds and their
feathers are preserved in key lacustrine environments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
results will have wider significance in providing a basis for comparison and
indication of likely biases in other assemblages of fossil birds preserved in
similar settings such as the Early Cretaceous Jehol Group that yields feathered
dinosaurs. The only way to discover what categories of taxa may be
systematically missing in such deposits is through the approach proposed here:
phylogenetic and taphonomic study of one of the most complete 'snap shots' of
avian diversity under the best conditions possible. The broader impacts of the
project include novel integration of specimen-based teaching of anatomy,
systematic methodologies, and taphonomic approaches; postdoctoral, doctoral and
undergraduate training; and the promotion of public understanding of evolution
and biodiversity via museum exhibits, linked outreach materials, and lectures.