* 0938223
* Excitation and Emission Properties of Molecular Nitrogen for Earth's Thermosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2013
* Donald Shemansky, Space Environment Technologies
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2013
* USD 298,108.00

The investigators will combine experimental measurement and theoretical
calculation to determine molecular nitrogen excitation and emission properties
that are critical to the rate processes of nitrogen rich thermospheres.
Molecular nitrogen is transparent to solar radiation from the infrared to the
far ultraviolet where the forbidden Lyman-Birge-Hopfield and Vegard Kaplan band
systems show weak, discrete absorption transitions. Strong absorption of solar
radiation occurs in the extreme ultraviolet where the singlet ungerade
electronic states show strong discrete blended structure. These states are
closely spaced in energy and are strongly coupled. Many of them are strongly
predissociative and a major source of chemical radicalization in the atmosphere.
The strong coupling among the ungerade states results in very large rotational
dependence of transition dipole matrix elements and predissociation yields. The
strong rotational dependence in cross sections and predissociation yields
requires that laboratory measurements must be translated to projected
atmospheric temperature through modeling to avoid large errors. The impact of
the strong rotational dependence has not been considered in many atmospheric
models. Predissociation yields will be determined from a comparison of emission
and excitation cross sections. The measured emission cross sections, together
with the already measured, high resolution photoabsorption cross sections, will
be utilized to determine the diabetic electronic transition moments. A coupled-
channel model will be used to analyze the measurements and calculate spontaneous
transition probabilities and predissociation yields. The research in this
program connects the community concerned with the understanding of the
thermosphere with researchers in laboratory geophysics and theoretical atomic
and molecular physics. The program addresses fundamental physical properties of
molecular nitrogen, which are critical to understanding the upper atmospheres of
Earth, Titan and Triton. As such, the results of the work are applicable beyond
the restricted targets identified here, and become a knowledge base for a broad
range of disciplines. The program has extensive participation of undergraduate,
graduate students and post-doctoral scholars.