* 0938034
* Communities of Learning for an Established Learning Object Library
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2012
* Carol Speth, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 12/31/2012
* USD 149,953.00

Since its inception in October 1999, the Plant and Soil Sciences e-Library
project - a collection of "learning objects" - has grown to include 120 lessons
(11 in Spanish) and 116 animations (21 in Spanish). These numbers have continued
to rise and include topic areas in soil science, weed science, plant physiology,
plant genetics, horticulture science, and turf science. A growing team of 28
content authors from 9 US and International academic institutions and other
partners are contributing peer-reviewed content to the e-Library. It has
experienced nearly 12 million hits from 427,269 unique visits from US and
foreign sites in the past 12 months.

A key challenge for digital libraries that are growing but also aging is to
update, prune, and develop new educational materials, courses, and workshops
that keep instructors, outreach experts, and students at the cutting edge by
facilitating rapid adoption by end-users. Materials developers have continued to
create new materials that have the potential to begin addressing this challenge,
particularly in meeting the needs of advanced professionals and adult learners
interested in continuing education, as well as students interested in pursuing
formal academic degrees. This project is re-developing (or re-invigorating) a
digital learning community where learning objects can be redesigned, reorganized
and aggregated to facilitate active inquiry learning experiences that reflect
state of the art knowledge. The project's objectives are: 1) Develop an online
community for the purpose of developing a more effective learning environment
(to take advantage of Web 2.0) where developers and selected teachers can share
their ideas, successes, and experiences in using the e-Library and engage in
collaboratively repackage the objects; 2) Create a digital learning community
framework in which the repackaging of learning objects may be driven by the non-
guided learner, such as industry leaders, policy makers, or applied science
practitioners needing professional development to meet the skills required in
the workforce; and 3) Assess the new impact of these learning communities and
continue the evaluation of how students and other learners with varying learning
styles utilize the educational resources.