* 0938795
* DOE-NSF Workshop:  Coordinated Approaches to Address Long-Term Issues in Global Change Experiments, to be held on August 13-14, 2009, at the Hyatt in Bethesda, MD
* BIO,EF
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2011
* Yiqi Luo, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 05/31/2011
* USD 13,000.00

Ecosystem responses to global change are strongly regulated by long-term
processes such as soil carbon dynamics, species replacement, shifts in community
structure, accrual of nitrogen capital in ecosystems, and primary and secondary
succession. Scientists have developed a variety of complementary approaches to
address these long-term issues. Each approach has its benefits, challenges, and
limitations. This workshop will explore the breadth of existing approaches and
activities to addressing this challenge. These approaches include space-for-time
studies; studies along natural gradients of temperature and precipitation; and
simulation modeling often combined with sophisticated data simulation approaches
among others. It is critical to develop coordinated approaches to address long-
term issues in global change research. Important topics that must be considered
include: 1) key research questions; 2) appropriate research approaches including
experiments and the required infrastructure; and 3) data analysis techniques
especially suited for the study of long-term phenomena. The workshop
participants will review extant long-term research efforts on climate change
impacts, brainstorm on key long-term issues, examine effectiveness of long-term
experiments, and develop coordinated approaches to investigate long-term
processes. This workshop is vital to foster the ongoing scientific discussion
and development of any future experimental approaches or designs for addressing
the long-term processes associated with global change.