* 0938330
* Atomic Scale Study of High-Temperature Iron-Based Superconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Juan Idrobo, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 08/31/2013
* USD 394,392.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The recent
discovery of a new iron-based family of high-temperature superconductors has
generated tremendous interest in the scientific community. The discovery offers
a new avenue for understanding the mechanism that gives rise to high-temperature
superconductivity. The iron-based high-temperature superconductors are also of
great interest for applications. For example, if the iron-based materials can be
molded cost-efficiently into flexible wires, withstand high critical current
densities and still be superconductors at liquid nitrogen temperatures, they
offer the potential to transform the electrical power industry. In this program,
the aim is to provide a framework in which mechanisms for superconductivity of
the iron-based materials can be explored by using advanced methods of structural
and electronic characterization combining state-of-the-art scanning transmission
electron microscopes with state-of-the-art first-principles (parameter-free)
calculations. The research program also includes training of a graduate student
in the most advanced experimental methods and computational modeling to study
materials at the atomic level. The training of students along both experimental
and theoretical disciplines is a unique aspect of the proposed activity, and is
expected to offer a wider range of career opportunities for the students in the
current competitive job market. They plan to participate in outreach programs
for high school teachers and students to develop high school lectures and hands-
on teaching modules focused particularly in physics concepts that are directly
applied in electron microscopy.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The
goal of this research program is to obtain a fundamental understanding of the
electronic and atomic structure-property relationships in the recently
discovered iron-based superconductors, using a combination of state-of-the-art
experimental and computational modeling techniques. They propose to achieve this
goal by investigating the atomic and electronic structures of the iron-based
superconductors using atomic-resolution Z-contrast imaging, bright-field imaging
and electron energy-loss spectroscopy (EELS) in an aberration-corrected scanning
transmission electron microscope (STEM), total energy first-principles
calculations based on density functional theory (DFT) and dynamical electron
scattering (DES) calculations. They expect that this synergistic approach, where
theory and experiment are equally emphasized, is going to have a significant and
timely impact by providing, (i) a framework in which mechanisms for
superconductivity of the iron-based materials can be explored, (ii) a detailed
understanding at the atomic scale of the influence of defects on the macroscopic
superconducting properties of the iron-based materials. The research program
also includes training of a graduate student in the most advanced experimental
methods and computational modeling to study materials at the atomic level. The
training of students along both experimental and theoretical disciplines is a
unique aspect of the proposed activity, and is expected to offer a wider range
of career opportunities for the students in the current competitive job market.
The methods and results of the research project proposed here will also be
shared with high school students, further impacting the development and
formation of students interested in and ready to pursue scientific research.