* 0938325
* Assessing the Impact of Parameterized Gravity Wave Drag on Climate Change Forecasts: A Systematic Investigation with Global Circulation Models
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2013
* Edwin Gerber, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Anjuli Bamzai
* 12/31/2013
* USD 375,936.00

This project seeks to understand and quantify the uncertainty associated with
gravity wave drag (GWD) parameterization in climate models, particularly for
climate change forecasts. Gravity waves influence the global circulation of the
atmosphere by transporting momentum between and within the troposphere and
stratosphere, but are too small to be adequately resolved in state-of-the-art
climate models. Hence their effects are estimated, or parameterized, based on
the resolved variables of the model. Recent studies have demonstrated that
uncertainty in how GWD is parameterized has a first order impact on both the
tropospheric and stratospheric response to anthropogenic forcing. Existing
studies of parameterizations, largely performed "offline" with fixed background
winds, are insufficient to quantify these uncertainties, as the impact of GWD is
amplified by interaction with synoptic and planetary waves. To redress these
concerns, the investigators will establish a framework for testing GWD
parameterizations in an idealized general circulation model
(GCM).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The idealized GCM captures the stratospheric and
tropospheric circulation with fidelity, but with computational efficiency that
permits us to systematically assess the impact of GWD parameters on a changing
climate, driven both by trends in the troposphere (i.e. tropical upper
tropospheric warming) and stratosphere (i.e. the cooling/heating of the polar
vortex associated with ozone loss/recovery). The investigators will use the
model to understand the influence of GWD on (1) trends in the tropospheric
circulation, in particular shifts in the extratropical jet streams, (2) trends
in the stratospheric circulation, in particular the Brewer-Dobson Circulation,
and (3) stratospheric climate and variability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of the research are (1) to help improve understanding and confidence in
climate change forecasts, (2) to educate and mentor students at the
undergraduate and graduate level, and (3) to provide a more general
understanding of climate forecasting. The inherent uncertainty in climate
prediction is a significant problem for the scientific community in
communicating with the public. This project provides a case study in how models
(in particular GCMs) can be used to quantify uncertainty, and used for outreach
directed at undergraduate students.