* 0938773
* ARI-MA: Development of a New Method for Interrogating Special Nuclear Materials Based Upon Polarized (gamma, n) Asymmetries
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Henry Weller, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 08/31/2010
* USD 400,000.00

The proposed research will contribute to the development of new technologies to
perform non-intrusive detection of nuclear materials that could pose a threat to
national security. There are a number of methods for cargo interrogation under
development that are based on using gamma-ray beams to identify specific nuclear
isotopes. Nuclear data are needed to interpret the results of measurements of
gamma-ray induced reactions and to identify the nuclear isotopes of interest.
This proposal will utilize the intense polarized gamma-ray beam of the HIgammaS
facility (at Duke University) to investigate the use of polarization observables
as a means of finger printing isotopes. The premise of the proposed technique is
that the magnitude and the energy dependence of the ratio of parallel to
perpendicular neutron yields is unique for the isotopes of
interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Deliverables include the ratio of the yields of
neutrons emitted parallel vs. perpendicular to the direction of polarization for
25 different isotopes measured at incident energies between 10 and 20 MeV.
Special attention will be paid to the isotopes of 233, 235, 238U, 239Pu, and
237Np. These results will be the foundation of a polarization-based technique of
cargo interrogation and will guide the technical specifications for the
development of intense polarized gamma-ray beam sources such as the T-REX source
currently being developed at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory. These
polarized beam studies of photo-fission reactions, being unique and original,
will lead to new insights into the nature of fission reactions. Graduate and
undergraduate students, including students from a historically black university,
will participate in all aspects of this research project and receive hands-on
training in all of the techniques needed to execute the proposed research.