* 0938075
* Developing Guidelines for Using Digital Media Visualization Resources to Support Student Inquiry in Online Laboratory Investigations
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2012
* David Uttal, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 12/31/2012
* USD 415,505.00

Interdisciplinary (99)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to
study the efficacy of visualization techniques in an online laboratory learning
environment and, in general, the integration of media into a wide range of
cyberlearning tools. The expected outcomes include a set of guidelines for
integration of visualizations into a standardized online lab user interface; on
assisting curriculum developers and teachers in identifying the types of
visualizations that are most useful in supporting student learning in an
authentic scientific inquiry; and on guiding their search for appropriate
visualization resources in NSDL repositories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
focuses on the ways in which learning experiences can be effectively designed by
asking questions: about types of visualizations needed to support student
learning; about the place in the learning sequence where each visualization and
accompanying activity is placed; about giving a choice to learners whether they
are directed to specific visualizations at specific points in the inquiry
process or whether they are allowed to choose which visualization to view at
their discretion. By producing specific guidelines, this project has a potential
to improve the integration of appropriate visualizations into student scientific
investigation activities, support individualized learning paths, and accommodate
different learning approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The guidelines developed
during this project are shared with the NSDL Technical Network Services Group,
all end-users of Teachers' Domain or other NSDL archives. They provide more
descriptive metadata that improves the search and selection of appropriate
visualizations from these repositories and can serve as a model for improving
resource integration in a wide range of learning contexts.