* 0938942
* ARI-MA:  Research Program in Exploiting Time-Correlated Signatures and Directionality of Interrogation to Detect Shielded Highly-Enriched Uranium
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Jason Hayward, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 08/31/2010
* USD 399,654.00

The research objective of this award is to advance knowledge and understanding
of a new fast-neutron imaging technique which is capable of detecting and
characterizing shielded highly-enriched uranium.&lt;br/&gt;This understanding
will be applied to improving system performance parameters including angular and
timing resolution. The research approach includes both experimental and
simulation work related to the system as a whole and two associated position-
sensitive detectors, one of which is coupled to an interrogating neutron source.
The project leverages recent advances in the medical imaging community as well
as infrastructure and expertise at Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL).
Deliverables include modeling and analysis tools, demonstration and validation
via hardware, documentation of research results, graduate coursework
development, and engineering student education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, the results will improve the confidence in detection and
characterization of shielded nuclear threats in small to medium-sized containers
(up to ~1 m per side). Multiple undergraduates, graduate students, and
postdoctoral researchers will be involved in the proposed 5-year research and
educational development effort. The results will be disseminated, and the
research will be integrated into our graduate coursework, part of which is
delivered by distance education. We will outreach to Prairie View A&amp;M
University (a HBCU) and partner with them for research support in simulations.
The work will deepen collaboration with ORNL, make use of their existing
infrastructure, and build infrastructure for research and education at the
university.