* 0938756
* U.S.-India Workshop: Articulate and Disseminate Research Priorities on Forest Canopies, Bangalore, October 2009.
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2010
* Margaret Lowman, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 08/31/2010
* USD 31,460.00

0938756&lt;br/&gt;This award supports travel for a US delegation of senior and
junior scientists to participate in the U.S.-India Workshop: Articulating and
Disseminating Research Priorities on Forest Canopies, Bangalore, October 2009.
US PI Kamal Bawa, University of Massachusetts Boston and co-PI Margaret Lowman,
New College of Florida are organizing the workshop with Indian host, Dr. T.
Ganesh, Ashoka Trust for Research in Ecology and the Environment, Bangalore. The
two-day workshop will follow the 5th International Canopy Conference
(www.canopy2009.org) that will bring together the scientists from the U.S.,
Europe, and Australia who have been pioneers in exploring the forest canopies
and have fostered collaborative research in these regions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;The post-conference workshop
will bring together a sub-set of 30 canopy leaders and an emerging generation of
young scientists who will be charged with defining research priorities in canopy
science and creating an ambitious plan to foster collaborative research and
education programs canopies over the next five to ten years. Additional goals
are to highlight the relevance of canopy research to important global
challenges, such as climate change, sustainability, and conservation. Its
integration with natural science, social science, and information technology is
important and will help promote ecological research in Indian forests, the link
to global efforts, and insure a sound research platform using multidimensional
approaches and the latest technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts
&lt;br/&gt;The workshop provides opportunities to build international networks,
promote increased diversity in the field of canopy ecology, and increase the use
of technology to broaden the scope and effectiveness of canopy research. The
principal investigators will offer a strong component of education outreach,
ranging from public talks for Indian audiences to a series of newspaper articles
and efforts to work with K-12 on canopy curricula. The public education outreach
lectures will facilitate science communication with Bangalore families,
students, and citizens. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;