* 0938810
* ARI-MA: Design and Growth of High Density, Wide Band-Gap Semiconductor Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,03/31/2011
* Bruce Wessels, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 03/31/2011
* USD 400,000.00

This project investigates the use of novel materials specially designed for high
resolution room-temperature identification of ã-rays emitted from fissile
materials. This effort will enhance the state of the science and body of
knowledge for highly dense, heavy element semiconductors with relatively wide
energy gaps. The proposed project has the potential to be transformative in
nature because it will identify new materials for sensitive ã-ray detection
using a new idea for materials design based on the concept of ?dimensional
reduction? of covalent frameworks. Using crystal growth techniques, we will grow
and survey a variety of semiconducting compounds to validate their energy gaps
and their resistivity. A minimum room temperature resistivity of ~108 Ohm-cm is
required in the desired materials in order to allow for larger biases to be
applied, resulting in faster carrier drift velocities and deeper depletion
depths in the detection device. For the highest Z materials, the so-called Fano
noise can also be substantially decreased (and thus energy resolution improved),
by choosing compounds such as the chalcogenides proposed here. The materials
will be characterized and tested in both crystal and device form for ã-ray
detection. Theory-based materials design will depend strongly on knowledge-based
optimization of the desirable properties of high Z wide gap semiconductors. The
selection process and experimental approach will also rely closely on
theoretical guidance. This is a close interdisciplinary collaboration between
synthesis, measurement and theory involving groups with complementary skills.