* 0938041
* Is there an educational advantage to NSDL? Assessing impact on cognitive processes and learning outcomes during resource selection and use.
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Anne Cook, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 08/31/2013
* USD 328,905.00

Psychology - Cognitive (73)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project
is to investigate whether NSDL tools and services support efficient selection of
digital resources for educational purposes and whether these tools and services
promote successful learning with these resources as measured by users' cognitive
processes. The expected outcomes include a detailed analysis of the learning
outcomes associated with two major NSDL tools that target the identification and
contextual use of resources: NSDL General Search and NSDL Science Literacy Maps.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, conducted by the University of Utah,
provides critical data about how digital library tools can promote effective
learning with distributed learning objects on the Web. Phase 1 of the project
uses a laboratory study to examine the influence of NSDL tools on pre-service
teachers as they search for and use educational digital resources, Phase 2
brings in-service teachers into the lab, assessing their cognitive processes and
outcomes as they use NSDL to perform a series of educational tasks, and Phase 3
moves to the classroom, assessing the impact of NSDL tools on student thinking
and learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this project is a
better understanding of the educational effectiveness of NSDL technologies and
resources as well as recommendations on more effective tool and service design
to promote positive impact on learning processes and outcomes. The evaluation
materials and protocols are published for reuse in other digital library
research.