* 0938172
* Individual Nomination of Anthony Carpi
* EHR,DUE
* 04/15/2011,03/31/2014
* Anthony Carpi, CUNY John Jay College of Criminal Justice
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 03/31/2014
* USD 10,000.00

Dr. Anthony Carpi has served with John Jay College for 12 years. Dr. Carpi has
championed a series of innovations that have substantially increased minority
access to the sciences by significantly reducing attrition, greatly improving
graduation rates, and dramatically increasing the number of graduates who pursue
advanced degrees in the sciences. This series of innovations has integrated a
culture of mentoring into the science program at John Jay College and has had
particular benefits for their large population of minority students. Dr. Carpi
has personally mentored 32 students, of which 56% are minority students. His
students have been among the most successful scientists produced by John Jay
College in the last decade - 11 of his mentees have gone on to pursue doctoral
degrees, an unprecedented and truly remarkable achievement for John Jay. Dr.
Carpi has worked to transform the science program at John Jay from training-
oriented to research-oriented. He has spearheaded two substantial College-wide
improvements: co-creating the Math &amp; Science Resource Center (MSRC) and
founding the Program for Research Initiatives for Science Majors (PRISM). MSRC
serves thousands of students per semester and helped substantially reduce
attrition from the science program in the first two years of the major. PRISM, a
formal student research program and FOS402: Research Internships for
Undergraduates, an undergraduate research course created by Dr. Carpi at John
Jay College, have increased the number of undergraduates participating in
mentored research from one to two per year to 32 in the 2007-2008 academic year
alone and have contributed to significant increases in program graduation rates
in recent years, especially among minority students. Dr. Carpi has served as an
exemplar to his colleagues, and has contributed to the national effort to
improve science mentoring. The MSRC has supported several thousand students
since its founding, and has contributed to an approximately 30% increase in
retention rates in the sciences. PRISM has affected more than 100 students since
its creation, and has been a major factor in the almost three-fold increase in
graduation rates from John Jay College's science programs.