* 0938520
* US-Egypt Advanced Studies Institute on Nanomaterials and Nanocatalysis for Energy, Petrochemicals and Environmental Applications, Cairo, Egypt January 2010
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2009,01/31/2012
* Mohamed Samy El-Shall, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 01/31/2012
* USD 100,000.00

0938520 &lt;br/&gt;Elshall&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal is for support of
an Advanced Study Institute (ASI) for US-Egypt on Nanomaterials and
nanocatalysis for Energy, Petrochemicals and Environmental Applications, to be
held in Cairo, Egypt, March 27-April 7, 2010. The collaborating scientists are
Dr. Mostafa El-Sayed, at Georgia Institute of Technology and Dr. Hany el-Nazer,
President, National Research Center (NRC) in Cairo. The ASI will focus on mixing
the basic fundamental concepts of catalysis and surface science with the most
recent advances and developments in the field of nanocatalysis and the new
industrial and technological applications related to energy and environmental
problems.&lt;br/&gt; The ASI will provide education and training for both U.S.
and Egyptian advanced graduate students and postdoctoral researchers.
Specifically it will: 1. bring 10 Professors and research leaders, 15 graduate
students and 5 postdoctoral researchers from multi-disciplinary areas from the
U.S. to participate with equal numbers of Egyptian graduate students and
postdoctoral researchers over the 12-day ASI. Particular efforts will be
directed to identify US members of minority groups to participate in this ASI.
2. make presentations to US and Egyptian students to learn a state-of-the-art,
cutting edge important and exciting research dealing with the synthesis,
characterization and applications of nanoparticles and nanostructured materials
for innovative solutions to the energy, petrochemicals and environmental
problems. 3. review the fundamental science dealing with nanoscale phenomena,
have in-depth discussions on the utilization of state-of-the-art of technology
in research and share information on new breakthroughs in nanocatalysis research
for energy, petrochemicals and environmental applications 4. promote and
stimulate collaboration in nanotechnology between American and Egyptian
researchers with special attention paid to promoting women and African American
researchers at the beginning of their careers in international collaboration in
areas that have great impact on the World?s energy and environmental problems.
5. establish joint research projects between the participating US and Egyptian
institutions, which could lead to economic developments involving the private
sectors in Egypt and the US. The synergism produced by bringing together the US
and Egyptian students and researchers in nanostructured materials and
nanotechnology is expected to enhance the scientific collaboration between the
two countries which will take this field a step closer in realizing its enormous
potential for novel nanotechnologies. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The ASI
deals with a current and important topic of research with applications in
energy, petrochemicals and environmental. These are important, active areas of
research, with many opportunities for increased fundamental understanding, and
many important technological applications. The planned series of lectures will
thoroughly cover the field. The expected participants are eminent in their
fields. This project will enable new collaborations between the US and the
Egyptian researchers in fields that could lead to significant scientific
advances and discoveries related to energy and environmental problems. This is
expected to enhance the scientific knowledge in these and other related fields,
and it may lead to new exciting technologies. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
ASI will lead to engaging US graduate students and postdoctoral researchers
including underrepresented groups in the international scientific enterprise. It
will allow students and scientists from the U.S. and Egypt to exchange their
experiences, ideas, and information and to build collaborations to promote
nanotechnology for the benefit of the public and private sectors. It is likely
that there will be new collaborations amongst the PIs in Egypt and the US, with
particular emphasis given to young minorities. There is strong possibility for
young scientists to make international scientific connections early in their
careers. &lt;br/&gt;