* 0938925
* ARI-MA: Machine Learning for Effective Nuclear Search and Broad-Area Monitoring
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Simon Labov, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 08/31/2010
* USD 300,688.00

The research objective of this award is to develop machine learning techniques
to enhance the performance of mobile radiation detection systems. The research
will produce methods for detection and explanation of complex patterns in data
collected by such systems, while taking into account many more sources of
information and factors than a human analyst can process. The developed
algorithms will also have the ability to adapt to changing conditions and
emerging patterns of threats. The methods will be tested in real-world scenarios
against data collected in environments that are awash in ambient, varying
background radiation, and which include natural and manufactured radioactive
sources that pose no security threat. Deliverables include descriptions of
developed algorithms, documentation of the results of their empirical
evaluation, software implementations, publications and
tutorials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research will complement
recent developments in detector technology with new ways to understand the data
to produce a leap forward in the practice of nuclear detection. The resulting
algorithms will enable systems consisting of supervised classification to
determine the nature of each detected radiation source, anomaly detection to
identify new or unknown sources, identification of groups of self-similar
anomalies to discover new classes of sources, and active learning to guide the
discovery of new classes and follow-ups on potential threat detections. Jointly,
they will allow for increased sensitivity and specificity of nuclear detection
system, while containing false detection rates. The results, including
evaluations against high-quality data from field measurements and threat
simulations conducted in realistic test environments, will be disseminated to
enable creation of production-grade systems. The majority of the funding is to
support graduate students who will perform the bulk of the research, and who
will finish their degrees in 2012-2014 to become new leaders in the
multidisciplinary area of machine-learning-supported nuclear threat
detection.&lt;br/&gt;