* 0938413
* Lessons-Learned from GSE Extension Services Grantees, 2005-2009
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Daryl Chubin, American Association for the Advancement of Science
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 08/31/2014
* USD 109,538.00

Intellectual Merit: The American Association for the Advancement of Science
(AAAS) Center for Advancing Science &amp; Engineering Capacity will review
experience with the Extension Services (EXT) component of the NSF Research on
Gender in Science and Engineering (GSE) program. The purpose of the review is to
compile lessons-learned among all project cohorts since 2005 and evaluate how
the intended concept translated into field experience. Extension Services
grantees are awarded up to $2.5 million over five years, a large investment for
a relatively small program budget. The first two projects funded have passed a
three and a half-year mark. Collectively seven projects represent over 17 years
of experience in the field, testing the concept of this particular investment
(each for five years).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EXT projects are engaged in the
process of changing educational values, practice, and knowledge, a process that
is neither linear nor predictable. Models for assessing the success of new
initiatives range from short and expedient, e.g. briefings, to formal,
comprehensive evaluation of outcomes. As new initiatives, EXT's lack a standard
template or control for gauging success. Periodically assessing lessons-learned
is one approach for doing so. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work is
exploratory in combining methods of evaluation research (formal outcomes
measurement), systems analysis (review and documentation of organizational
processes and functions in a consistent manner), management review (leaders
describe their experience), journalistic reporting (interesting stories and
facts), and anthropology (how people explain what they are doing in situ). The
method is inherently novel, interdisciplinary, and pragmatic. Among key inputs
are interviews with project managers, project documentation, reports and reviews
gathered via the third-year reverse site visit, analysis of the concept as
articulated in annual program announcements, and interviews with the NSF Program
Director. Interviews with grantees will employ an Interview Guide Approach (per
the Kellogg Foundation Evaluation Handbook). The goal is to develop an overview
of how the lead EXT teams interpreted the solicitation with guidance from the
Program Director, how they designed their version of an Extension Service, and
what happened when they confronted the realities of implementation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interviews will be conducted by staff of the AAAS Capacity
Center, who are experienced in multiple methods among those cited above,
especially evaluation theory and methods, and who are familiar with NSF's
objectives and operations, the GSE program, the community of practice and the
knowledge base related to issues of women in S&amp;E, and who have personally
produced many similar reports for university, corporate, and federal clients.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Lessons-learned about GSE's Extension
Services will potentially enable the program to refine the solicitation, guiding
new teams toward productive strategies in organizing their services and reaching
various communities not currently participating. To the extent certain kinds of
EXT events and relationships are found to be promising, they might be adapted
elsewhere. Lessons-learned is not a substitute for rigorous formal project or
program evaluation; it is expedient and pragmatic in real time, elucidating what
is useful to others and NSF as "field experience," capturing significant
experience as these large-scale projects evolve. Taken together, these lessons
constitute a portfolio assessment of projects that can guide current and future
performers as well as NSF management.