* 0938420
* Symposium:   Insights of Early Chordate Genomics:  January 3-7, 2010; Seattle, WA
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2010
* Stacia Sower, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 08/31/2010
* USD 25,119.00

In the animal kingdom, there is a phylum called Chordata that includes three
groups: amphioxus or lancelets, Tunicates, and Vertebrates (animals with
backbones). The sequencing of key genomes from members of these groups opens up
many avenues for comparative investigations on the evolution of these animals in
comparison to all other living organisms - avenues that were not available in
the 20th century.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because of these very recent advances in
genomics and mapping of key animal genomes, the principal investigators will
host a symposium at the Society of Integrative and Comparative Biology (SICB)
meeting in Seattle (January, 2010) that will bring together the latest findings
from chordate genomes with respect to the evolution of developmental mechanisms
and neuroendocrine systems. These findings are already challenging several
current hypotheses and providing directions for new comparative studies. As
studies progress on the genomes from these basal chordates, many more past
hypotheses and findings will be challenged. This symposium therefore offers an
opportunity to expand our understanding of fundamental features of ancestral
developmental mechanisms and neuroendocrine systems and will be the first to
examine these features synthetically in one meeting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Eleven
national and international speakers will participate and present in the
symposium. In addition, there will be two contributing sessions where speakers
are encouraged to have at least one graduate student or postdoctoral research
associate from their laboratory present an oral presentation or poster. There
will also be an opportunity for other participants attending the meeting to
present at one of these contributing sessions. Proceedings of the symposium will
be widely disseminated to the scientific community and beyond through papers
published in the SICB journal, Integrative and Comparative Biology. &lt;br/&gt;