* 0938453
* Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement Grant: Inka Estate Administration in the Imperial Heartland (Maras, Cusco, Peru)
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2011
* Kylie Quave, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2011
* USD 15,000.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Alan Covey, Kylie Quave will excavate and analyze
material remains from the imperial Inka site of Cheq'oq in Cusco, Peru. Cheq'oq
was a large storage and residential center pertaining to private noble lands --
or a royal estate -- in 16th-century Cusco. While state political economy
functioned alongside local economies and an extensive private economy of estate
resources and labor, researchers in the Inka heartland have traditionally
focused on the largest administrative centers and royal palaces. In this way,
they have overlooked systematic excavation and analysis of estate-associated
sites, especially those with non-royal residential elements. This project
emphasizes the investigation of a lower-order estate settlement to test
hypotheses pertaining to the nature of the estate as an economic system. Who
lived and worked on the Inka estate? What kind of status was conferred on these
groups that are known through Colonial documents to have been brought into the
region from the provinces for attached service to the nobility? And what role
did they play in staple and wealth production? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Estates
included palaces, irrigated terracing, camelid corrals, and other infrastructure
for resource intensification. The Inka charged mid-level elites with the
management of their resources and labor force. Depending on the social context,
these administrators may have been Inka nobles, or may have come from conquered
provincial or local groups. Through horizontal excavations and analysis of the
area with Cusco-Inka pottery on the surface Quave will evaluate 1) the
accordance of social status on estate administrators and laborers and 2) the
organization and intensity of estate wealth production. The elites using the
site will serve as the unit of analysis through which to examine how the Inka
nobility enacted social and economic changes at the local and regional levels in
creating the estate system. Excavations will focus on household organization and
production and consumption activities to better understand the new socioeconomic
context developed within an imperial capital.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will contribute to a comparative anthropological understanding of the role of
elite administrators in the political economy and private economy of early
states. Imperial heartlands developed with the intensification of elite and
state resources, in negotiation with local subsistence economies for land tenure
and labor patterns. This project builds a database for cross-cultural models of
these processes, comparing and contrasting their role in imperial development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The dissertation work also integrates research and
education: the co-PI, U.S. and Peruvian students, and professional collaborators
will be trained in excavation and systematic analyses. Results will be published
in peer-reviewed journals and presented in public venues. In Peru, local
residents will collaborate in educational programming for the community,
including a regional exhibition space and guided site visits for children. The
co-PI is also active in community outreach in the U.S. through museums and SMU;
she will share knowledge gained through the academic training under this grant
in those venues.