* 0938007
* EFRI-BSBA:Bio-Inspired Arrays of Haircell Sensors for Artificial Glabrous and Hairy Skin
* ENG,EFMA
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2015
* Alan Kadish, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Garie Fordyce
* 09/30/2015
* USD 2,000,000.00

EFRI-BSBA: Bio-Inspired Arrays of Haircell Sensors for Artificial Glabrous and
Hairy Skin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI Name: Chang
Liu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Northwestern
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
0938007&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biological sensors
exhibit exquisitely high sensitivity, large dynamic range, and robust and
efficient signal reconstruction. They accomplish these even with imperfect and
noisy data. Further, most biological sensors are employed as flexible sensor
skins consisting of two dimensional, high density, multimodal sensor array. The
overarching engineering objective of the proposed work is to develop a flexible,
multimodal sensing skin for the sense of touch that exploits biologically
inspired principles to achieve high sensitivity, wide dynamic range, and an
advanced, highly-efficient signal processing capability. Specifically, we will
focus on developing artificial glabrous and hairy touch-sensitive skin ?
parallel arrays of multimodal tactile sensors ? along with companion signal
processing algorithms. A glabrous skin is largely smooth and consists of normal
and shear contact sensors, whereas a hairy skin further consists of exposed
hairs for proximal touch sensing. We plan to test-bed the sensors and algorithms
in one application: smart, sensorized catheter tips for cardiac surgery
procedures (e.g., tissue ablation, internal space mapping, ECG recording), with
intended benefits of increased accuracy, reliability, and speed. The proposal
seeks transformative interdisciplinary research in the following major areas:
(1) The proposal team will develop a silicon-polymer hybrid, flexible sensing
skin with multimodal sensor integration by leveraging existing expertise of
artificial haircell sensors and multimodal tactile sensors. (2) The team will
develop a radical multimodal tactile sensor skin, mimicking glabrous and/or
hairy skin, consisting of artificial hairs (whiskers) and other tactile sensing
modalities (normal and shear contact, temperature, etc). (3) The team will seek
biological inspirations at many levels to increase the sensitivity, widen the
dynamic range, and enhance speed and robustness of downstream signal processing.
(4) The team will creatively explore the use of active sensing ? sensors that
sense the properties of surroundings through movement and active engagement,
rather than passive interfaces. (5) The team will perform cutting edge research
on signal processing, to face the challenge of massive sensor data and
multimodal sensor informatics fusion. Here, bioinspiration will be sought by
investigating a model system, early signal-processing stages of the rodent
whisker (vibrissal) touch sensor.&lt;br/&gt;