* 0938112
* The Developmental Mathematics Collection: Extending the NSDL with content and knowledge syntheses on exemplary practices for Developmental Mathematics
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2009,06/30/2011
* Thomas Carey, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 06/30/2011
* USD 149,867.00

Mathematics (21)

There is a growing need for developmental materials in mathematics. A team of
California community college faculty who have been engaged in redesigning
courses in Developmental Mathematics have collected and created hands-on
activities with tangible manipulative materials for use by students in lecture
and lab settings. These resources are being made available and categorized in
ways suited for use by instructors who teach developmental mathematics courses.
The Developmental Mathematics Collection and its associated website provide an
opportunity to aggregate such resources and make them more widely available.
Building on complementary state-wide efforts, the project will build a community
of Developmental Mathematics faculty who share resources online with other
instructors, for feedback in their formative stage of development and for
exchanging knowledge via value-added annotation and review of the suitability of
these digital resources for specific course levels in Developmental Mathematics.
The site will host a metadata record that catalogs each major element of the
collection with the following information: title, URL, description, resource
creator, education level and subject keywords. The resources in the collection
are searchable by common course labels (e.g., Pre-algebra, Elementary Algebra,
Intermediate Algebra), by pedagogical content knowledge at the program,
curriculum, course and activity level, and by areas of vocational or personal
interest.