* 0938014
* MathPath
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2014
* Gail Long, Maryland Public Television
* Standard Grant
* Herbert H. Richtol
* 09/30/2014
* USD 2,056,150.00

Maryland Public Television (MPT), in partnership with the Math Forum at Drexel
University and the International Society for Technology in Education (ISTE), is
establishing an elementary math pathway as part of the National STEM Education
Distributed Learning program (NSDL). The primary target audience for MathPath is
elementary classroom teachers and specialists, including coaches and
supervisors. Additional audiences include higher educators involved in teacher
preparation and parents. The overarching goal of MathPath is: 1) to make high-
quality digital mathematics content available to the target audience; and 2) to
contextualize the resources so that educators can easily incorporate them into
effective math instruction. To accomplish these goals, MPT is: 1) forming and
strengthening collaborative relationships; 2) identifying content for inclusion
in MathPath; 3) specifying requirements for the MathPath website; 4) developing,
testing and refining the MathPath website; 5) developing MathPath professional
development resources; 6) launching, promoting, and supporting the MathPath
website; and 7) evaluating the implementation and outcomes of the MathPath
project. Intellectual Merit: It is well recognized that the elementary grades
are critical in building a strong foundation of mathematical knowledge that will
lead to students' success in algebra and beyond. At the same time, it has become
clear that many teachers who provide this instruction have weak math content
knowledge and pedagogy. A well-designed NSDL Pathway can help increase the
likelihood that elementary educators have the knowledge and instructional
resources they need to teach math effectively and ensure the success of all
students, including minority and other at-risk students. Using the capabilities
of Web 2.0 provide the means for not only offering content but for involving
users in a learning community built around a collection of high-quality
resources. MathPath users are taking advantage of an interactive and
participatory environment using such tools as blogs, wikis, podcasting, and
digital video. Broader Impacts: To address the high level of concern about
improving elementary math instruction, there is increasing interest in
developing and certifying elementary math specialists. While formal recognition
and certification of elementary math specialists is just now emerging, there are
many educators who currently have the interest and are responsible for ensuring
high-quality mathematics instruction for elementary students. This includes
classroom teachers who only teach math, lead or resource teachers who spend most
of their time coaching and mentoring classroom teachers, and district elementary
math coordinators and supervisors. These are people who are likely to seek out
quality resources and to share them with colleagues. MathPath is filling an
important position in the NSDL by aggregating high-quality content and providing
the information and professional development that elementary educators need to
use digital math content effectively. While there are numerous sources of
content on the Web, there is no one trusted source for both digital content and
opportunities to learn in the area of elementary mathematics education.