* 0938402
* Individual:  Fueling the STEM Pipeline by Mentoring Across the Age Span
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2016
* Maja Mataric, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 07/31/2016
* USD 10,000.00

Dr. Maja Mataric received her Ph.D. in Computer Science and Artificial
Intelligence from MIT in 1994. She is Professor of Computer Science and
Neuroscience, and Pediatrics Director of the Center for Robotics and Embedded
Systems, Co-Director of the Robotics Research Lab, and Senior Associate Dean for
Research at the Viterbi School of Engineering at the University of Southern
California. Dr. Mataric has established a mentoring philosophy that encompasses
the need to encourage students continuously as they progress in their
educations. Her stated philosophy is that mentoring must be viewed as a pipeline
process, in which role models and training opportunities are provided from as
early as possible and the pipeline is continually fueled. The pipeline mentoring
program is based on the established literature about critical times for
capturing interest and recruiting women and underrepresented students into STEM
areas. To build the pipeline, the comprehensive spectrum of mentoring activities
performed to date span: K-12 STEM outreach and teacher training, undergraduate
student mentoring toward placement in graduate programs, graduate and
postdoctoral student mentoring and placement in academic positions, peer
mentoring of female faculty, mentoring of junior faculty in engineering, and
developing a culture of mentoring at USC. Dr. Mataric's mentoring programs have
resulted in new courses and programs at the K-12 level that have trained
generations of teachers and students and continue to recruit generations of
inner-city at-risk students into STEM topics. Approaches have yielded the
recruitment of underrepresented groups at each level, from all-girls elementary
school teams winning robotics contests at the state level, to outstanding
placement of Ph.D. students and postdoctoral fellows in academic positions, to
outstanding outcomes in female faculty mentoring leading toward nationally
competitive research grants, to developing novel mentoring programs with impact
across the entire university. The programs have resulted in the placement of
Ph.D. students in minority serving universities and of Ph.D. students from
underrepresented groups (women and African Americans) in top research
universities in the US and world-wide. The programs have also established a
role-modeling and networking pipeline between the K-12 inner city institutions,
USC undergraduates, Ph.D. students, and faculty. Dr. Mataric's mentoring
programs have effectively aided in the recruitment and retention of women
faculty in engineering at USC and have had a significant impact on
institutional-wide cultural change.