* 0938257
* Marine Ecosystem Engineers in a Changing World: Establishing Links Across Systems - A Symposium of the Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology, Seattle, WA, January 2010
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2010
* Linda Walters, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Mary Beth Saffo
* 09/30/2010
* USD 15,204.00

Ecosystem engineers are organisms that produce unique habitats by creating
physical structure or by altering the flow of materials, such as water, around
them. Ecosystem engineers are particularly diverse and important in marine
environments, and include organisms such as corals, oysters, tube-building and
burrowing worms, seagrasses, mangroves, and macroalgae. These organisms modify
their own external conditions, and create habitats for other organisms. Some
invasive marine species are adept ecosystem engineers and readily adapt to their
new environments by virtue of their engineering capabilities. Other native
species, long recognized as ecosystem engineers, are declining despite their
engineering capacities, apparently lacking the resilience to cope with stresses
imposed by changing environments. Comparisons across systems are needed to fully
understand the physiological/architectural characteristics and organism-
environment interactions that shape ecosystem engineering. To this end, the
Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology has organized a symposium
entitled "Marine Ecosystem Engineers in a Changing World: Establishing Links
Across Systems" for its annual meeting in Seattle, Washington in January 2010.
The organizers' goals are to: (i) establish commonalities in the physiological,
chemical, and physical processes that allow organisms to become ecosystem
engineers, (ii) develop a consensus about how human activities and climate
change influence ecosystem engineers, and (iii) begin a discussion about how to
use this understanding to inform conservation biologists and resource managers
about threatened or invasive ecosystem engineers. To our knowledge, no other
symposium has ever addressed this range of issues comparatively across systems.
Students-in-training from undergraduates through advanced Ph.D. candidates will
be well-represented at the symposium.