* 0938043
* EFRI-BSBA:  Multifunctional materials exhibiting distributed actuation, sensing, and control: Uncovering the hierarchical control of fish for developing smarter materials
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* George Lauder, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 08/31/2014
* USD 2,160,208.00

EFRI-BSBA: Multifunctional materials exhibiting distributed actuation, sensing,
and control: Uncovering the hierarchical control of fish for developing smarter
materials&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI Name: Michael
Philen&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Virginia Polytechnic Institute and
State University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal No.
0938043&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fish have a
remarkable ability to maneuver in tight places, perform stable high acceleration
maneuvers, hover efficiently, and quickly brake as a result of a complex
muscular system that comprises more than half of the body mass. Additionally,
fish have an extraordinary ability to sense minuscule changes in fluid flow
through neuromasts in the lateral line which has been shown to allow fish to
detect, localize, and track prey, perform synchronized schooling maneuvers,
provide feedback control for efficient locomotion, and form hydrodynamic images
of the environment which enable the fish to characterize entities in the
vicinity. However, there is still very little understanding of the structure and
organization of the hierarchical control systems or of how these actuation and
sensing systems are integrated to perform steady and maneuvering locomotor
tasks. Furthermore, there has been little effort to transform the biological
concepts related to the sensing, actuation, and control of fish into truly
bioinspired and biomimetic engineered materials and systems. &lt;br/&gt;This
research aims to identify and theoretically describe the computational
processing performed at the local sensory level for muscle activation and
vertebral-stiffness modulation along the tail structure of fish for locomotion.
Through a series of interdisplinary engineered experiments, the research seeks
to understand (a) the ability of fish to actively modulate the mechanical
properties of the tail via muscle recruitment, (b) how swimming gaits are
regulated by a hierarchy of control systems that involve the visual, vestibular,
and neuromast sensory systems, and (c) how hydrodynamic stimuli to the lateral
line neuromasts directly influence the mechanical properties of the tail.
&lt;br/&gt;An advanced multifunctional material system having distributed
actuation and sensing will be developed to serve as a platform for validation
and to provide greater understanding of the biology of these systems. The new
material system will utilize innovative artificial neuromasts (sensors) and
muscles (actuators) that are distributed and arranged as inspired by the
configuration found in fish. The artificial neuromast will consist of a cluster
of nanowires acting as hairs attached to ionic polymer artificial neurons to
create robust, flexible, sensitive, and dynamically responsive sensors for fluid
flow detection. The biologically inspired actuation provided by the
multifunctional material utilizes a distribution of micron flexible matrix
composite actuators in the material system. Through coupling of the biological
and engineering experiments of the fish and artificial material system, the
interdisplinary team will work together to develop a new framework for
observing, identifying, and predicting the sensorimotor behavior of fish for
locomotion and stiffness modulation. &lt;br/&gt;This research will advance the
state-of-the-art development of multifunctional materials, leading to new
structures that can intelligently sense and actuate a network of distributed
robust sensors and actuators. Pioneer efforts include developing an advanced
material system using nanotechnology and advanced composite technology,
fabricating hierarchically structured sensors, creating new tools for bio-
engineering investigations, and instigating a paradigm shift in the
understanding of the organization and structure of the hierarchical control fish
use for sensing and maneuvering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through collaborative
efforts, an intellectual framework for education in K-12 classrooms,
undergraduate research, and recruitment of minorities will be developed and
implemented. One goal of the proposed education plan is to achieve broad impact
on students? learning through dissemination of knowledge through K-12 programs
at Harvard?s Museum of Natural History. A traveling exhibit will be developed on
robotic fish that showcases the biology of aquatic propulsion, new actuator and
sensing technologies and how these can be integrated to design a robotic fish.
Assessment will establish measurable learning objectives and provide data on
learning and improvement of the educational modules.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;