* 0938047
* EFRI BSBA: Complex microsystem networks inspired by internal insect physiology
* ENG,EFMA
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2015
* Jon Harrison, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Garie Fordyce
* 12/31/2015
* USD 2,219,595.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to understand
how insects produce and control internal flows and to use this knowledge to
create novel, highly efficient, bio-inspired fluid-transport systems. Current
approaches to flow delivery and regulation in complex microsystems rely on
targeted actuation and active control. In contrast, insects have evolved over
millions of years to efficiently manage flows using flexible tissues, simple
actuation, and passive, distributed control built into the network itself. The
approach combines synchrotron x-ray imaging of internal insect dynamics,
material characterization of insect vessels, fluid mechanics modeling and
experiments, and advanced micromechanical fabrication
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposed research
effort includes transformation of the accepted approach to fluid-based transport
in small-scale systems, further development of advanced experimental and
fabrication techniques, and fundamental advances in the understanding of insect
physiology. The proposed research has the potential to change the paradigm for
flow delivery and regulation in small-scale systems, leading to new
bioengineered tissues and energy-efficient, biomedically-implantable
microdevices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts will include integrating
the findings from this project into educational programs at the K-12 and
university levels. New lessons that integrate biology and engineering will be
developed with under-represented students in urban and rural classrooms. The
broader public will also be educated through direct involvement with new
television and film productions of National Geographic. Additionally, a deeper
understanding of how insect respiration and circulation work will lead to novel
mechanisms for targeted biocontrol, enabling economically significant advances
in agricultural, residential, and commercial pest management.&lt;br/&gt;