* 0938401
* Collaborative Research: Persistent Wintertime Temperature Inversions in the Salt Lake Basin
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2010,12/31/2014
* Shiyuan Zhong, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 12/31/2014
* USD 224,832.00

A three-year research project will be conducted to investigate processes leading
to the formation, maintenance and destruction of persistent, multi-day, mid-
winter temperature inversions or cold-air pools that form in the Salt Lake basin
(SLB). These persistent inversions occur frequently as well in other regions
throughout the western US and throughout the world, and their initiation and
breakup are quite difficult to forecast. Air pollution can reach unacceptably
high levels during persistent inversions in urban basins, and when the inversion
breaks the breakup can carry pollution vertically to produce regional-scale air
pollution and climate impacts. Because of poor mixing, fog and stratus can build
up in the inversion leading to hazardous episodes of persistent freezing rain,
drizzle or fog and interfering with ground transportation and aviation.

The objectives of the project are to 1) identify the meteorological processes
that lead to buildup, maintenance and breakup of persistent inversions, 2)
determine the consequences of these processes on air pollution transport and
diffusion in urban basins, and 3) determine how meteorological models can be
improved to provide more accurate simulations of such persistent inversions.

The project includes observations, analysis, and modeling. The initial focus
will be modeling of an event in the winter of 2000-2001 using existing
meteorological data. The analyses of this recent event study will identify the
key physical mechanisms leading to persistent inversion formation and
destruction in this case.

A field experiment will be conducted in the SLB from 1 Dec 2010 to 7 Feb 2011 to
obtain the detailed meteorological data on several more cases needed for further
model simulations and analyses. A mesoscale meteorological model will be used to
interpret the observations, verify hypotheses, provide further insight into
physical mechanisms, and evaluate the air pollution implications of the
inversion processes. The simulations will take account of the often-observed fog
and stratiform clouds that form and dissipate within the SLB inversions.

Intellectual Merit: The project will advance knowledge and understanding of the
physical processes that affect persistent inversions. This increase in knowledge
is expected to lead to improvements in models and, ultimately, in weather
forecasts for the western U.S. and throughout the world. The work uses
innovative approaches, employs conceptual models of relevant physical processes
resulting from earlier research, and uses a combination of analyses of prior
data and collection of new data and numerical modeling to gain understanding.

Broader Impacts: Broader societal impacts are promoted through the integration
of the research into university teaching, through the support of undergraduate
and graduate students and through the promotion of investigator/student
diversity. Project results will be widely disseminated through peer-reviewed
scientific publications and presentations. The results have potential benefits
to society through improved understanding of cold pools with potential
applications for better understanding air pollution dispersion, weather
forecasting and climate.