* 0938909
* ARI-MA:  New Detectors for Fast Neutron Spectroscopy
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* David Wentzloff, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 08/31/2010
* USD 400,002.00

The research objective of this award is to develop innovative fast-neutron
detection systems that will provide revolutionary increase in the sensitivity of
detection and characterization of special nuclear material (SNM). Current
detection systems use helium-3 (He-3) detectors because they are very sensitive
to thermal neutrons. Due to the neutron moderation in these systems, however,
the initial neutron energy information is lost, which limits the capability of
accurate characterization of SNM. Moreover, He-3 is a rare gas with
unpredictable availability, threatening the fieldability of such systems. Novel
neutron detection systems will be designed under this award, based on recently-
developed organic scintillation detectors using aromatic hydrocarbon compounds
(containing hydrogen and carbon) and custom electronics and real-time analysis
algorithms. These new detection systems will preserve the incoming neutron
energy information while maintaining high detection efficiency and allowing
accurate neutron/gamma-ray discrimination. Several detection systems will be
fully developed and tested, complete with detectors, electronics, data analysis
algorithms, and neutron spectrum unfolding algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
new detection systems developed under this award are expected to have immediate
applicability to homeland security mission areas for detection and
characterization of shielded SNM. The new detection systems, based on unique
detector designs, innovative electronics, and new analysis algorithms, will
revolutionize the way in which information from the detectors is extracted,
processed, and analyzed. This approach will significantly increase the
sensitivity of detection and characterization of shielded SNM and provide a
flexible and scalable platform for both portable (handheld) and large-scale
(multi-detector) detection systems. The project will also help develop and train
the next generation of nuclear scientists by engaging them in cutting-edge
research activities such as real-time data analysis algorithm development,
detailed characterization of new detection systems, evaluation of neutron
shields for dosimetry and reactor physics applications, and passive and active
interrogation of nuclear material.&lt;br/&gt;