* 0938430
* Individual Award for Excellence in Physics Mentoring
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2013
* Richard Cardenas, St Mary's University San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 05/31/2013
* USD 10,000.00

Dr. Richard Cardenas has served as the chair of the Physics and Earth Science
department at St. Mary?s University since 2004. He facilitated the formation of
the Society of Physics Students in 2002 and presently serves as the principal
adviser to this group. In addition, Dr. Cardenas initiated the Fiesta of Physics
Program in 2003, and since its inception the program has provided science
education outreach to more than 15,000 families who live in the area surrounding
St. Mary's University in San Antonio, Texas. This program impacts low income,
minority families who otherwise may not consider a science career or understand
the role the natural world plays in their day-to-day lives. As a primary
mentoring activity, St. Mary's students help develop the programming and conduct
the experiments that they take to the various schools in the surrounding area.
Over the past six years, Dr. Cardenas has personally mentored over 60 physics
majors, and over 500 St. Mary?s students, primarily from the sciences but also
from non-science majors, have participated in the Fiesta of Physics program. In
order to prepare and teach the science experiments in Fiesta of Physics,
students must have a good understanding of basic physics and other science
principles and achieve deep learning that transcends the superficial
memorization that often serves as knowledge. Einstein once stated that "if you
can?t explain relativity to a six-year old, you don't understand it". Fiesta of
Physics students have taken Einstein's observation to heart as they prepare to
explain a variety of science principles to many six through ten-year olds and
their families, many of whom indicated that they would like to become scientists
in the future. In addition, the St. Mary's students develop greater curiosity
and interest in science themselves, and over 80% of physics majors go on to
attend graduate school to seek Ph.Ds. Many others go on to teach in area high
schools. This Fiesta Physics Program reaches thousands of children and their
families who have earlier not been interested in science and who are often
taught by teachers who lack education and training in science fields.
Frequently, science teachers recognize their limitations and actively recruit
Dr. Cardenas to bring the Fiesta of Physics to their schools. Due to resource
limitations, Fiesta of Physics has limited its programming to the Edgewood
Independent School District, one of the poorest school districts in Texas.
Currently, there is a waiting list of schools outside the Edgewood District that
want to bring Fiesta of Physics to their students. To try and accommodate more
schools, twice a year Fiesta of Physics provides programming through an on-
campus extravaganza for all schools that wish to participate. Science
demonstrations have helped the school children on the state-mandated achievement
test. The Spring 2009 program had over 300 attendees most of whom were fourth or
fifth graders. Increasingly, non-science majors who want to participate in
community education outreach are being drawn to the program.