* 0938224
* Student/Postdoc Poster Program and Travel Scholarships:  The 6th Annual Biotechnology and Bioinformatics Symposium at Lincoln, Nebraska; October 9-10, 2009
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Leen-Kiat Soh, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2010
* USD 26,564.00

The University of Nebraska-Lincoln has been awarded a grant to support student
and postdoctoral participation in the 6th Biotechnology and Bioinformatics
Symposium (BIOT-2009) that will be held October 9-10, 2009 in Lincoln, Nebraska.
BIOT-2009 will showcase research and development activities in bioinformatics
and computational biology as well as biotechnology, and promote future
interdisciplinary activity and research in these areas. The symposium attracts
papers and contributions from all over the US and internationally. The
conference will energize multidisciplinary interactions among different fields
including active discussions between computer scientists and scientists from
biology and biotechnology. It will ignite collaborations among different fields,
among different states in this region, and between academia and industry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BIOT-2009 presents a unique opportunity for students and
postdocs interested in research in bioinformatics and biotechnology. To maximize
the benefit accruing to those supported, each student and postdoc will present a
poster on their research at a special conference session that will receive
comment from members of the BIOT-2009 program committee. This activity will
integrate graduate students and postdocs into the community by providing them
with a forum to talk to the leading researchers in the field about their
research. The poster format encourages the student and postdoc participants to
begin building a rapport with established researchers. This nurturing effort
should pay dividends by more effectively guiding them in this rapidly changing
research field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Additional information about the
conference and student involvement can be found at
http://www.biotconf.org/.&lt;br/&gt;