* 0938292
* Expanding Diversity in the Aquaitc Sciences
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Benjamin Cuker, Hampton University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 09/30/2013
* USD 755,352.00

This proposal will be awarded using funds made available by the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hampton University and the American Society of
Limnology and Oceanography (ASLO) propose renewed funding for a program to
increase the numbers of under-represented minorities electing careers in aquatic
sciences. The program targets minority students, faculty and professionals
interested in aquatic sciences, as well as faculty working at Historically
Minority Colleges and Universities (HMCU). Participants received a free
membership in ASLO and support to attend the annual meetings and special pre-
meeting workshops. The present proposal will cultivate the development of past
participants and incorporate new cohorts of students into the process. By
continuing to build active participation of target group members in the annual
meetings of ASLO, the program aims to achieve four objectives: &lt;br/&gt;1.
Expose more minority undergraduates and beginning graduate students to cutting
edge aquatic science through active participation in ASLO meetings.
&lt;br/&gt;2. Link minority students to opportunities for internships, advanced
studies, special programs and potential employment through interactions at ASLO
meetings. &lt;br/&gt;3. Continue to bring new cohorts of minority students into
the networks of minority and majority aquatic scientists. &lt;br/&gt;4.
Establish a significant presence of minority scientists in ASLO that will form a
mentor core for the ongoing recruitment of new minorities into the field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since the initiation of the program in 1990, over 654
students have participated in the program. About 42% of students return for
subsequent meetings, 25% attend two, and 16%, 3 or more. Many (80%) of the
participants are female in recent years, reflecting a national trend of
declining enrollment of male minority students in colleges. The participant
group has been diverse, consisting of 57% African-Americans, 33% Hispanic-
Americans, 7% Native-Americans, and 4% Pacific Islanders. Shifts in participant
demographics over the course of the program include increasing numbers of
Hispanics, women and graduate students. In addition, 11 former students who have
earned Ph.D. degrees returned as mentors. Students from 181 different
institutions participated over the years. About 57% of the students came from
key minority serving institutions with aquatics programs (Hampton U., Savannah
State U., The U. of Puerto Rico campuses, Fort Valley State U., The U. of
Maryland, Eastern Shore, Jackson State U., Cal. State, LA and the University of
Texas, El Paso, Florida A&amp;M U.). Many students participated via special
relationships with REU programs, such as those at Shannon Point (Western
Washington Univ.), Harbor Branch/Savanna State U., the Virginia Institute of
Marine Science, and Oregon State U. Best estimates suggest that, 28% of the
participants completed graduate or professional degrees, with about 155 earning
MS and 31 completing PhD or Law degrees.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;