* 0938201
* Local Elections in America Project (LEAP) Workshop
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2009,01/31/2012
* Paru Shah, Macalester College
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 01/31/2012
* USD 49,908.00

The U.S. Census Bureau estimates that one in every ten counties in the nation is
?majority-minority? and that Latinos, African-Americans and Asian-Americans will
comprise the majority of the population by the end of the 21st century. These
shifts in demographic and socioeconomic contexts portend tremendous flux in
control of urban politics and policy. While the study of race and representation
in urban America has a long history, several key questions remain either
unanswered or only partly addressed. For example, how do electoral structures
(voting methods, term limits, legislature size, off-cycle elections) impact vote
choice and minority voter turnout? When and where do they facilitate or hinder
cross-over voting? At the same time, new questions are becoming increasingly
salient: Under what circumstances do minority candidates emerge? How is this
impacted by the use of primary or run-off elections or the presence of multiple
racial/ethnic candidates on the same ballot? What role do community
organizations, interest groups, and leaders play in urban elections and
campaigns? How do campaign finance, and the content, tone and consequences of
media coverage impact local elections?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the large
number of cases and considerable institutional and contextual variation across
local governments, one might assume that the study of local elections is an area
already well harvested by participation scholars. The truth, however, is that
this is a rather unexplored area of inquiry. On the one hand are studies that
focus primarily on candidate- and campaign-specific explanations of turnout and
vote choices and typically rely on single city or small-N analyses (e.g., Liu
&amp; Vanderleeuw 2007; Barreto, Villarreal &amp; Woods 2005; Bullock 1984).
While this body of work offers considerable insight about specific electoral
contests and proves indispensable with regard to theory and hypothesis building,
it is relatively limited when it comes to empirical description and causal
inference. A second area of inquiry employs macro-level models and aggregate
level data to explore how local context, electoral and other governing
arrangements influence two principal phenomena: voter turnout and minority
representation in local legislatures. Although these studies typically rely on
relatively large samples (e.g., Engstrom &amp; McDonald 1981; Meier et al. 2005;
Kelleher &amp; Lowery 2004) only a handful include longitudinal designs
(Marschall, Shah &amp; Ruhil 2008; Trounstine &amp; Valdini 2008; Caren 2007;
Sass &amp; Pittman 2000; Karnig &amp; Walter 1983) and almost none includes
candidate- or campaign-specific covariates (but see Lublin &amp; Tate 1995).
Consequently, while these studies are stronger on empirical description and
inference, they provide little purchase when it comes to understanding how local
electoral dynamics actually shape electoral outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
first objective of LEAP is to compile the most comprehensive, public-use,
database on local governments and elections in America. In addition to
aggregate-level turnout and vote choice data across multiple election cycles
(primary, run-off and general elections) for a large, representative sample of
U.S. jurisdictions, LEAP will also collect election-specific covariates
(candidate race/ethnicity and experience, campaign expenditures, issues, and
media coverage) for a subset of jurisdictions with populations that are either
multi-racial/ethnic or predominately of one minority group. Finally, by also
compiling precinct-level data for this subsample of places, the racial and
ethnic dimensions of local elections can be appropriately analyzed. With data on
multiple offices and elections at two levels of analysis, LEAP will allow for
aggregate, hierarchical and ecological analyses of a broad range of questions on
political behavior, minority incorporation and urban politics. Thus a second
objective of our project is to lay the institutional foundation for making these
data as accessible as possible, while at the same time developing a framework
for expanding and maintaining these public-use data over
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will bring together a wide range of
scholars to provide input into what sort of data should be collected and how to
proceed with this data collection.