* 0938273
* Implementation Grant: Development of Multidepartmental, Multidisciplinary Concentrations at Tuskegee University
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Luther Williams, Tuskegee University
* Continuing Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2015
* USD 2,938,318.00

The "Development of Multidepartmental,Multidisciplinary Concentrations at
Tuskegee University" project seeks to reform the approach to biology instruction
by infusing a strong genomic-bioinformatics and biophysics focus into the
current biology curriculum and linking it to a collaboratory research experience
that will promote critical thinking, enhance quantitative skills, ascertain
mastery of integration of knowledge learned, and illustrate the
interconnectedness of STEM disciplines for all students.&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching goal of this project is to develop a genomic-bioinformatic and
biophysics stream of concentration by developing requisite courses including
Microbial Genomics, Introductory Bioinformatics, Computational Genomics, with
dry and wet labs with genomics data search using computers; by integrating
genomics and bioinformatics modules into existing courses; by implementing and
evaluating the newly developed courses using wet/dry project collaboratories and
computer-based lectures; and by disseminating the results of these efforts among
undergraduate faculty in general and those at HBCUs and MSIs in
particular.&lt;br/&gt;This effort will result in an increase in the quality of
educational instruction in biology, production of a cadre of very talented
students (particularly minority students) who are capable of employing diverse
aspects of mathematics and physics to answer biological questions, and better-
trained faculty who are capable of deploying pedagogical approaches that infect
students with an enthusiasm for scientific discovery. The transformation of the
biology curriculum will have the outcome of effecting changes across the natural
and physical sciences departments and increasing the dialogue of how best to
train students for the practice of science in the 21st century.