* 0938964
* CPATH-1: Revitalizing Computing Education through Community-Based Video Game Development Projects
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Arturo Concepcion, University Enterprises Corporation at CSUSB
* Continuing Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 08/31/2012
* USD 370,256.00

This CPATH project uses free open source libraries and tools for a student-
centered,community-based video game development project called Mythic for the
purpose of revitalizing interest in computing studies. The Mythic project is
student centered in the sense that students define project goals, and it is
community-based in the sense that students from different institutions, ranging
from high school to community college to university, contribute to the
development of a common project. The project promises to help revitalize
computing education by engaging students in meaningful and enjoyable work
activities that lead to greater mastery of computing concepts through the use of
software development tools, the use of software libraries, and the use of
computing concepts. Project investigators are also establishing internships with
local game development companies to increase the relevance to students and
assist faculty in aligning learning outcomes to meet the needs of industry.

The intellectual merit lies in the strong collaborative team with significant
experience in game development and building real software in class settings. The
project has an excellent conceptual foundation that could lead to new research
findings in both video game development as well as in computing education.

The broader impacts involve the potential to attract a more diverse student
population to computing fields. Students from the local community who go into
the video game industry will serve as role models for younger students at the
high school and college levels. Similarly, students going into computing jobs
outside the video game industry will also demonstrate to younger students as
well as their parents and teachers that focusing on video game development when
young can result in the development of skills needed for rewarding careers later
in life. Black and Hispanic students account for more than 50% of enrollments at
the lead institution. Thus, the project helps to broaden the participation of
these underrepresented groups in pursuing degrees in computing disciplines. The
associated learning materials that are produced can serve as a resource for
other institutions and as a foundation for collaborative research. This project
activity should demonstrate to other departments and institutions the value of
student-centered, community-based video game development projects to cultivate
interest in and mastery of computational thinking in students from high school
through university.