* 0938820
* EAGER: Preliminary Work for the Development of the Next-Generation Storm-Penetrating Aircraft
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Donna Kliche, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Bradley F. Smull
* 07/31/2011
* USD 82,562.00

Direct in-situ observations by specially instrumented storm penetrating aircraft
(SPA) remain a vital means of describing and understanding complex processes
occurring deep within severe thunderstorms and other intense and life-
threatening weather phenomena. Since the retirement of the South Dakota School
of Mines & Technology (SDSMT) T-28 SPA in 2005, NSF has been actively exploring
its replacement with a more modern platform possessing expanded endurance,
payload capacity and altitude range. This next-generation SPA will be capable of
addressing a far broader range of intense weather phenomena that could be
explored by the T-28. At present, a Fairchild A-10 (as currently utilized by the
Department of Defense) is a leading candidate for this replacement. Preparatory
to its procurement, a more complete and quantitative assessment of the range of
conditions likely to be encountered by this more capable platform must be
completed.

The SDSMT-based Principal Investigator leading this effort has considerable
prior experience in analysis of T-28 data and will be responsible for
comprehensive statistical description of those archived observations in
conjunction with ancillary datasets (including balloon-borne observations, data
from existing research aircraft operating at higher altitudes, and model
simulation output) needed to specify meteorological conditions impacting
aircraft safety, flight performance, and requirements for specialized
meteorological instrumentation. Quantities to be examined include turbulence
intensity, updraft/downdraft speeds, supercooled liquid water concentrations
(and respective impacts on aircraft icing), and likelihood/intensity of
lightning strikes to the airframe. This analysis will address not only severe
continental thunderstorms, where the T-28 was typically operated, but also
extend to developing tropical storms, electrified clouds within winter storm
systems at both middle and polar latitudes, and so-called "pyrocumulonimbus"
developing over active forest fires. This advance effort will serve to minimize
future delays in mission readiness for the new SPA, once procured. This work
will be done in coordination with scientists and engineers at CIRPAS (the Center
for Interdisciplinary Remotely Piloted Aircraft Studies in Monterey,
California), where the A-10 would be based once procured.

Broader Impacts:

The ultimate purpose of this study is a better description of extreme
meteorological conditions and processes governing the behavior of intense storms
that are a threat to life and property. Broader impacts will extend to
training/mentoring of a graduate student in Atmospheric Sciences and enhancement
of course material utilized in SDSMT classes in cloud microphysics/dynamics and
mesoscale meteorology.