* 0938987
* Workshop:  Student Travel Support for the 2009 North American Power Symposium, held at Starkville, MS, October 4-6, 2009
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2009,02/28/2010
* Noel Schulz, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 02/28/2010
* USD 10,000.00

This proposal requests funding to subsidize the travel expenses incurred by
students attending the 41th Annual North American Power Symposium to be held at
Starkville, MS from October 4 to October 6, 2009. It is anticipated that this
subsidy will positively impact the extent of student participation at the
conference. The North American Power Symposium (NAPS) is a non-profit event that
is aimed primarily at student participation. Traditionally, the overwhelming
majority of the papers are presented by students. At the 2009 NAPS, the
organizers are taking several other steps to foster and encourage student
participation. This includes arrangement for free accommodation of registered
students. Additional measures are being taken to encourage women and minorities
to participate.

Intellectual Merit:

NAPS is unique in its focus on students, specially preparing and presenting
technical papers for the first time to international audience. This conference
provides a unique opportunity for NSF to interact with and promote interaction
among students, academia and power industry to promote and discuss NSF?s vision
of technical challenges in power and energy, and complex systems, sensing,
communication and control as well as its economic, educational and sociological
impact. NAPS is also venue to an exciting student paper competition for
identifying and fostering high quality research performed by students.

Broader Impact:

NAPS conferences have a history of giving students their first opportunity at
research presentations. Further, NAPS encourages discussion of systematic
integration of research and teaching. Based on recent history of NAPS
conferences the student program has been able to attract 20% minorities and
women.