* 0938352
* Aerosol Growth and Chemical Compositions from Heterogeneous Processing of Organic Compounds
* GEO,AGS
* 11/15/2009,10/31/2013
* Renyi Zhang, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 10/31/2013
* USD 597,358.00

Scientific questions to be addressed in this project include (1) what is the
chemical mechanism of heterogeneous processing of different classes of
oxygenated organic compounds on inorganic, organic, and soot aerosols, (2) what
is the dependence of heterogeneous processing on gaseous reactant
concentrations, RH, reaction time, and particle acidity and size, (3) what are
synergetic effects between the first- and later generations of low and semi-
volatile organic compounds (VOC) oxidation products and effects of the presence
of oxidants in the particle phase, and (4) how can laboratory measurements be
used to aid interpretation of ambient measurements and simulations of
atmospheric organic particulate matter (PM)? Heterogeneous processing will be
studied by exposing monodisperse aerosols in a flow reactor and particles
deposited in an optical cell to low gaseous concentrations of representative
products from VOC oxidation, including alpha-dicarbonyls, aldehydes, and
alcohols. Experiments will also be conducted in a Teflon chamber with aerosols
exposed to organic compounds generated in situ from photo-oxidation of VOCs.
Secondary organic aerosol (SOA) growth will be quantified from concurrent
measurements of the particle size, mass, density, and chemical compositions
along with the gaseous organic concentrations. Seed particles will be chosen to
represent primary and secondary atmospheric aerosols under conditions of
different relativity humidity (RH), acidity, and reaction times. The changes in
the particle size and mass due to heterogeneous processing will be measured
using a combination of tandem differential mobility analyzer (TDMA) and
differential mobility analyzer - aerosol particle mass analyzer (DMA-APM).
Concentrations of gaseous reactants will be monitored by ion drift - chemical
ionization tandem mass spectrometry (ID-CIMS/MS). The chemical composition of
aerosol particles will be characterized using thermal desorption - ion drift -
chemical ionization tandem mass spectrometry (TD-ID-CIMS/MS), attenuated total
reflection Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (ATR-FTIR), nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR) spectrometry, and matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization -
time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOFMS). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Persistent
exposure to elevated levels of particulate matter has adverse effects on human
health. Also, aerosols play an important role in regulating the solar radiation
intake in the earth-atmosphere system. Understanding of formation and growth of
organic aerosols represents a frontier in atmospheric chemistry and aerosol
research. The information on formation and chemical compositions of organic
aerosols generated from this project can be employed to assess human-health
effects including respiratory and cardiovascular diseases. Hence, this research
not only will advance our knowledge of organic aerosol formation, but also will
be beneficial to the public by identification of potential human health and
climate issues and to policy-decision makers in developing effective control
strategies for ambient particulate matter. The project will provide
interdisciplinary research opportunities for undergraduate students and graduate
students in the areas of organic chemistry and atmospheric sciences. They will
have the opportunity to present their work at conferences and build connections
within the two scientific communities, as part of their education and training
on global environmental change research.