* 0938099
* NSEC:  Center for Nanotechnology in Society at University of California, Santa Barbara
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2016
* Richard Appelbaum, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Cooperative Agreement
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2016
* USD 7,077,759.00

The global vision for nanotechnology to mature into a transformative and
beneficial technology depends on an array of interconnected and complex factors
situated within a rapidly changing international economic, political, and
cultural environment. These include the resolution of scientific and
technological questions, the safe creation, development, and commercialization
of nano-products, and the acceptance of nanotechnology by diverse publics. The
NSF Center for Nanotechnology in Society at University of California at Santa
Barbara provides a clear and comprehensive approach to understanding challenges
to successful development of nanotechnologies in N. America, Europe, Asia and
other regions. Through a mixed, complementary portfolio of interdisciplinary
research, education, and engagement activities, CNS-UCSB produces basic
knowledge about a linked set of social, economic, and environmental issues at a
time of sustained technological innovation. The Center addresses education for a
new generation of social science and nanoscience professionals as it fosters
research on the origins of the nano-enterprise, the innovation and globalization
of nanotechnology, and the social response, media framing, and the publics? risk
perception of nanotechnologies. CNS-UCSB will continue to use its evolving
international research infrastructure to create a genuine learning community of
diverse participants who can pool their knowledge for the simultaneous benefit
of society and technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Intellectual Merit. CNS-UCSB
brings together a diverse and talented interdisciplinary, international group of
researchers from around the globe to conduct collaborative research on pathways
and impediments to socially and environmentally sustainable futures for
nanotechnologies. CNS has a strong commitment to produce work at the cutting
edge of disciplinary work as well as contributing high quality publications and
products to the to the growing body of literature on nanotechnologies in
society. CNS researchers publish their work in leading science and technology
studies, history of science, social, economic and behavioral science, nanoscale
science and engineering, and science and environmental policy journals. CNS
synthesizes results of research and meetings into meta-analysis papers and
reports on innovation policy, patents, comparative nation-state industrial
policy, the role of collaboration and institutions in NSE in the US and abroad,
media frames for nanotechnology, and factors driving formative nanotechnology
risk perception among diverse publics and groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact. The Center provides novel interdisciplinary educational opportunities
for a new generation of social science, humanities and nanoscience professionals
via graduate fellowships and research assistantships, undergraduate summer
research internships for regional community college students and UCSB
undergrads, mentored by UCSB graduate students, and several interdisciplinary
social science postdocs per year. CNS convenes a year-round graduate seminar for
credit and develops new courses for undergraduate and graduate curricula in
science and technology studies, and will be preparing educational modules for
introduction of research materials into the NSE undergrad science and
engineering curriculum, and community college science and social science
curricula. CNS disseminates technological and social scientific findings related
to responsible development to a broad public and facilitates public
participation through public engagement in dialogue with academic researchers
from diverse disciplines. CNS-UCSB hosts conferences and workshops for diverse
audiences, more specialized meetings for educators and researchers, and speaker
series, and plays a founding role in the new society, S.NET. Outreach to still
wider publics and interested parties takes place via electronic forms such as
the Weekly Clips, our blog, podcasts of interviews with researchers, and media
briefings. The CNS also engages and informs policymakers and governmental
agencies; a new program of carefully crafted policy briefs will extend this
reach. CNS?s distinguished National Advisory Board allows regular consultation
with leaders of all stakeholder constituents, at all phases of research and
dissemination. In the renewal period, and in collaboration with UCLA's Center
for Environmental Implications of Nanotechnology, CNS will work with government
and industry to develop risk communication for particular audiences grounded in
empirical knowledge of the public, emerging views of nanotech, and past risk
controversies.