* 0938120
* Content Clips: A Selection, Customization, and Presentation Service for Elementary Science Education
* NONE,NONE
* 11/01/2009,10/31/2012
* Lois McLean, McLean Media
* Standard Grant
* Herbert H. Richtol
* 10/31/2012
* USD 148,984.00

This project is developing an online selection, customization, and presentation
service for elementary teachers that provides high quality, online resources for
an underserved audience of the National STEM Education Distributed Learning
(NSDL). It extends the results of a Targeted Research study that examined ways
to increase the educational value of online collections. It also builds on the
Content Clips (CC) web site http://www.contentclips.com, which includes
multimedia resources and Flash templates that let teachers dynamically blend
resources from different web sites to assemble customized online presentations.
The CC approach helps teachers integrate multimedia resources into classroom
instruction and takes advantage of the growing adoption of electronic
whiteboards and projection systems. This new effort is assembling 30 sets of
images, animations, and video clips that support standards-aligned content units
commonly taught in Grades 2-5. The team is also upgrading the Content Clip site
interface, developing new options for teachers to customize presentations, and
creating support aids to help teachers use the service features. Outreach
efforts involve workshops for teachers and promotion through publications, web
sites, and conferences. The project team includes experts drawn from
universities, K-12 schools, educational publishing companies, the NSDL Resource
Center, and other NSDL projects. The CC service supports underrepresented
groups, including ELL students and children in rural communities, by providing
visual examples and tools to expand background knowledge and develop vocabulary
skills. Teachers of any grade or subject, such as history or art, can also use
the system to customize and present online multimedia resources.