* 0938796
* Nuclear Function of a Membrane Ubiquitin Ligase
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Ann Erickson, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 07/31/2013
* USD 132,500.00

Intellectual merit. Most cellular events are controlled by precise regulation of
protein expression. Termination of protein expression is commonly achieved by
moving proteins into cellular recycling centers, where they are broken down into
amino acids that can be reutilized in new protein synthesis. Entry into these
recycling centers is tightly regulated. Proteins that are turned-over inside
proteasomes, barrel-shaped recycling centers in the cytoplasm, need a special
modification that serves as a key or signal for entry. This "key" is a small
sequence of amino acids, named ubiquitin, which is linked or ligated to proteins
by a class of regulatory proteins known as ubiquitin ligases. Ubiquitin ligases
thus control protein expression by their ability to recognize and tag other
proteins for destruction. Ubiquitin ligases have multiple substrates and thus
commonly impact multiple key cellular pathways, including regulation of the cell
cycle, programmed cell death, and the integration of signaling pathways during
development. Uncovering the function of ubiquitin ligases is essential to our
understanding of all cellular processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most ubiquitin
ligases are soluble proteins that ubiquitinate cytoplasmic proteins. This
research will focus on identifying the proteins tagged for turnover by a
specific ubiquitin ligase, an endosomal membrane protein that is stabilized and
moves to the inner nuclear membrane when cell signaling pathways under the outer
cell membrane are activated. To identify proteins tagged by this ligase,
experiments will compare the protein composition of purified inner nuclear
membrane when the ligase is active and when its expression is knocked down.
Proteins that escape ubiquitin-mediated degradation and thus increase in
quantity in the inner nuclear membrane fraction when expression of the ligase is
knocked down will be identified by mass spectrometry. Identification of ligase
substrates correlated with specific nuclear functions will indicate a role for
the endosomal ubiquitin ligase in nuclear
regulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: These studies will serve as a
vehicle for educating undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctoral
fellows, including members of under-represented groups. The project is based on
observations initially obtained by a graduate student. The studies were
confirmed and expanded by a postdoctoral fellow. The principal investigator has
and will continue to train undergraduate chemistry and biology majors, who
either elect research for course credit or spend the summer in the lab with REU
grant support. The undergraduates attend lab meetings, have their own projects,
and are included on publications. All trainees not only master new techniques
but, more importantly, learn to analyze data, to propose creative solutions to
problems, and to summarize and present data in a professional format. Mentoring
undergraduates is excellent training for the graduate students and postdocs in
the lab, teaching them to teach, to organize and schedule, and to encourage
others.