* 0938371
* PAESMEM Organizational Award: Purchase College, SUNY / Community College Mentoring Program
* EHR,DUE
* 04/15/2011,03/31/2013
* Joseph Skrivanek, SUNY College at Purchase
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 03/31/2013
* USD 10,000.00

State University of New York, Purchase College began its Baccalaureate and
Beyond Science Mentoring Program in 2000. The program has mentored 201
underrepresented students to succeed academically and complete Bachelor's
degrees in science technology, engineering and math fields (STEM). The program
provides a full array of mentoring activities for community college students to
assist them to complete their Associates degrees, transfer to a four-year
college and complete Bachelor's degrees. These include academic monitoring,
academic advising, tutoring, peer mentoring, career counseling, parent events,
and an intensive research program during the summer. Students in the program are
completing Bachelor?s degrees at three times the national average for community
college students; 70% complete Bachelor?s degrees in STEM fields. Twenty-two
percent of participating students who have completed Bachelor degrees have
continued their STEM studies in graduate school. One student has already
completed her Ph.D. in Clinical Psychology, while several others have completed
Masters Degrees or are in graduate school studying Biochemistry,
Neuropharmacology, Medicine and Optometry; several are working in the scientific
workforce as research scientists. The Baccalaureate and Beyond Program is highly
successful at assisting underrepresented minority, low-income and first-
generation college students to succeed in STEM disciplines. Nationally, the
rates of bachelor degree completion for African American and Hispanic students
are substantially below those of non-Hispanic Caucasian students. The program
mentors these students to succeed academically to complete Bachelor's degrees in
STEM fields in order to prepare them for the STEM workforce. Of the 201 students
served thus far, 70% have been underrepresented minorities. The program enhances
the infrastructure for supporting these students at the six community colleges
that partner with Purchase College. This is accomplished through biannual
meetings of community college presidents to discuss program challenges and
student success stories, pedagogy workshops for community college faculty to
improve the teaching of introductory science courses, and collaborative academic
monitoring of students.