* 0938505
* Workshop on Transitions in Human Social Organization
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,02/28/2011
* Peter Whiteley, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 02/28/2011
* USD 20,467.00

Dr. Peter Whiteley (Anthropology Division, American Museum of Natural History,
New York) will convene an Advanced Seminar Workshop at The Amerind Foundation
(Dragoon, Arizona) on significant new advances in the cross-cultural study of
kinship and marriage systems. Co-chaired by Prof. Maurice Godelier (École des
Hautes Études en Sciences Sociales, Paris), the workshop will bring together
researchers from Australia, Brazil, Europe, and the United States. Prior to the
emergence of the state, all human social ties, including economic and political
connections, were based on kinship and marriage. Therefore, explaining how
societies organized these relationships is important for understanding patterns
of human social formation, evolution, and adaptation.

Seminar participants include global leaders in kinship and social theory. Their
respective regional concentrations include Native North America, Lowland
Amazonia, sub-Saharan Africa, Papua New Guinea, Australia, South Asia, and
Indonesia. Participants will present papers for critique and discussion over
five days. A particular focus will be Crow-Omaha kinship systems, an apparently
pivotal transitional type that has long puzzled anthropologists. By sustained,
multi-faceted, collaborative analysis, the workshop seeks to explain the causes
and consequences of these important systems. Under what social, political, and
adaptive circumstances do they arise, persist, and/or transition into other
systems? What is the role of demography, of linguistic relations, of geography?
Do they provide comparative adaptive advantages over other systems? What are
their effects, if any, on other aspects of societal form? The reciprocal aim is
also to assess differing approaches (e.g., linguistic, formalist, historical,
substantialist) to the study and analysis of kinship systems.

The results of this workshop, which will be published by the University of
Arizona Press and thus widely available, will enable scientists to better
explain the associations of kinship systems with other behavioral phenomena.
This promises significant advances in the understanding of all human kinship
systems through time and across cultures and languages. The seminar also seeks
to demonstrate the renewed value of kinship-system analysis for the comparative
explanation of human social formations.