* 0938393
* CPATH-1: Health Computing: Integrating Computational Thinking into Health Science Education
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Bambang Parmanto, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2012
* USD 313,640.00

&lt;br/&gt; Traditionally, whenever there are significant computational
requirements, computer science, computer engineering, or information science
programs will adjust their teaching contents to fit the needs from those fields
by introducing more background knowledge to the students in these computational
programs. However, this solution will not be sustainable when the computational
challenges are from all the fields at the same time. One alternative and more
sustainable solution is to expand computational thinking centered training into
all other fields. This is what this team is proposing. More specifically, this
team will integrate computational thinking into health science education in an
approach named ?Health Computing?. For students in health sciences and many
fields other than computer science, computer engineering, or information
science, core computer science courses are difficult. It is also difficult for
them to understand the relevance of computer science courses and the core
courses in their specific fields. However, the digitalization of all Americans?
health records and the progress made in biomedical technologies require health
science students to have more advanced training in computing technologies,
methods, and tools in order to be globally competitive in their future career.
In this proposed project, the team will develop a series of computer and
information science courses which are highly relevant to health sciences and
arrange a number of activities (such as high school outreach, summer internship,
faculty development, multidisciplinary collaboration) to expose the
computational thinking centered course materials and teaching strategies to a
wider audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project plans to provide teaching
opportunities to the graduate and undergraduate students as well. In addition,
this project will provide summer internship opportunities to the participating
students through the business partners of School of Health and Rehabilitation
Sciences at University of Pittsburgh. This will allow the students to apply
their knowledge and skills beyond the classroom. The high school outreach
program proposed in this project will be combined with the one offered by the
School of Engineering at University of Pittsburgh, which has a long successful
history of recruiting underrepresented students in STEM programs. This project
will introduce the proposed teaching strategy and course materials to other
health science schools and institutes since they will be applicable and
transferable in many other fields.&lt;br/&gt;