* 0938999
* CPATH-2: Computer Science Pathways for Educators
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Voicu Popescu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 08/31/2014
* USD 871,456.00

This CPATH project creates new pathways for undergraduate education majors to
become computer science teachers and to obtain sound foundations in
computational thinking. It includes a joint effort between faculty in the
departments of computer science and education to create a Computer Science (CS)
Endorsement program based on the Educational Computing Standards set by the
International Society for Technology in Education. The pathways to the
endorsement program will be targeted to diverse student groups: all education
majors will be exposed to modules focused on computational thinking, science
education majors will be able to fulfill general course requirements while
taking courses towards the endorsement, and students transferring into education
from a STEM discipline will be able to build on their background.

The proposed effort builds on existing courses and teacher education. Modules on
computational thinking that highlight the pervasiveness of computational
metaphors in topics like reasoning, knowledge construction, and problem solving
are to be integrated into existing courses. Two new courses are to be developed
jointly: a CS Methods course with an associated teaching practicum in computer
science and a course in Great Issues in Computer Science. These courses provide
students with pedagogical and content knowledge experiences preparing them to
effectively teach computer science. The team plans to run a workshop to bring
together educators and computer scientists with a focus on incorporating
computation in secondary teacher education and exploring the establishment of
computer science licensure standards.

Intellectual Merit: The design of a CS methods course and the associated
collaboration between education and CS faculty should result in a better
understanding of how to effectively teach secondary computer science, an urgent
need in the nation's high schools. Selected material from the methods course
will also benefit computer science faculty teaching introductory courses.
Education students satisfying their practical training component in CS
introductory courses will increase awareness of good practices and how to
effectively teach introductory CS topics. The introduction of a Great Issues
course will be of benefit and interest to a broad set of students. Thus the
project has the potential to provide a national model for secondary computer
science education and contribute to the sparse intellectual core currently
existing in this area.

Broader Impact: The goal of the project is to increase the number of
undergraduate education majors having taken CS courses and obtaining a CS
Teaching Endorsement. This increase should translate into an increase in the
number of future teachers who are qualified to teach computer science in high
schools, are knowledgeable about computer science as a career, and who have an
understanding of how the pervasive nature of computation impacts and changes our
society. As a multiplier effect, qualified high school teachers teaching
computer science should increase the number of high school students receiving a
first computer science course. This increased contact is an important part in
the ongoing national effort to raise interest in computer science and to educate
a more computationally competent and proficient workforce.