* 0938633
* ALFRED: Ongoing Growth of an Anthropological Resource
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Kenneth Kidd, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 07/31/2013
* USD 731,577.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ALFRED (the ALlele FREquency Database,
&lt;http://alfred.med.yale.edu&gt;), created at Yale University in 2000 and
supported since then by the NSF as scientific infrastructure, has been
accumulating gene frequency data on human populations from diverse sources and
currently has nearly 500,000 tables of allele frequencies involving over 18,000
polymorphisms with data on nearly 700 distinct populations from around the
world. ALFRED has become a valuable international resource for research in human
origins and expansion around the world; the data also have implications and
value for biomedical research. This award will allow the already successful
project to continue to enlarge the database contents by providing salary support
to employ a staff of one full-time curator, a half-time programmer, and a part-
time student. This staff will integrate into ALFRED new data becoming available,
thus keeping the database active. Data from 'very high throughput' or VHT
projects will greatly expand the contents of ALFRED through partially automating
the curation process. Other data from the scientific literature will continue to
be incorporated with priority given to results from populations not already
represented in the database. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit in
this proposal consists of assembling into a single database in a standardized
manner data that are published or publically available in diverse formats, often
using non-standard terminology, and making those data accessible in user
friendly, flexible ways. This process involves having a staff with a combination
of expertise in anthropology, molecular biology, and computer science. ALFRED is
already having a broad impact as a resource used internationally in research and
teaching. Hundreds of different users access ALFRED every month and citations of
ALFRED regularly occur in the literature. ALFRED is a unique resource that makes
otherwise inaccessible data readily available to users from a variety of
different fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Continuing to improve the existing
database by increasing its contents will only enhance its value in research and
teaching. The proposed efforts to enhance the educational utility of the
database will improve accessibility to large datasets for teaching/learning
about normal human genetic variation and how that variation is distributed
around the world, thereby illuminating our biological history as a species. It
is also our belief that understanding normal genetic variation is one of the
surest ways to prevent misuse of genetic data.