* 0938976
* ARI-MA:  Nuclear Materials Detection via Time-Encoded Differential Absorption and/or Differential Fluorescence
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Gary Varner, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 08/31/2010
* USD 398,088.00

The research objective of this award is to demonstrate and evaluate the use of
differential absorption and differential fluorescence for the detection of
fissionable nuclear materials concealed by terrorists in shipping containers,
road vehicles, aircraft and ships. Differential absorption and fluorescence have
long been used effectively at optical and x-ray wavelengths to identify
materials and structures that would otherwise be undetectable due to the higher
levels of absorption or fluorescence by the materials in which the structures of
interest are embedded. But there has previously been no practical means
available to extend this technique to the high photon energies needed to
distinguish special nuclear materials from the non-nuclear materials and
radiation shielding relied on by terrorists to conceal the shipment of the
special nuclear materials of concern. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this award we
will investigate the use of inverse Compton scattering employing a sequence of
optical pulses of varying wavelengths to generate a matching sequence of
intense, collimated gamma ray pulses of differing energies identifiable by the
time windows in which these pulses are detected to determine the energy
dependence of the absorption or fluorescence of the materials through which
these pulses pass. By these powerful but simplified means, the presence of
special nuclear materials can be identified ? even at low concentrations ? by
the unique energy-dependence of their absorption and/or fluorescence. If
successful, this research will (1) validate a new cost-effective means for
detection of these nuclear materials, (2) provide the student and postdoctoral
training needed to help establish the manpower base needed to implement these
techniques, and (3) contribute to the broader development of these and related
techniques to the parallel applications in science, medicine and industry.
&lt;br/&gt;