* 0938842
* EAGER:  Layered Nanotube Composite Electrodes for Energy Storage
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2009,10/31/2011
* Jodie Lutkenhaus, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 10/31/2011
* USD 172,303.00

0938842&lt;br/&gt;Lutkenhaus&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will investigate electrochemical
processes occurring within proof of concept nanostructured electrodes created
using an integrated approach consisting of layer-by-layer (LbL) assembly
technique and nanotemplating. The proof-of-concept electrodes will contain
annular layers of lithium battery intercalation cathode material, ion conducting
polymer, and electron conducting polymer within a nanotube geometry. LbL
assembly is the sequential adsorption of oppositely charged species to a
substrate (in this case, a nanoporous template). The combined processing
techniques impart a hierarchical structure where materials properties and three-
dimensional geometry at multiple length scales can be finely controlled. Such a
design is expected to produce shorter reaction-diffusion path-lengths, increased
surface area, and increased electrode utilization relative to planar LbL film
electrodes. The resulting nanostructured cathode will represent a breakthrough
in specific energy, power density, and stability relative to conventional,
planar electrodes. Thus, the research will contribute not only to scientific
understanding of electrochemical processes in nanostructured electrodes, but to
the continued development of effective energy storage
media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Smaller, lighter, energy dense
power sources are desired for small-scale applications such as portable
electronics and miroelectromechanical systems. A great challenge is to create a
power source smaller than the device to be powered; this is especially important
as the application approaches the micro- to nanoscale. A long term goal of the
PI?s lab is to create micro- to nanoscale power sources from the directed
assembly of hard and soft materials. As a preliminary effort, this EAGER project
targets the creation of a proof-of-concept cathode, where nanotube arrays act as
small-scale cathode ?forests?. Initial challenges include the directed
adsorption of materials in the confined dimensions of a template pore, and the
understanding of electrochemical reaction-diffusion processes at the nanotube
surfaces. Success of this project paves the way for the creation of a nanotube
battery, where each component (anode, electrolyte, and cathode) is sequentially
deposited using LbL assembly and nanotemplating.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact of the research is the creation of a new class of hierarchically
manufactured materials, where control over multiple length scales is
demonstrated. The so-called ?layered nanotubes? will contain annular layers of
intimately interfaced materials, each performing a designated function (lithium
intercalation, ion conduction, electron conduction, mechanical reinforcement).
This concept can be extended beyond electrochemistry to reaction/separation
processes, where one layer could catalyze a reaction and the next layer could
separate the products, or to drug delivery where each annular layer could
deliver a specific drug or bind to a specific receptor site. The ?big picture?
goal of the PI is to create and use multi-layered multifunctional nanostructures
that can perform a sequential set of tasks at the micro- to nanoscale. By
applying this system to lithium-ion batteries, the research aims to address the
expanding and varied needs of effective energy media for ever-smaller
applications. The results of this work will be broadly disseminated through
journal articles and conference proceedings. A simplified version of the system
described above will be integrated into classroom and outreach activities for
teaching students about electrochemistry fundamentals and principles.