* 0938033
* EFRI-HyBi: Maximizing Conversion of Biomass Carbon to Liquid Fuel
* ENG,EFMA
* 08/01/2009,05/31/2014
* MAHDI ABU-OMAR, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* George J. Antos
* 05/31/2014
* USD 2,000,000.00

Abstract &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI Name: Rakesh Agrawal&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
Purdue University&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 0938033&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; EFRI-
HyBi: Maximizing Conversion of Biomass Carbon to Liquid
Fuel&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: To date, all biomass conversion processes are limited in the fraction of
lignocellulosic-derived carbon that is converted to liquid fuel. Based on total
lignocellulosic carbon mass and current conversion processes, the carbon
recovery into fuel is limited to less than 40%. In order to minimize the land
area needed to grow biomass to meet our nation?s liquid fuel demand for the
transportation sector, it is essential that the efficiency of conversion of
biomass carbon to liquid fuel be maximized. To this end the synergistic
development of a thermal conversion process using catalysts is envisioned, with
optimized structures and composition of lignocellulosic biomass, to yield
directly high-energy density liquid fuels. If direct conversion cannot be
optimized, oxygen removal from the biomass will be improved for a bio-crude that
may be further refined. Preliminary data indicate a dependence on cell wall
composition and structure for the reaction products of biomass in pyrolytic
conditions. The basis for the work is the hypothesis that modification of key
molecular bonds in wall architecture will reduce the temperature (energy input)
required to produce a bio-oil and also change the distribution of molecular
species released during hydropyrolysis at the new temperature. The intellectual
merit of this proposal resides in the synergistic development of fundamental
knowledge in each of the areas: (i) a chemical process using fast-hydropyrolysis
along with in-situ hydrodeoxygenation (HDO) for biomass conversion, (ii)
suitable catalyst development to enhance activity and selectivity of the thermal
reactions; (iii) gene discovery for engineering of biomass tailored for its end-
use in fast-hydropyrolysis/HDO, (iv) scientific and technical knowledge base to
build small-scale distributed plants with low energy inputs and low supplemental
hydrogen consumption, avoiding transportation of biomass over long distances.
Study of all these aspects in parallel will reveal synergies for the production
of energy-dense liquid fuel molecules that have not been seen before. The
diverse team brings together experts in plant genomics, reaction engineering,
catalysis, process systems analysis, chemistry and chemical engineering to
create an interdisciplinary knowledge base that transforms the carbon and energy
efficiencies of biofuels production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: The
proposed research and resulting technologies will have impact at multiple
levels. They will introduce new and transformative concepts in the conversion of
the entire biomass carbon to liquid fuel and will create scientific knowledge
linking the physical and chemical structure of biomass to the conversion process
using fasthydropyrolysis/ HDO. The use of maize mutants, transgenic lines, and
diversity lines and their recombinant inbreds will allow rapid identification of
genes controlling desirable quality traits that impact conversion efficiency for
future translation to a variety of energy crops. Successful outcomes from the
project will lead to the development of small distributed scale plants that will
have environmental, commercial and economic impact of global proportions. The
research results will be disseminated through conferences, journal articles, and
the internet and by their incorporation in various energy-related courses and
lectures at Purdue. Research opportunities will be provided to undergraduate and
graduate students, and provided through existing outreach programs at Purdue.
The PIs will disseminate information to and engage with chemical and energy
companies to facilitate future implementation and thereby accelerate economic
impact.&lt;br/&gt;