* 0938449
* Individual: Nomination of Prof. Douglass Henderson for the PAESMEM Award
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2011,12/31/2013
* Douglass Henderson, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 12/31/2013
* USD 10,000.00

Dr. Douglass L. Henderson has been Chair of the Engineering Physics department
since 2001. Prior to that, he served as Associate Dean of the College of
Engineering from 1995-2001. Dr. Henderson has made significant contributions to
mentoring of students and faculty, specifically underrepresented minorities, in
engineering and the sciences from pre-college, undergraduates, and graduate
students to young faculty. Dr. Henderson's innovative creation of the University
of Wisconsin Graduate Engineering Scholars (GERS) program is the prime example
of his dedication to mentoring students in the university environment, and
diverse student populations in particular. The diversity program at the
University of Wisconsin is intellectually robust and the GERS program in
particular is a unique mentoring program that cuts across all engineering
disciplines and connects to the physical sciences, biological sciences and
mathematics. Dr. Henderson has graduated almost two dozen Ph.D. and fifty M.S.
students of diverse backgrounds, a truly phenomenal record. With his outstanding
record as GERS program director, as well as in his role as Associate Dean of
Diversity at UW, he is the consummate mentor at all levels, from individual
students to faculty and administrators to institutions. Dr. Henderson's efforts
in creating the GERS program is unique, stands as a transformative
organizational concept to address the recruitment, retention and graduation of
under-representative minorities in the STEM fields, and is a great example for
other major research universities to follow. The programs and activities that
Dr. Henderson has developed in support of mentoring students of diverse
backgrounds have broad impact in two ways. First, many consider the program to
be the Gold Standard in engineering mentoring, in terms of how to successfully
recruit and retain such students at a major Research-I university. It is being
imitated nationally. Second, the GERS program has been a great example for how
to improve their success in other areas of STEM, the biological sciences, the
physical sciences, and the social sciences. Dr. Henderson has been the key
individual at the University of Wisconsin in developing similar programs across
the UW campus.