* 0938474
* Physical Oceanography Dissertation Symposium VI and VII
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2009,12/31/2014
* Amy Nye, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 12/31/2014
* USD 275,286.00

Under this award the principal investigators will organize the sixth and seventh
Physical Oceanography Dissertation Symposium (PODS) conferences in Honolulu,
Hawaii from 3-7 October, 2010 and 7-11 October 2012. These symposia were
established in 2002 to bring together, for the purposes of scientific discussion
and interactions, a group of oceanographers who had either recently graduated,
or were soon to graduate with PhDs in physical oceanography. The goal of these
meetings is to provide these individuals with an opportunity to present their
dissertation research in an open forum in front of their professional peers and
to forge professional relationships between the participants that would
facilitate their future research and academic careers. This program is modeled
after the highly successful Dissertations in Chemical Oceanography (DISCO)
meetings, which first met in 1978, and is formatted in a similar manner. It is
anticipated that the DISCO symposia will be held in parallel with the PODS
symposia and that there will be interaction between the participants in both of
these meetings, broadening the perspectives of all participants. Support for the
DISCO meetings is being pursued in a separate proposal, but interaction between
the two groups is an integral part of the goals of the proposed PODS symposia. A
broad international announcement of the PODS symposia will be made to physical
oceanographers working at academic institutions in both the US and other
countries to develop an applicant pool. From this pool, agency personnel will
select invitees. The meeting consists of a series of sessions grouped by
research subject area that are chaired by selected invitees and will also
include student-led discussion periods. In addition to an initial presentation
by an invited senior scientist in the field, there will also be presentations
by, and discussion with, agency personnel explaining funding mechanisms and
strategies. Participants will form break-out groups to discuss current issues in
research, as well as obstacles and opportunities to career paths in the field,
then provide feedback on these issues to agency personnel through formal
presentations. By bringing the two separate symposia invitees together in
evening discussion sessions revolving around specific topics, the goal is to
broaden the disciplinary expertise of the participants, promote future
collaborations, and to make connections between their research and the education
of future generations of scientists. Logistical support for these symposia will
be provided by the University of Hawaii?s Conference Center (PI Yamashita) in
the Outreach College, as well as from two faculty members (co-PIs Measures and
Selph) from the Department of Oceanography.

Broader Impacts: The PODS symposia will produce a cohort group of early career
professionals in the field of physical oceanography, serving to create a peer-
mentoring group that will last throughout their careers. In addition, the cross-
disciplinary contacts arising from the combination of the DISCO and PODS
meetings will foster future inter-disciplinary understanding and collaborations.
These individuals play a critical role in improving our understanding of Ocean
and Earth Science processes, which provide the scientific framework vital for
developing rational climate related policies.