* 0938434
* Integration of Nanotechnology into Undergraduate Engineering and Science Education
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2012
* Lihong (Heidi) Jiao, Grand Valley State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 12/31/2012
* USD 200,000.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

This Nanotechnology Undergraduate Education (NUE) in Engineering program
entitled "Integration of Nanotechnology into Undergraduate Engineering and
Science Education", at Grand Valley State University (GVSU) under the direction
of Dr. Lihong (Heidi) Jiao, will develop and integrate a sustainable
nanotechnology program, including its technical, ethical and societal
dimensions, into the undergraduate engineering and science curricula at GVSU.
This proposal aims to develop two curricular courses and an outreach workshop on
nanotechnology related topics for classroom and lab activities. The first course
on Fundamentals of Nanotechnology will be taught to 40-50 students in their
junior year and the follow-on course on Nanosystems Engineering will be taught
to 20-30 students in their senior year in parallel to the Senior Capstone
project.

This proposal has a strong workforce training component with course content that
spans across the chemistry, materials, devices and system levels. GVSU is well-
poised in terms of its location and student network to contribute considerably
to workforce training programs in Michigan. The project improves students'
learning and provides them with critical knowledge, skills, and expertise in
nanotechnology to assume leading positions in nanotechnology-related fields. The
project will provide educational opportunities for K-12 students and educators
to learn about nanotechnology and supports the Michigan state government's
initiative to diversify its economy to high tech areas through preparing a
highly qualified workforce.