* 0938198
* Workshop: Molecular Models for Carbon-Neutral Industrialization : March 25-27, 2010, Palm Springs, CA
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2012
* Jianzhong Wu, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 01/31/2012
* USD 47,076.00

0938198&lt;br/&gt;Wu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Overview: Significant advances in
basic science and technology are urgently needed to meet the global energy
demand in the next few decades without leaving a potentially disastrous carbon
footprint behind. As thermodynamics played a central role in fossil-fuel-powered
industrial revolution, molecular modeling will be critical to accelerate
development of large-scale, cost-effective carbon-neutral technologies to deal
with the global energy and environmental challenges. The workshop is designed to
offer computational scientists and engineers a realistic look at the
opportunities and challenges in application of molecular modeling to addressing
global energy and environmental problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: A group of young researchers and internationally distinguished scientists
will be invited to discuss and envision the pivotal role that the computational
research should play in transforming the fossil-fuel-based modern technologies
to those based on sustainable energies and biomass feedstock. The event will be
March 25-27 at the Palm Desert campus of the University of California in
Riverside (UCR), an appealing and affordable venue for the conference adjacent
to Palm Springs, California. The workshop is timed to coincide with the end of
239th ACS National Meeting &amp; Exposition in San Francisco. One week ahead
that, the March Meeting of the American Physical Society (APS) will be in
Portland, Oregon. These two major international conferences provide an
opportunity to invite prominent researchers including those from Europe and Asia
to participate in the workshop. The first day of the workshop will be devoted to
developments in energy research and computational needs that may help further
progress. The second day will feature 10 invited speakers analyzing 10 most
challenging problems in application of molecular modeling in the near future.
With broad diversity and breadth of backgrounds, the workshop participants and
invited speakers will cover different aspects of molecular modeling ranging from
first-principle calculations to molecular simulations and phenomenological
modeling. Their selection will reflect an emphasis on the near future
applications of computational methods to energy and environment
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The workshop has impact in at
least three areas. First, it stimulates debate and discussion among engineering
scientists in the molecular modeling community on future research directions,
and in particular the importance and impact of molecular modeling for
experimental design and new industrial applications. Second, it provides
valuable inputs into science policy thinking to support computational research
to address key technological challenges. And third, it promotes
interdisciplinary and international communications and collaborations in
integrating different computational methods into a more directed and fruitful
way of engineering. The workshop will also help to define new frontiers in
molecular modeling research and transform efficient computational methods as a
powerful tool for industrial applications