* 0938766
* ARI-MA:  Systematic Approach to CdZnTe Material and Detector Development
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Arnold Burger, Fisk University
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 08/31/2010
* USD 400,000.00

The research objective of this project is to develop materials preparation
methods, including synthesis, purification and crystal growth, characterize the
physical and chemical properties and use them to fabricate radiation detectors.
The detectors will be tested and integrated to realize practical detection
devices for national security applications. We will expand the overall knowledge
in this area by: developing an improved crystal growth method for control of
crystal quality and yield and the program will meld together theory, modeling
and experiments, having both fundamental and applied research aspects. The
project will generate the knowledge needed to develop detectors that will have
higher resolution, better directional sensitivity, and higher detection
efficiency than current generation of
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this
research will advance the science and technology of cadmium zinc telluride (CZT)
gamma spectrometers and imaging systems for many national security applications
involving radiological and nuclear threats. Novel and optimal techniques for
crystal growth, crystal characterization and detector fabrication will be
developed. This academic project bears the promise that it will produce
publishable data allowing to establishing processing-properties-performance
correlations and fabricate compact and low power, improved gamma spectrometers
and imagers for the identification and location of nuclear isotopes. This
collaborative program will involve students, ranging from undergraduates through
PhD graduate students and will produce more detector-trained scientists and
engineers than any other US academic program. Fisk students will transition
smoothly to a major research university with PhD programs. The project will
attract and develop a high quality and diverse new generation of PhD
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;