* 0938713
* Washington ACS Meeting: Washington, DC; August 16-19, 2009
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2010
* Ting Xu, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* David A. Brant
* 07/31/2010
* USD 3,500.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 0938713 PI: Xu, Ting ORG: California-Berkeley
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Washington ACS
Meeting&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: This proposal seeks support for
travel awards for graduate students, post-docs, and underrepresented faculty to
attend the symposium on ?Hybrid Soft Materials of Natural and Synthetic
Polymers? at the Fall ACS national meeting in Washington, D.C., August, 16-19,
2009 in the Division of Polymeric Materials: Science and Engineering. The
organizers aim to capture recent developments and present research in both well-
developed stages and in new directions. The proposed symposium is divided into
four specific focus areas: (1) Peptide-directed self-assembly, (2) Amphiphilic
peptides, conjugates and assemblies, (3) Hybrid responsive biomaterials, (4)
Hierarchical assemblies toward biomaterials. The threefold objectives of the
symposium are: (1) to highlight recent advances in the design, synthesis, phase
behavior and application of hybrid soft materials combining polymers and natural
building blocks, (2) to provide a platform for the polymer chemist, polymer
physicist, material scientist and bioengineer to establish connections and
exchange ideas, (3) to facilitate opportunities for minority and junior faculty,
postdoctoral fellows, and graduate students to present their most recent
research results and extend their horizon and knowledge base of hybrid
materials. This symposium will provide opportunities for both leaders and young
investigators working in these focus areas to share their recent advances,
ideas, challenges, and solutions with the expectation that approaches being
developed in one area can directly impact and facilitate advances in the others.
In addition, the integration of polymer scientists, biophysicists and engineers,
who may approach material design in different manners, may facilitate more rapid
advancement of these technologies. Finally, the format of the symposium is
intended to facilitate discussion among all scientists in
attendance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: Because the symposium is under
the auspices of the ACS Division of Polymer Materials Science and Engineering
(PMSE), every oral presentation will be accompanied by a two page abstract in
PMSE Preprints. These abstracts contain pertinent references and significantly
support the impact of the oral presentation. Younger scientists and those from
underrepresented groups will benefit from the opportunity not only to meet one
another but to hear from and meet international leaders in the field. The
symposium has a strong interdisciplinary character and will stimulate
discussions among participants with a variety of scientific
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;