* 0938020
* Collaborative Research: Climate Literacy & Energy Awareness Network (CLEAN) Pathway
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2012
* Cathryn Manduca, Carleton College
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Lea
* 12/31/2012
* USD 254,886.00

The Climate Literacy and Energy Awareness Network (CLEAN) pathway for NSDL is
being developed. The primary audience is a broad one ranging from middle school
students to college graduates. The goal of the CLEAN collaborative project is
the assembly of a collection of approximately 500 authoritative, scientifically
sound resources so that teachers, their students and the general citizenry may
improve their knowledge of climate and its impact on society and enable them to
make better informed decisions about energy use and stewardship of planet earth.
The CLEAN pathway utilizes science literacy maps (strand maps) to aid users in
finding needed resources and illustrate connections between concepts and how
concepts build on one another. The resources are aligned with the AAAS Project
2061 Benchmarks for Scientific Literacy, the National Science Education
Standards and, the NAAEE Excellence in Environmental education Guidelines for
Learning. Teleconference-online workshops are helping teachers and citizens
learn to use the resources. An online community using Web 2.0 social networking
tools to promote collaboration, interactivity and knowledge sharing among
educators, experts and enthusiasts is being facilitated.

This project is receiving co-funding under the Dear Colleague Letter: Climate
Change Education to support the development of NSDL efforts directly related to
climate science.

