* 0938019
* EFRI-BSBA: Engineering Synthetic Mimics of DNA-Protein Recognition Systems
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Nils Walter, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,999,926.00

ABSTRACT: &lt;br/&gt;EFRI-BSBA: Engineering Synthetic Mimics of DNA- Protein
Recognition Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal # 0938019&lt;br/&gt;PI:
Larson, Ronald G.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this
collaborative project is to create artificial "DNA" consisting of charged lines
or nanowires deposited on a silicon substrate, with charged synthetic
nanoparticles functioning as synthetic "proteins." Proteins transcribe DNA into
RNA, regulate genes, and replicate DNA, all with remarkable efficiency and
precision. To do so, in each cell, thousands of proteins scan continuously
millions of bases of DNA, and bind firmly only when encountering precise
sequences of six to twenty base pairs. This superb sequence discrimination is
achieved through a combination of simple physical forces - primarily
electrostatic, hydrophobic, hydrogen bonding, and van der Waals. These forces
result in the diffusion of positively charged proteins along negatively charged
DNA, binding firmly only when a precise pattern of charged, polar, and
hydrophobic regions on the protein complements sites on DNA having the
appropriate base sequence. If this mechanism could be harnessed within synthetic
systems, it would represent a transformative breakthrough that would open the
door to wide-ranging applications in the areas of nanoscale sensing, actuation
and programmed assembly. Examined in this project will be both charged organic
PAMAM dendrimers and surfactant-coated inorganic CdSe and CdTe nanoparticles,
and engineer their charge distributions, as well as hydrogen bonding and van der
Waals interactions to produce weak binding to generic DNA sequences or line
charge distributions and strong binding to specific ones, using molecular
dynamics simulations to guide the design. The research will aim to engineer both
the one-dimensional search and the binding at specific sites by patterned
nanoparticles to complementarily patterned lines on silicon. This research also
intends to drive reactions upon firm binding, including photoemission, thus
taking the first steps towards precise nano-actuation. Broader impacts include
responding to a "grand challenge" by laying a foundation for the diagnosis,
repair, and ultimately self-fabrication of nanomaterials and nanocircuitry. The
PIs will also develop an outreach and minority recruiting program using a
miniaturized "Biological Mimics Roadshow" for use in the classroom in
collaboration with U-of-M's IDEA Institute. This program will be supplemented by
running residential summer science camps for Detroit minority high school
students, which will introduce high school minority students to some of the most
exciting science and engineering, and encourage their pursuit of these fields.