* 0938578
* Challenges and Opportunities in the Hydrologic Sciences
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Stephen Parker, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 09/30/2012
* USD 535,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;The National Research Council?s (NRC) Water Science and Technology
Board (WSTB) proposes to undertake a study of the current and emerging
challenges and opportunities in the hydrologic sciences, including (1) a review
of the current status of the hydrology and its subfields and of their coupling
with related geosciences and biosciences, and (2) the identification of
promising new opportunities to advance hydrologic sciences for better
understanding of the water cycle that can be used to improve water resources and
environmental engineering and management.&lt;br/&gt;The study will be carried
out by an ad hoc, interdisciplinary committee of approximately 12 volunteer
experts, with support from NRC staff. It will be organized and overseen by the
WSTB with assistance and guidance from the WSTB?s standing committee on
Hydrologic Sciences. The committee will hold approximately five meetings to
receive briefings, gather information, deliberate critical issues, and write its
report. The report will contain conclusions and recommendations regarding future
directions for the hydrologic sciences. The total estimated cost of this
activity is $535,000 for the 24-month period, June 1, 2009 through May 31,
2011.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: Hydrologic science faces new challenges as
the nation and world increasingly address complex issues presented by global
climate change, ecosystem protection, groundwater resource sustainability, and
new water demands. Society requires a deeper understanding of how human
pressures are altering the water cycle and affecting the quality and quantity of
water available to humans and the environment. Agencies need accurate
information to make decisions on allowable water use and waste management in an
evolving economy as climate, land use, and population patterns change. These
topics cannot be addressed separately; connections require integrated studies.
Such integration necessitates cutting-edge research modalities for sensing data,
converting raw data into information, and synthesizing findings. An effective
response to this new world requires revisiting the agenda for hydrologic science
and revamping ways in which science is done.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The
primary focus of this study will be the NSF program in hydrologic science but
given the importance of water issues to the nation, the report should also serve
the academic/educational community, other agencies with programs in hydrology
and water resources, Congressional staff, the OSTP, professional societies, and
other entities with missions related to Earth sciences and water resources. The
report should be an important reference to those engaged in hydrologic research
and advancement of the science, much the same as Opportunities in the Hydrologic
Sciences (1991) has served the hydrologic science community for nearly two
decades.