* 0938825
* EVO: Remote Participation Technology for LIGO and the LIGO Scientific Collaboration
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Harvey Newman, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,302,381.00

The search for gravitational waves from astrophysical sources will be refined
through the vigorous work of hundreds of scientists from around the world as
part of the LIGO Scientific Collaboration (LSC). Working along side their
European colleagues, data from both the LIGO and VIRGO interferometers is being
analyzed in the search for these first signals. The search for gravitational
waves has become a worldwide effort. It is expected that scientists will be in
constant communications with each other as they engage in numerous working
meetings to be scheduled regularly in the United States and Europe. A concerted
effort is being made to provide an effective means for remote participation in
meetings and other collaboration activities within the LSC without actually
having to travel to the physical location. As technology for conducting high
quality teleconferencing, the Enabling Virtual Organizations (EVO) service will
continue to be used and improved upon, leveraging its original development for
use in the high energy physics collaborations around the world and improving its
value to high energy physics and to other large and small
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The use of EVO for audio and video
teleconferencing is becoming a substantial enabling technology around the world
for the LSC. Support and continued development of remote participation
technology will be contributed to the EVO architectural framework by activities
carried forward by this award. Effective and beneficial use of the EVO services
will be assured for the LSC through the addition of new members to the EVO
development team. EVO software and network development, as well as LIGO/LSC user
support, will be advanced using guidance that will be provided by LIGO and the
LSC collaborators. Small groups, students, those with limited travel funds and
others with difficulty travelling will be enfranchised to fully participate in
important discussions and presentations by providing remote access to LSC
meetings and events. Strong international relationships will be promoted by
lowering the barriers for bringing together scientists and their work from
around the world.