* 0938190
* EAGER:   Tool development for proteomics and environmental metaproteomics
* BIO,EF
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Brian Palenik, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 07/31/2011
* USD 87,596.00

This EAGER project to Brian Palenik, UC San Diego, is for tools development to
identify previously unknown, putative genes in metagenomic sequence data.
Metagenomic sequences represent the full complement of microbial genomes in a
community and are difficult to analyse because of their complexity. Even the
genomes of cultured organisms are difficult to annotate as typically 50% of the
genome sequence can contain unknown or novel genes. Proteomics uses mass
spectrometry to analyze peptides derived from the proteolysis of samples. This
analysis allows for the determination of the presence or absence of specific
proteins in the original sample. In some forms, proteomics can use genomic
databases as a starting point for peptide and protein identification. More
recently, a form of "reverse proteomics" is being tested where mass spectrometry
data are used to improve whole genome annotation by demonstrating the presence
of proteins not predicted in the initial genome annotation. This technology is
now beginning to show promise in the analysis of complex environmental samples,
such as metaproteomic samples. This type of community-level analysis can lead to
new information about not only the biodiversity but the functioning of
ecosystems. However, the coupling of mass spectrometry and genome and metagenome
data to analyze environmental samples still requires tool development. This
development is best done when the metagenome and metaproteome sampling can be
coordinated to optimize and test the tools. This PI is developing several tools
for analyzing metaproteomes using metagenomics data obtained from the same site.
The tools include computational procedures to discover new open reading frames
and genes, methods to identify which species are present without DNA sequencing
and an approach for analysing post-translational modifications in Synechococcus
metagenomes. This aspect of the work is higher risk than the other aims but is
important because this will allow them to evaluate which genes in the metagenome
are active. This project represents a novel interdisciplinary collaboration
between a marine microbiologist and a mass spectroscopist, and it is timely as
it takes advantage of ongoing metagenome sequencing funded by another NSF
proposal. If successful, these tools will allow for the identification of
activated genes within communities. Further, new or novel genes will be
identified in the metagenomes and the products of these novel genes will be
identified. This research team will focus on marine cyanobacterial communities
as the test metagenome. The PI has already sequenced the genomes of two
Synechococcus (marine cyanobacteria) and he will use these as reference genomes
for the metagenomic/metaproteomic analyses. Synechococcus assemblages in the
ocean are not very diverse, therefore Synechococcus metagenomes are some of the
best metagenomes for these tests because these populations can be enriched from
seawater to produce a nearly pure samples for proteomic analysis. &lt;br/&gt;The
PI is overseeing training of two post-docs as a result of this award.