* 0938940
* Collaborative Research:  RAPID--Investigating Potential Secondary Organic Aerosol (SOA) Increases Due to Beetle Infestation Across the Western United States
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2011
* Kara Huff Hartz, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Pszenny
* 05/31/2011
* USD 41,291.00

This RAPID project is a study of the changes in volatile organic carbon (VOC)
emissions from Lodgepole pine trees (Pinus contorta var. latifolia) as a result
of the rapidly expanding infestation of pine bark beetles (Dendroctonus
ponderosae) in the Western United States. Lodgepole pine is a widespread and
abundant species in Western montane forests. Preliminary measurements of VOC
emissions from infested and non-infested trees have shown different emission
patterns of monoterpenes, which are important precursors for secondary organic
aerosol (SOA) formation. Because the various monoterpenes differ in their SOA
formation potential, changes in their patterns of emission may have far-reaching
effects on visibility and radiative forcing of climate on a regional scale.
There is some urgency to this project because the beetle infestation is underway
and spreading rapidly. It offers a unique, early opportunity to observe and
document impacts on the atmosphere of an insect infestation of the type that is
projected to become increasingly frequent and severe as the climate warms.
Sampling is carried out in consultation with and with the approval of the USDA
Forest Service, which has issued a special use permit for field work in the
Routt-Medicine Bow National Forest. This award is funded under the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).