* 0938957
* EAGER: Poly(Ionic Liquids)
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Thomas Smith, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2012
* USD 162,426.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Room temperature ionic liquids (RTILs)
are salts with low melting points (often below room temperature), and are
typically comprised of quaternary sulfonium, phosphonium, or ammonium
(imidazolium, pyridinium, pyrrolidinium) cations paired with anions of low Lewis
basicity (BF4-, PF6-, CF3SO3- (CF3SO2)2N-, etc.). Today the utility of RTILs in
advanced electrochemical devices ranging from lithium ion batteries, to fuel
cells, capacitors, solar cells and actuators is being explored. Because of the
mobility of both the anionic and cationic components of ionic liquids, it is
proposed that the function of such devices might be improved if solvated
membranes or conventional ionic liquids were replaced by film-forming ionic
liquid polymers in which the mobility of the ions is constrained. However, when
the mobility of the anionic and cationic components in ionic liquids is reduced
by incorporation in a polymer system, ionic conductivity is also substantially
impacted. This limitation can possibly be mediated by reduction of the
dimensionality of ion diffusion in nanostructured, precision block copolymers
and polymer blends. The present proposal outlines options for the synthesis and
characterization of ionic liquid 1,3-dialkyl-4- and 5-vinylimidazolium salts
that are amenable to facile homopolymerization or incorporation as block
sequences in a wide variety of vinyl- and acrylic copolymer systems. In
addition, the potential device utility of polymer blends and block copolymer
systems containing these imidazolium polymers is highlighted. Specific goals of
the research are to synthesize and characterize families of dissymmetric,
aprotic ionic liquid monomers formally derived from 1-methy-4- and
5-vinylimidazoles, 2-alkyl-1-methyl-4- and 5-vinylimidazoles and 1-methyl-4-and
5-vinylimidazole-2-propane sulfonate; elucidate options for the
homopolymerization, random copolymerization and block copolymerization of these
monomers; characterize the thermal and electrochemical properties of these
monomers and polymers; and, study the thermal and electrical properties, and
morphology of blends of polymers of 1,3-dialkyl-4-vinylimidazolium salts with
PVF2.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Room
temperature ionic liquids (RTILs) are salts with low melting points, often below
room temperature. Today, the utility of RTILs in advanced electrochemical
devices ranging from lithium ion batteries, to fuel cells, capacitors, solar
cells and actuators is being explored. Nevertheless, only limited success has
been achieved in practical applications. Because of their liquid state, the
function RTILs in commercial devices might be improved if they were replaced by
film-forming ionic liquid polymers. However, incorporation in a polymer system
typically results in a substantial drop in ionic conductivity. This limitation
can possibly be overcome in precision 2-D or 1-D nanomaterials. The present
proposal outlines options for the synthesis and characterization of
nanomaterials derived from ionic liquid polymers. Specific goals of the research
are to synthesize and characterize new ionic liquid monomers; elucidate options
for the preparation of nanocomposites; and, evaluate the morphology, thermal
properties and electrochemical characteristics of these
materials.&lt;br/&gt;Novel materials, that can be fabricated with the agency of
the poly(ionic liquids), described in the present proposal, might be the key to
commercial utility of an ionic liquid system in robust light-weight electronic
devices ranging from Li ion batteries to photovotaics and fuel cells. Recent
reports that imidazolium-based RTILs are excellent solvents for the dispersion
of carbon nanotubes, and that the intrinsic structure and properties of the
carbon nanotubes are retained after dispersion might be translated into
practical device options by utilizing these new poly(ionic liquids). The
research will be carried out at the Rochester Institute of Technology (RIT), a
comprehensive university, offering terminal M.S. degrees in Chemistry and
MS&amp;E, and providing meaningful research experiences to graduate and
undergraduate students alike. Three graduate students and two undergraduate
students will be directly trained and mentored. In addition, the PI will mentor
a summer student in the Syracuse/RIT, NSF Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority
Participation - Upstate Alliance, and an ACS Project SEED student. A unique
collaboration with Peggy Cebe (Tufts University), characterizing the crystal
habit of polymer composites and providing research experiences to deaf and hard-
of-hearing students will also be supported. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;