* 0939164
* CPATH-1: Revitalizing Computing Education through Computational Science
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Michael Miga, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2013
* USD 299,953.00

This program aims to revitalize undergraduate computing education through the
development of a computational science minor targeted to undergraduate majors in
science and engineering. These majors represent a broad community of learners
for whom computation is an increasingly critical tool. Modern scientific and
engineering applications of significant complexity require high-performance
computing solutions, and scientists and engineers require computational thinking
competencies to achieve such solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
introduces concurrent, parallel, and distributed computing concepts, techniques,
and patterns early in the curriculum. The advent of multi-core processors at the
commodity level, necessitated by the efforts to prolong Moore's law, have made
understanding these topics a critical learning outcome. The overall effect of
this project will thus be to teach computational thinking competencies, modern
software design methods, high-performance computing, and scientific computing to
a broad community of learners sorely in need of them. By renovating the
curriculum with non-computer science majors in mind, computer science majors
will also benefit significantly because concurrent, parallel, and distributed
computational methods will be infused into the curriculum earlier than they are
normally encountered. The computer science curriculum will also be revitalized
by introducing real-world examples from science and engineering that have
computational interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The demographics of science and
engineering are different enough from traditional computer science that
underrepresented groups in computing will receive significant exposure to core
ideas of computational thinking and computing. The diffusion of computational
techniques throughout a variety of disciplines will also change the way
computational thinking and computation are perceived and taught within the core
computer science discipline. A rigorous evaluation plan throughout all phases of
the project will measure quantitatively the changes in the preparation of
undergraduates for scientific computing by the proposed computational sciences
minor, leading to a greater likelihood of being adopted or adapted by other
institutions. By improving the computational skills of scientists and engineers,
at Vanderbilt and elsewhere, the project will achieve the broader impact of
improving science education in the United States, making students far better
prepared for the work force and advanced graduate training.&lt;br/&gt;