* 0939514
* Center for Energy Efficient Electronics Science (Center for E3S)
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2010,02/28/2022
* Ming Wu, University of California-Berkeley
* Cooperative Agreement
* Usha Varshney
* 02/28/2022
* USD 47,679,948.00

Center for Energy Efficient Electronics Science (E3S)&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Yablonovitch, Eli&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
0939514&lt;br/&gt;Lead Institution: University of California,
Berkeley&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Information-processing equipment, including
computers, consumer electronics, telephony, office equipment, network equipment,
data centers and servers, and supercomputers consumes a significant fraction of
the total electricity production in the US, and it is growing dramatically with
time, both on an absolute basis and as a fraction of the total. The inexorable
growth in the role of information in society will place an increasing burden on
the US energy economy. Aggregate energy used for information technology
constitutes a genuine, looming energy crisis in information processing. At the
most fundamental level, the energy used to manipulate a single bit of
information is currently a million times greater than theoretical limits. In
order to address this issue, there is a critical need for fundamental and
conceptual breakthroughs in the underlying physics, chemistry and materials
science that form the foundation of information-processing technologies. This
Science and Technology Center for Energy Efficient Electronics Science (E3S)
seeks to approach the fundamental physical limits and engineering realization of
electronic devices and systems for digital information- processing technologies.
The Center for E3S proposes to research revolutionary concepts, and scientific
principles that would enable fundamentally new and different science for
digital-information processing, in order to achieve a radical reduction in
energy usage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;Current
technology is dependent on the transistor, which suffers from a serious voltage-
dependent limitation, since it requires a powering voltage close to 1 Volt,
whereas the wires of an electronic circuit will function with tolerable signal-
to-noise ratio, even at voltages as low as 1 millivolt. If the operating voltage
is reduced by a factor of one thousand, than power will be reduced by a factor
of one million. Hence, the energy per bit-function in digital electronics is
currently one million times higher than it needs to be. New science that would
enable a millivolt electronic switch will lead to a successor to the
conventional transistor, thereby resulting in a paradigm shift in digital
electronics. Currently, CMOS dissipates a minimum of about 30,000 eV per digital
function. The 2007 International Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors projects
a goal for this value to be reduced to about 800 eV per digital function by the
Year 2022. To address this revolutionary challenge, an interdisciplinary team of
scientists from UC Berkeley, MIT and Stanford University will assemble in E3S to
conduct research in four interrelated themes: I. Nanoelectronics: solid-state
millivolt switching; 2. Nanomechanics: zero-leakage switching; 3. Nanomagnetics:
surpassing the Landauer Limit; and 4. Nanophotonics: few-photon optical
communication, for the common goal of new energy-efficient device
architectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central idea behind Theme 1 is to change
the operational paradigm for the logic switch by controlling the width of the
energy barrier rather than the height. Conduction occurs via tunneling of
electrons, and it can be shown that this type of device can be operated at very
low supply voltages and with very low off-currents. Theme 2 is focused on the
design of nanoelectromechanical switches that will have zero off-state leakage
current. To overcome contact wear and reliability issues, two novel switching
device structures are proposed; one with an interface material between
electrodes as they close; and one that uses a complementary configuration to
obtain very-low-energy switching. Theme 3 seeks to surmount the Landauer Limit
of 18 meV energy dissipation per logic operation at room temperature by using
nanomagnetic devices. Electrical control of ferromagnetism, as compared to an
external magnetic field, is proposed as an energy-efficient alternative. Theme 4
seeks to use nanophotonics for ultra-low-energy communications to approach the
physical energy limits for intra and inter-chip communication between devices. A
new form of spontaneous emission of light will be explored that is potentially
superior to conventional stimulated emission. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;Many programs at the participating institutions (UC Berkeley,
MIT, and Stanford and with three minority-serving institutions: Contra Costa
College (CCC), Los Angeles Trade Technical College (LATTC), and Tuskegee
University, international collaboration with Oxford University, the University
of Toronto and the University Hong Kong and industrial partnerships with Intel,
IBM, Google, Lam Research and Hewlett Packard) will be leveraged to integrate
research and education programs. Among these are pre-college programs including:
Summer High School Apprenticeship Program for rising high school seniors (UC
Berkeley), Pre-College Engineering Academy for 11th and 12th grade high school
students (UC Berkeley), Saturday Engineering Enrichment and Discovery Program
(MIT), Minority Introduction to Engineering and Science Program at the
undergraduate level (MIT), the Transfer-To-Excellence Program for community
college students (UC Berkeley), E3S Center Summer Research Program for community
college students, the Summer Undergraduate Program in Engineering Research at UC
Berkeley, and the MIT Summer Research Program for minority students. A Graduate
Student Council will be formed to develop student leadership skills. A Graduate
Student Rotation Program will benefit students as well as enhance synergy among
the four proposed research themes. At the postgraduate level, university
postdoctoral fellows programs will be leveraged to recruit minority and female
faculty. The Center plans to disseminate research results and activities to a
broader audience to increase energy awareness through weekly energy forums and
monthly lectures in the San Francisco Bay area, and plans to implement a
comprehensive evaluation and assessment plan for the Center?s research and
education activities.