* 0939187
* EAGER:   Collaborative Research: Cross-Domain Knowledge Transformation via Matrix Decompositions
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Heng Huang, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Petros Drineas
* 08/31/2010
* USD 53,855.00

EAGER: Collaborative Research: Cross-domain Knowledge Transformation via Matrix
Decompositions&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Traditional data mining algorithms discover
knowledge in new domains starting from the scratch, ignoring knowledge learned
in other domains. Knowledge transformation is a transformative paradigm that
utilizes previously acquired knowledge in other domains to guide knowledge
discovery process in a new domain and is especially useful for large data sets.
In particular, utilizing applicable knowledge in other domains helps to
stabilize the unsupervised learning and generate results that we may have
preliminary understanding. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
design and develop cross-domain knowledge transformation mechanisms for
knowledge discovery. The transformation mechanisms are based on matrix
decompositions where the knowledge been transferred are represented directly and
explicitly ? making them easy to comprehend and be utilized in practice. The
proposed mechanisms provide a versatile knowledge transformation framework with
solid theoretical foundation and enable a new paradigm of unsupervised learning
with domain knowledge. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The usefulness of these knowledge
transformation mechanisms/systems will be demonstrated for effective information
retrieval, consumer recommender systems, and product/online opinion sentiment
analysis. The versatility of this transformative metholody will be verified
across many domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;