* 0939907
* RAPID:   Acquisition of high resolution LiDAR for Barro Colorado Nature Monument, Panama
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2010
* Stephen Hubbell, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 05/31/2010
* USD 62,000.00

Light Detection and Ranging (LiDAR) is an effective, rapid, remote-sensing
technology for describing the structure of forest canopies, height of individual
trees, and the size and location of forest disturbances. These data can also
provide estimates of standing carbon stocks of entire forests at landscape
scales. When used in conjunction with LiDAR, hyperspectral imagery, which
measures the wavelength of light reflected from a canopy, can provide
identification of individual forest species. At present, the cost of deploying
LiDAR and hyperspectral imagery has limited its application mostly to temperate
forests. A time-limited opportunity has arisen to acquire this imagery at a
greatly reduced cost for Barro Colorado Nature Monument (BCNM), Panama, one of
the best-studied tropical forests in the world.

LiDAR and hyperspectral imagery provide an exceptionally powerful tool for
integrating data on the structure and biodiversity of tropical forests. These
data will provide a valuable resource for diverse projects conducted at BCNM,
and will stimulate new research aimed at translating existing ground-based
research up to landscape scales relevant to forest management and conservation.
The wealth of existing data at BCNM allow for a rigorous evaluation of LiDAR's
potential to provide large-scale forest carbon estimates, which will play a key
role in implementation of proposed carbon dioxide (CO2) emission control through
Reduced Emissions from Deforestation and Degradation. Data will be maintained by
Smithsonian's Environmental Science Program and made available online and as an
Ecological Archives publication one year after acquisition. These data will
contribute to the training and research of students at numerous collaborating
institutions.