* 0939564
* Center for Dark Energy Biosphere Investigations (C-DEBI)
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2022
* James Cowen, University of Southern California
* Cooperative Agreement
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 09/30/2022
* USD 47,474,312.00

Center for Dark Energy Biosphere Investigations (C-DEBI) - A NSF Science and
Technology Center for resolving the extent, function, dynamics and implications
of the sub-seafloor. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Earth's "deep biosphere" includes
a variety of sub-surface habitats on Earth, such as mines, aquifers, and soils
on the continents, and the sediments and igneous rock below the ocean floor. It
is estimated that nearly half of the total biomass on Earth resides in the deep
biosphere. Technological hurdles have limited examination of the sub-surface
biosphere sites to relatively few locations and only shallow drilling. These
limits have hindered deep biosphere research, skewing data sets towards
environmental accessibility, and precluding the development of a more accurate
global census. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The largest potential subsurface biome is
also the least accessible: the sub-seafloor biosphere which is estimated to
harbor one third of all biomass on Earth in the two environments of igneous
ocean crust and sediments. Today, we know far too little about the organisms of
these sub-surface microbial communities or the critical abiotic and biotic
processes within this unique biosphere. However, attention to the sub-surface
Earth and biology, is increasing, and the technologies available for sampling,
monitoring, and experiments has dramatically improved in the last decade.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;This Center will provide a
framework for a large, multi-disciplinary group of scientists to pursue
fundamental questions about life deep in the sub-surface environment of Earth.
The fundamental science questions of C-DEBI involve exploration and discovery,
uncovering the processes that constrain the sub-surface biosphere below the
oceans, and implications to the Earth system. What type of life exists in this
deep biosphere, how much, and how is it distributed and dispersed? What are the
physical-chemical conditions that promote or limit life? What are the important
oxidation-reduction processes and are they unique or important to humankind? How
does this biosphere influence global energy and material cycles, particularly
the carbon cycle? Finally, can we discern how such life evolved in geological
settings beneath the ocean floor, and how this might relate to ideas about the
origin of life on our planet? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Center will be led by a
world-class team of investigators who bring different disciplinary foundations
for the intellectual and technical challenges of the research: Drs. Katrina
Edwards (University of Southern California); Andrew Fisher (University
California, Santa Cruz), James Cowen (University of Hawai'i, Manoa), Steve
D'Hondt (University of Rhode Island), and Jeff Wheat (University of Alaska,
Fairbanks). These leaders, with their large group of collaborators in the
Center, bring expertise in molecular biology, microbial ecology, hydro-
geophysics, microbial biogeochemistry, geology, sediment and hydrothermal
geochemistry, modeling, theory, and technology/instrument
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;C-DEBI will
develop new technologies and conceptual models for studying this realm; to train
and educate the interdisciplinary scientists who will define and pursue the
future of this science and excite the public; and to interface efficiently with
the international ocean drilling enterprise: the Integrated Ocean Drilling
Program. Coordination and integration of the research an education, the national
and international projects, and the development and deployment of observing
systems and experimental technology will be a strong focus of the Center.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;C-DEBI will accelerate interdisciplinary collaboration
between PIs, post-docs, graduate and undergraduate students to uncover the
nature and importance of the deep biosphere. The Center will train undergraduate
and graduate students and provide fellowship support across the institutions.
Existing courses and new ones will use C-DEBI science to teach fundamental
knowledge about Earth systems and different life forms discovered in the deep
biosphere. Public lectures, museum exhibits, and science-at-sea activities will
be employed to inform and excite the public about their world.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;C-DEBI will train teachers and invest significantly in
broadening the diversity of those who pursue science and technology careers in
our nation. The Center will use the diversity of existing education, outreach
and training programs, from K-8 through under-graduate programs, at all
partnership institutions to help attract under-represented groups to science,
and the Center will directly engage minority serving state universities and
community colleges to meet this challenge. The lead institution is one of the
most diverse campuses in the country, and partner institutions variously are
well poised with regard to attracting Hispanics, African Americans, Native
Hawai'ians and Pacific Islanders, and Native Americans. The C-DEBI group of
scientists has been excellent in supporting gender diversity in graduate
programs in the recent past, as do the departmental units in which the lead
investigators sit. C-DEBI will specifically target career advancement for women
in science, and the recruitment of women into ocean sciences. The investigators
have a good record with regard to attracting Hispanic and Native American
students at this level.