* 0939088
* CPATH-2: Collaborative Research: From Middle School to Industry: Vertical Integration to Inspire Interest in Computational Thinking
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* William Marcy, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 08/31/2013
* USD 275,999.00

This project, InspireCT, employs vertically integrated project teams to expose
students to the excitement of computational thinking in action. This vertical
integration results in a hands-on, active learning experience that can occur
while students are still deciding what to study as undergraduates. InspireCT
will revitalize undergraduate computing education by engaging students in team
project applications of computing much earlier than is done today. The project
includes participants at four levels of computing knowledge: pre-college
students in grades 6-12, less experienced undergraduates, advanced
undergraduates, and practicing professionals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the
center of the project are advanced undergraduates and team projects typical of
computing degree capstone experiences. The less experienced students are
integrated into the excitement typical of capstone projects by activities
appropriate to their experience level. The professionals provide projects and
mentoring to ensure good connection with professional practice and actual
applications of computational thinking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;InspireCT also
makes use of mentoring - the project explores the impact of mentoring on student
learning, and also examines the positive impact of the younger students seeing
the successes of the more advanced students. This is expected to engender a
positive attitude among less experienced students toward the study of computing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit - This project creates and disseminates
a new approach to introducing and engaging students in computational thinking
activities. This active learning approach is expected to improve student
learning and to create a much more direct engagement with computing by "doing"
rather than "hearing about" computational thinking. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project focuses upon computational thinking concepts such as problem solving,
abstraction, design, and thinking algorithmically. But the project also suggests
that definitions of computational thinking need to include team level,
collaborative efforts since this is how most professionals engage in
computational thinking. Research indicates that understanding the collaborative
and social aspects of computational thinking may be central to attracting more
women students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses significant
challenges including shifts in instructional role, definition of appropriate
activities for vertical integration, and changes in instructional role. At the
same time, the project builds on a substantial base of theory and prior results
in areas such as active learning, capstone projects, and gender equality in
computing education. The theory and related work both indicate that the benefits
could be very substantial if this project is successful in addressing the
challenges and meeting the goals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact -
InspireCT impacts students at both the pre-college and undergraduate levels.
Sparking student interest at that earlier age and improving learning outcomes
via active learning constitutes a potentially transformative impact on computing
education. The social and applied aspects of this approach also provide key
characteristics that research shows are effective in attracting women to
computing. The community building aspect of the project includes both pre-
college and undergraduate instructors. The InspireCT activities are organized to
help identify and establish a series of collaborations between pre-college
instructors and undergraduate faculty.