* 0939753
* OEDG Planning Grant:  Alliance for Broadening Participation of Native Americans in the Geosciences Conference
* GEO,GEO
* 09/15/2009,01/31/2011
* Diana Dalbotten, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 01/31/2011
* USD 39,770.00

The University of Minnesota-Twin Cities is working with partners in the Mid-West
to convene a planning conference to launch a new National Alliance for
Broadening Participation of Native Americans in the Geosciences (NABPNAG). The
purpose of the NABPNAG will be to bring together geoscientists, native leaders,
educators and students for the purpose of advancing research, identifying best
practices, improving evaluation, promoting educational opportunities, and
fostering new collaborations. The conference will take place in the fall of 2010
at the Fond du Lac Tribal and Community College in Northern Minnesota. The
alliance effort builds on best practices for improving participation by Native
Americans in STEM fields, and particularly in the geosciences include 1)
cultural context, 2) relevance, 3) a holistic approach that considers the entire
student, 4) involvement of the community, family, and elders, 5) a communal
learning environment, and 6) problem-based or real-world-based activities. The
conference will address the following research strands: Topics in Education and
Evaluation Related to Native American Geoscience and STEM Learning, and Topics
in Geosciences Research Affecting Indigenous Communities. Attendees at the
conference will include: Native American K-12, undergraduate and graduate
students, as well as faculty from Tribal colleges and other universities,
teachers, elders, and other interested researchers. The following strands will
promote the broader impacts of the conference: Collaboration-Building
Opportunities for All Participants; an Education and Research Opportunity Fair,
for exposing students to new education and research programs; New Curriculum and
Activity Demonstration, for exploration and evaluation of new education
resources; and, a Research Poster Session for showcasing high-school and
undergraduate research, as well as new research by geosciences faculty. This
conference builds on preliminary meetings held during sessions at the Society
for the Advancement of Chicanos and Native Americans in the Sciences (SACNAS)
and American Geophysical Union (AGU) national meetings. Continuation of the
alliance after the NABPNAG conference will be fostered by organizing sessions
and receptions at professional conferences, through communication by
technological and traditional means, and via new ongoing research and education
collaborations.