* 0939622
* Interdisciplinary Networking Impact of the Research Coordination Network (RCN) program
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2011
* Alan Porter, Search Technology Inc
* Standard Grant
* Richard S. Inouye
* 06/30/2011
* USD 75,699.00

Intellectual Merit: This project aims to gauge how effective Research
Coordination Network (RCN) program awards have been at stimulating research that
crosses disciplinary, organizational, institutional, and geographic boundaries.
It examines research teaming and research community networking characteristics.
It will measure how interdisciplinary articles generated by RCN researchers are.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To accomplish these aims, the project will apply a range
of bibliometric (i.e., counting research publication activity), text mining,
statistical, and visualization methods to learn about the effects of RCN
support. The main data being analyzed are abstract records of articles published
by RCN researchers and by suitable comparison groups of researchers. Those
articles will be separated into 'Before' and 'After' RCN project periods to help
determine the effects of RCN support. This should help understand social and
intellectual networking pattern evolution and cross-disciplinary research
knowledge transfer mechanisms. Given the importance placed on interdisciplinary
research processes in science today, such findings would be intellectually
important for researchers and for research
managers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The findings of this research
should point to ways to facilitate interdisciplinary research knowledge
interchange. This is intended to aid NSF in determining the effectiveness of the
RCN program and possible ways to enhance this program?s goals. More broadly, it
should offer insights to enrich graduate training programs to enhance young
researchers? networking orientation and skills.