* 0939995
* Special Meeting at Copper Mountain on Multigrid and Iterative Methods
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Van Henson, Front Range Scientific Computations, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 09/30/2013
* USD 149,784.00

This project is a three-year effort to support participation in the 2010 and
2012 Copper Mountain Conferences on Iterative Methods and the 2011 Copper
Mountain Conference on Multigrid Methods. The funding in this award is
specifically intended to support the participation of students, women, and
minority scientists. The Copper Mountain Conferences have graduate students
forming a very large fraction of the attendees (typically 30%-40%), many of them
full participants who co-author papers and give presentations. Women and
minorities are growing fractions of the attendees (e.g., 27 of 49 students
participating in 2008 were women); this award funding is targeted to further
enhance their proportions. Support for the students, women, and minority
scientists from this award is in the form of reduced registration fees, travel
support, and subsidized meals and lodging. The funding also supports a "Student
Paper Competition", which draws entries from a significant fraction of the
student attendees and results in extraordinarily high-quality papers on
scientific discovery from the students, working in tandem with and under the
guidance of their faculty advisors. These results, like the conferences as a
whole, span wideranging and important theoretical and applications areas, such
as techniques of convergence analysis, implementation and development of
mathematical software, and use of such ideas in novel settings, including
advanced computer architectures and new applications such as uncertainty
quantification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Copper Mountain Conference series form
arguably the premier conferences in two closely related mathematical fields:
iterative and multigrid methods. These two fields provide computational support
for numerical simulation of a very wide host of endeavors, including
environmental and energy research, medical and biological applications, and many
other areas critical to the U. S. and international science and engineering
community. This award supports the participation of students, women, and
minority scientists at those Conferences. The Conferences? traditionally work to
ensure the future vitality of the fields of iterative and multigrid methods by
facilitating development and nurturing of a community of capable graduate
students and entry-level scientists. Through their egalitarian structure, with
no invited speakers and all talks of equal length, the Conferences provide
mechanisms for young people to meet each other and all participants in a relaxed
yet scientifically rigorous setting; these mechanisms include topical tutorials,
themed evening workshops, and access to the broad representation of participants
from academia, national laboratories, and industry. The Conferences have a
tradition of a very high level of student participation (typically 30-40% of
attendees), and will cultivate this through supporting students' local and
travel expenses. An emphasis is placed on engendering diversity through support
of women and minority scientists. These conferences bring together the world?s
leading practitioners in these critical fields and result in high-level
publications, effective applications codes, and the establishment of longterm
collaborative research partnerships.