* 0939055
* CPATH-2: Collaborative Research: Broadening Studio-Based Learning in Computing Education
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2010,09/30/2014
* N Narayanan, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 09/30/2014
* USD 420,599.00

This CPATH award funds an extension of a prior community building award to
expand the studio learning model on a national scale. A team of four computing
faculty and three evaluators will address this challenge in a carefully
orchestrated 30-month national project in which faculty development workshops
will train ten to fifteen computing educators to teach up to twenty courses
taken by a variety of computing and IT majors at ten to fifteen community
colleges and universities across the country, with each course taught once in a
studio-based format and once in a traditional format. A rich set of data,
including pre- and post-tests, pre- and post-surveys, student interviews, and
instructor reports, will be collected and analyzed in order to evaluate the
impact of SBL. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The instructional methods most commonly
employed today in computing education are not a good match for computing careers
of the future. Instruction tends to focus more on programming and less on
computational thinking, design, and problem solving. Labs and homework
assignments are generally geared toward individual and isolated work rather than
communication, collaboration, presentation and critiquing. This not only runs
the risk of turning students off to computing as a discipline, but also fails to
prepare students for tomorrow?s computing careers that require skills in
communication, collaboration and critical analysis, as well as computational
thinking, design and problem solving. The Studio-Based Learning (SBL) model has
the potential to train students in these skills, make learning computing both
engaging and effective, and thus trigger a fundamental shift in computing
education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Intellectual merits: The broad implementation
and systematic evaluation of the SBL model has the potential to significantly
expand the knowledge base on effective and engaging methods of computing
education. Since the investigators' work on SBL dates back to the late 1990s, by
the end of the proposed project, the collaborative group will have accumulated
over a decade of data, theoretical analyses and practical information on the
implementation and impact of SBL. Furthermore, five years' worth of systematic
implementation and evaluation results will have accrued from a variety of
computing courses, from a variety of institutions across the country, and for a
broad spectrum of undergraduate students, making this one of the longest and
most systematic evaluation of a pedagogical approach in computing education.
Results from the project will therefore enrich both the theory and practice of
computing education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The national
implementation should enable a large and diverse group of undergraduates in a
variety of computing majors from across the country, in different types of
institutions, and in different levels and types of computing courses, to benefit
from SBL. In turn, this has the potential to form the beginnings of a convincing
case for an even broader adoption of the approach. The ultimate benefit will be
not only that students find the computing curriculum less intimidating and more
engaging, but also that they are prepared for careers that increasingly require
skills of computational thinking, design and problem solving, collaboration and
communication. The project includes implementation in several EPSCOR states and
minority-serving institutions. The activities of this project, evaluation
results, and practical resources will be widely disseminated not only through
the traditional means of papers, presentations and meetings, but also through a
feature-rich community portal and other non-traditional means. Finally, this
project's results could also benefit other science and engineering curricula
because design and problem solving play important roles in all of science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;