* 0939858
* Collaborative Research: Global Innovation and the Changing Nature of Domestic Engineering Work
* SBE,SBE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Diane Bailey, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Julia I. Lane
* 08/31/2011
* USD 61,398.00

Innovation is increasingly undertaken on a global scale. More and more financial
capital used to spur innovation in U.S. firms is spent abroad: domestic
companies employ scientists and engineers in other countries to take advantage
of highly skilled workers while simultaneously cutting costs. This research
examines whether and how innovation investment that leads to task-based
offshoring changes the nature of occupational work in domestic U.S. firms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research builds on previously funded NSF work which
examined how advanced innovation technologies were changing the nature of
engineering work. It examines the possibility that innovation investments act as
an exogenous force that provides the occasion for firms to restructure, and
hence act as a catalyst for offshoring. The research also examines the
consequences for the firms' ability to succeed in international markets. The
particular focus of the research is on the experience at General Motors (GM): as
part of its response to the current economic crisis, the U.S. government has
extended GM 13.4 billion in federal loans. With these loans, GM is restructuring
its global operations, including engineering. The study thus advances
understanding of the impact of science investments with respect to occupational
structures and global labor market. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study design
involves field research at four of GM's global engineering centers located in
Warren Michigan, U.S., Bangalore India, Sao Palo, Brazil, and Russelsheim,
Germany. The results of interviews with engineering managers and engineers at
all four of the research locations are analyzed. Additionally, network methods
permit the exploration of changes in structure by uncovering patterns of
communication between engineers and others with whom they interact to accomplish
their work. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are at least three important ways in
which the research has a broader impact. First, the study reveals, in the
context of automotive engineering, how innovation investments are changing the
domestic workforce through internationalization. This information can inform
policy decisions about future investments that change the structure and content
of innovation work at home and abroad. Second, the project provides a detailed
ethnographic documentation of the changes in structure and content of domestic
jobs as innovation work becomes offshored. Third, the research advances
understanding of how work is changing and thus helps tease out both what factors
are important for determining how work tasks should be distributed in global
firms and what types of technologies should be implemented to facilitate the
transfer of tasks.