* 0939554
* RAPID:  Migrant Material Cultural Project:  An Ethnographic and Ethnoarchaeological Analysis of Undocumented Migration in Southern Arizona and Northern Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Jason De Leon, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 06/30/2010
* USD 31,860.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Dr. Jason De Leon (University of Washington) will undertake research on the
relationship between shifts in recent United States Border Patrol security
measures, changes in undocumented migration streams into southern Arizona, and
the unique material goods and economic systems associated with desert migration.
Populations of interest are migrants preparing to cross into the United States
through the desert, vendors in the town of Altar, Mexico, who specialize in
migrant provisions, and undocumented migrants who use temporary campsites on
Ironwood Forest National Monument lands in Arizona.

This study addresses three primary sets of questions: 1) How have recent
increases in border security in the El Paso region impacted the flow of
undocumented migrants into Altar, Mexico, and southern Arizona? 2) What are the
demographic characteristics (e.g., age, gender, nationality) of migrants who are
currently crossing the Sonoran Desert and using lay-up sites in Ironwood Forest
National Monument? 3) How has the local economy of Altar, Mexico, been impacted
by recent changes in U.S. Border policies?

This exploratory research applies a unique combination of ethnographic,
archaeological, and ethnoarchaeological methods and theories to understand
multiple components of undocumented migration. This includes examining the
immediate impacts that changes in U.S. Border Patrol have on migration streams,
as well as studying the specialized economic systems that have arisen in
northern Mexico to deal with the increasing number of migrants attempting desert
crossings. Additionally, this project is the first detailed analysis of the
temporary migrant campsites that dot the American southwest. This research is
not only an innovative approach to studying migration, it will also provide new
demographic and economic data on understudied sub-populations of undocumented
migrants (i.e., women, children, and the elderly). This combination of
ethnographic, archaeological, economic, and demographic research will greatly
contribute to the growing field of migration studies and to understanding the
interlinked effects of border policy changes.

