* 0939103
* CPATH-1: Informatics at Multiple Scales
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* James Walden, NORTHERN KENTUCKY UNIVERSITY RESEARCH FOUNDATION (DO NOT USE)
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2013
* USD 295,814.00

&lt;br/&gt; Natural science has come to recognize and study phenomena that recur
at multiple scales of space and time. This recognition has allowed fundamental
principles to be exhibited in full universality and has helped energize cross-
disciplinary work in the sciences. The team at Northern Kentucky University
conjectures that a similar energizing of cross-disciplinary work in the
informatics domain can be accomplished by likewise focusing on computational
phenomenon occurring at multiple scales. They propose to develop, deploy,
disseminate, and assess a curriculum model that is based on this notion. Seen
from a computational perspective, the range of scales is vast. From elementary
particles to the planet itself, computation occurs at many levels. This way of
organizing computational phenomena across distinct scales is an alternative way
of addressing the ?principles? approach to computing pedagogy. NKU will explore
and assess the effectiveness of this alternative approach. Encouraging students
to see computation operating on many scales can deepen their appreciation for
computational thinking (CT) across wide variety of disciplines. This can help
combat the insular pull of computer science pedagogy that can arise from a
narrow focus on code and technology for its own sake. This project uses the
College of Informatics at Northern Kentucky University to implement a model
based on this vision. The College was formed in 2005, bringing together three
departments: Communication, Computer Science, and Business Informatics (formerly
Information Systems). The model deploys computational thinking in the curriculum
at two levels of resolution. All students who have majors in the college (about
1100 students with majors ranging from Journalism to Information Technology)
will enroll in a Principles of Informatics course that exposes them to
computational thinking at many scales. Majors in Computer Science go beyond this
to work through a full curriculum that has been reframed and extended to
reference the multiple scales model. The dissemination of an accessible and
appealing curriculum framework, one that motivates such students to apply
computational thinking to a wide range of workplace situations, should provide a
rich set of resources upon which other metropolitan universities, each with
their distinctive sets of cross-disciplinary expertise, may build.&lt;br/&gt;