* 0939789
* Exploring the Tea Road to Alaska through Workshop Participation, Archaeological and Archival Investigations in Irkutsk and Kiakhta, Russia
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2011
* Katherine Arndt, Alaska Historical Society
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 12/31/2011
* USD 34,416.00

This award supports travel that will allow U.S. and Russian scholars to
participate in a small international conference on Russian America in Kiakhta,
Russia. Related collaborative activities, with opportunities for student
involvement, will include archaeological testing in Kiakhta, the
characterization of historical documents in the Kiakhta archives, the collection
of archaeological glass samples for chemical analysis from the 18th century
Tal'tsinka glass factory near Irkutsk, and the opportunistic examination of
museum collections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite close geographic and historic
ties between Siberia and Alaska, there has been little cooperative work in
historical archaeology. Through a multi-faceted approach, this project advances
information exchange and scientific research in the ancient gateway city of
Kiakhta, through which Chinese tea and durable goods entered Russia for
distribution throughout its empire, to include colonial settlements in North
America. The project also allows for the continuation of research in and near
Irkutsk, the administrative center of Siberia from which expeditions to America
were organized. The data from Kiakhta and Irkutsk may help us to better
understand this chapter of U.S. history by elucidating the origin and nature of
goods shipped to Russian America.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The merit of the proposed
activity lies in the promotion of an international community of students,
investigators, and cultural resource managers dedicated to conducting joint
research on the shared history of Russia and the U.S. during the time of Russian
America. It also presents an opportunity for U.S. scholars to establish work
relations in the multi-ethnic Republic of Buryatia. This project broadens the
understanding of colonial Russian America and its historical connections with
China and central Siberia through the dissemination of knowledge and development
of collaborative international partnerships. The involvement of students
encourages the perpetuation of joint research in the region. The project also
emphasizes cooperation between Russian and U.S. museums through a "sister
museum" concept.&lt;br/&gt;