* 0939559
* RAPID Collaborative Research: Short-term colonization processes at Costa Rica methane seeps
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Victoria Orphan, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2011
* USD 30,014.00

This RAPID project will conduct 5 submersible or ROV dives to collect a series
of colonization experiments deployed in March 2009 on Mound 12 off Costa Rica
(997 m). These experiments were deployed opportunistically, and to optimize the
information that could be obtained, the PIs needed to recover them within a 12
month time frame. Early colonization of rock, wood, shell and tube substrates
will be studied. The microbes, foraminiferans and metazoans present after 6-12
mo will be compared to those colonizing similar experiments to be deployed at
Hydrate Ridge, where seeps occur within an oxygen minimum zone. The overall
project goal is to integrate physical, geological, chemical and biological data
to develop a holistic view of the influence of seep-generated carbonate hard-
ground ecosystems on margins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the
research are to (a) Compare colonizers at seeps off Costa Rica and Hydrate Ridge
to assess the importance of different oxygen regimes in the development of
anaerobic methane oxidation, sulfide oxiders and other microbial metabolisms on
hard substrates, and to evaluate their roles in driving protozoan and metazoan
succession at methane seeps. (b) Deploy a suite of biotic and abiotic substrates
to distinguish the specific roles of carbonate substrate from those of other
hard substrates (wood, clam and mussel shells, worm tubes) available. (c)
Explore the similarity of vent and seep colonization processes by comparing
colonization at the Costa Rica seeps, where vent species are common, to the
Hydrate Ridge seeps, where they are not. (d) Determine whether there are
diagnosable biogeographic isotope or other biomarker signatures from newly
recruited Costa Rica microbial, foraminiferal and animal populations at active
vs. inactive seeps, and whether these differ from those at Hydrate
Ridge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will involve international
participation from Costa Rican scientists at the Univ. of Costa Rica. The
collections will provide material for summer research projects by diversity
students. In conjunction with results from the parent project, the research will
be disseminated in coursework at 3 teaching institutions. Additional broader
impacts include community outreach (local school presentations; web site
development) and interdisciplinary, hands-on training of several future
scientists, including underrepresented groups (women; first-generation
university graduate and undergraduate students from rural
communities).&lt;br/&gt;