* 0939106
* CPATH-1: CPATH at Marietta College
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Scott Lewandowski, Marietta College
* Continuing Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 09/30/2013
* USD 168,446.00

Abstract: Cultural Shift: Bringing the JOY (Joint Organization to inspire Young
people) back to computation Through this CPATH planning project, Marietta
College is exploring effective means of introducing and/or revitalizing
computational thinking across disciplines on its campus and among teachers and
students in the surrounding K-12 educational community. Led by faculty in
computer science, computer information systems, management information systems
and mathematics, this project will create a cultural shift among faculty in
multiple areas of study. Faculty from these varied departments are serving on
the advisory committee for this planning project and have agreed to pilot
threads that introduce computational thinking into their courses: physics,
biology, education, graphic design, petroleum engineering and theater.

Intellectual Merit of the Proposed Activities At a small liberal arts
institution, the dependence of each discipline on another is perhaps more
pronounced than at larger institutions. Rather than creating discipline-specific
computer curricula, professors in most other disciplines rely on the computer
science department to offer courses that provide a strong base for computational
learning. The expectation is that as students develop mastery within their
disciplines, they will be able to integrate this knowledge with their
computational skills, which will strengthen their ability to manage information,
and enable them to transition to increasingly higher levels of discovery and
comprehension. The intellectual merit of this CPATH project stems from its focus
on revising basic computer courses to emphasize computational thinking, and
integrating computational thinking as a method that informs learning across many
disciplines.

Broader Impacts of the Proposed Activities The broader impact of this CPATH
planning project is evident in three elements: campus-wide involvement,
community outreach, and piloting threads of computational thinking (CT) in non-
computer courses. Faculty and staff from any discipline are invited to explore
the concept of computational thinking by participating in workshops, attending
presentations and/or serving on a CT project advisory committee. Through
creative road shows and summer learning opportunities, middle and high school
students are being introduced to CT. An introduction to CT is being added to in-
service math teachers? workshops at the college. Faculty in at least two and
perhaps as many as six other disciplines are piloting efforts to introduce CT
within their courses. The anticipated project outcomes include broadening
fluency with computational thinking among faculty at Marietta College and among
math teachers in the K-12 educational community; revision of two key computer
courses to create a stronger alignment with computational thinking for first
year computer students; and increasing excitement about and awareness of the
myriad uses for computational thinking among K-12 youth. The project?s
evaluation process will measure the effectiveness of the various elements of
this project and inform the development of a full implementation proposal in the
spring of 2011.