* 0939075
* CPATH-1: Experimenting with an Open Platform for the New Interdisciplinary Study on Gerontechnology
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Peter Martin, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 08/31/2012
* USD 300,000.00

This CPATH award supports a curriculum initiative to inject computational
thinking capability into computer science and gerontology disciplines at the
local and state levels with a plan to conduct, assess, and to analyze the
outcomes to guide future nationwide efforts. The proposal consists of three
major components: Developing a new interdisciplinary curriculum track in
Gerotechnology culminating in an undergraduate certificate; Transforming the
existing SmartHome Laboratory at Iowa State University into an open project
platform, so that experiments and projects on the Smart Home can be run from
remote locations; and Establishing an open source community on software based on
service-oriented architecture to support collaborative projects. The new track
is strongly supported by the latter two components to ensure that the proposed
curriculum is supported by meaningful materials, examples, and projects and that
enable community building between disciplines, stakeholders, and
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The proposed work
introduces a new pedagogy that is interdisciplinary, incorporates the recent
developments in multiple disciplines, and focuses on hands-on and practical
experience. The SmartHome Laboratory allows students to make lasting
contributions to real and meaningful applications and to collaborate with
students from other colleges and backgrounds. Computer science students will be
able to demonstrate their computational thinking competences through human-
centered learning opportunities. Students from outside computer science should
have opportunities to work in teams in order to fully utilize modern
technologies that have begun to transform their professions. A competent team of
experts in the fields and experienced practitioners has been assembled to ensure
success of the project. The main national impact should be the creation a model
of a program for a tightly focused application, gerontechnology, a new
collaborative program model for the nation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact: In addition to the main goal of injecting computational thinking
capabilities into the curriculum, the investigators plan proactive recruiting
and support of a diverse group of students, including those with disabilities,
females, and underrepresented minorities. The proposed curriculum provides
stronger incentives and better accommodations to these groups while
disseminating exciting, immediately applicable, cutting edge technologies. The
results from learning and project activities can be disseminated immediately to
the aging population and people with disabilities through service learning
courses and family outreach extension.