* 0939227
* Conference on Advances in Magnetic Nanostructures. To be Held at the Lodge Vail, Colorado, October 4-9, 2009
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2009,01/31/2010
* Amanda Petford-Long, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 01/31/2010
* USD 10,000.00

This proposal seeks funding towards supporting the 2009 Advances in Magnetic
Nanostructures conference, being organized under the auspices of Engineering
Conferences International (ECI). Magnetic nanostructures are of considerable
interest both from the point of view of fundamental science as well as
industrial applications. Due to novel magnetic and magneto-transport properties,
such nanostructures can exhibit confinement of magnetic material into two or
one-dimensional structures and close proximity with other materials in layered
or nanocomposite structures. Reduced dimensionality, engineered interfaces and
materials structures can result in new physical phenomena, such as giant and
tunnel magnetoresistance, exchange bias, and spin-torque induced dynamics or
reversal. These phenomena lead to new device concepts such as magnetic tunnel
junctions and spin transistors for potential use in biomedical applications such
as hypothermia cancer therapy, guided drug delivery among others.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;The proposed conference aims
to provide a forum for researchers from academic institutions, government
research laboratories and industry across the world to discuss fundamental and
applications-oriented research on magnetic nanostructures, and to disseminate
their latest research results and technological achievements. In addition, to
exposing the participants to the latest research results in this exciting field,
the conference offers a platform for promoting interactions between researchers
for networking, collaboration and sharing ideas. The program will consist of a
series of invited oral and contributed poster presentations. The conference will
be partially supported by ECI and will be held on October 4- 9, 2009. The ECI
meetings, organized along the lines of a Gordon Research Conference, are
excellent meetings that bring out the most in a field and set trends for the
future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact &lt;br/&gt;One of the goals of this
conference is to provide a forum for new researchers: young scientists and
members of underrepresented groups, researchers from other disciplines,
scientists from around the world. Significant effort will be made to include
women and members of underrepresented groups as participants and invited
speakers. Financial support will be used for the attendance of young scientists,
postdoctoral researchers and graduate students, which will provide them an
excellent opportunity to learn about major advances in the field and interact
with world leaders.