* 0939891
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: The Ethnoarchaeology of Northeastern Ethiopia
* SBE,BCS
* 11/15/2009,10/31/2010
* Helina Woldekiros, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/2010
* USD 12,078.00

Under the direction of Dr. Fiona Marshall, Helina Solomon-Woldekiros will
conduct ethnoarchaeological research on the Afar salt caravan route in Northern
Ethiopia. Long distance trade and exchange in salt, obsidian, iron, gold and
exotic animal products have contributed to the development of distinctive
political and socio-economic institutions of many ancient African societies. Ms
Woldekiros will collect information on the route, costs of travel, and material
traces of present day caravans to identify ancient use of the Afar trail.
Archaeological survey and excavation will test the hypothesis that there was
local or regional exchange in commodities from the Afar lowlands to the North
Ethiopian plateau dating to as early as Aksumite (150 C.E-C.E 700) period.

This research will map the Afar Salt Route and allow calculation of ancient
transport costs and estimations of changing commodity values on prehistoric
Aksumite kingdom trade routes. It will also provide the basis for future studies
of local interactions between highland and lowland communities and the
complexity of Aksumite regional economies.. The project will establish a
comparative perspective for ethnoarchaeological studies of caravan trade in
other regions of the world such as the Andes and Asia. Ms Solomon-Woldekiros
will collect three data sets to address the main goals of the project: GIS
(Geographic Information System) locational information, ethnoarchaeological
data, and archaeological data from survey and excavations on three sample
sections of the route. This project will have a broader impact by providing
useful cross-cultural comparative material for archaeologists interested in the
material remains of caravan organization in Africa and elsewhere. Documentation
of the Afar salt trade will also contribute to recording of the rich cultural
heritage of Northern Ethiopia. In many parts of the world, pack animal based
caravans are being replaced by trucks and modern roads. This project may help to
preserve this one aspect of Tigray and Afar cultural heritage. A workshop
focused on the archaeological culture-history of the region and in cultural
heritage management will also be coordinated with local Tigray and other ethnic
groups who live in Adigrat, eastern Tigray region. Cooperation with the
Departments of Anthropology in Mekelle and Addis Ababa, will focus on giving
lectures and workshops for Archaeology undergraduate and master's students in
ethnoarcheological and zooarchaeological analytical methods. Training students
will likewise contribute to international exchange of information and the
development of new research initiatives examining the histories of exchange
systems in East Africa and the Horn.