* 0939500
* Conference on Water-Ecosystem Services, Drought, and Environmental Justice - U. of Georgia; November 9-12, 2009
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2011
* Clifford Duke, Ecological Society of America
* Standard Grant
* Richard S. Inouye
* 07/31/2011
* USD 30,375.00

Ecology has the tools and methods needed to measure and predict the impacts of
drought on ecosystem services related to water and in turn to help analyze the
magnitude and social distribution of those impacts. Social science can provide
us with the tools to understand how human institutions affect and respond to
drought. The combined knowledge and approaches of ecology and social sciences
are required to solve the increasingly pressing problem of drought. Yet, the two
disciplines have pursued the research on drought largely independently.
Understanding the implications of drought for water and other related ecosystem
services is key to effective forecasting and education about the role of drought
in socio-ecological systems. Understanding how social processes contribute to or
ameliorate the effects of drought is crucial for maintaining ecosystem services.
Promoting an integrated approach to drought as a socio-ecological process is
urgently needed. The intellectual merit of this project lies in its examination
of the social determinants of water use and integration of hydrologic, economic,
and policy components. The first ESA Millennium Conference, Water-Ecosystem
Services, Drought, and Environmental Justice, will be held at the University of
Georgia, November 9-12, 2009.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Effective public decision
making requires application of the knowledge generated by both ecological and
social disciplines. Water-Ecosystem Services, Drought, and Environmental Justice
will bring together ecological and social scientists and students to explore the
development of scientifically and socially sound solutions to water allocation,
including both household and agricultural demands, in times of drought. The
conference will contribute to educating undergraduate and graduate students in
the integrated topic of drought as a socio-ecological issue. It will do so first
by including promising students from diverse backgrounds in the Conference.
Second, insights from the Conference will be made widely available in curricular
materials suitable for high school and college use. The combined scientific and
policy implications will be put forth in a white paper suitable to support
outreach to policy makers and managers, as well as in at least one academic
publication. The broader impact of the Conference ultimately consists in the
objective of reducing conflicts among water users, enhancing environmental
justice, and more effectively managing public responses to water
scarcity.&lt;br/&gt;