* 0939882
* CAREER: Microbial fuel cell technology for large-scale wastewater treatment
* ENG,CBET
* 02/19/2009,06/30/2013
* Largus Angenent, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Ram Gupta
* 06/30/2013
* USD 341,356.00

Angenent, Lars T., PI Washington University 0645021

CAREER: Microbial Fuel Cell Technology for Large-Scale Wastewater Treatment

Microbial fuel cell technology offers advantages for converting waste to energy
because the microbial fuel cells can operate using the dilute organic waste
streams typical of domestic wastewater treatment plants and at low operating
temperatures. The purpose of the research is to advance the conversion to
electricity by predicting the power output of various configurations of
microbial fuel cells, by ascertaining the selection process for the microbial
community in the cathode thereby enhancing the electron flow, and by
understanding how operating conditions can affect the biofilm at the anode. The
research will be integrated with an educational component that will engage
students from an urban high school and encourage them to consider careers in
science and engineering.

The general approach to achieving the three objectives includes the development
of a modular microbial fuel cell with three-dimensional, high surface area
electrodes made from low-cost carbon fibers and membranes made from low-cost
materials. The modular system will allow various configurations that can be
optimized for power output to accomplish the first objective. Selection and
growth principles for a denitrifying biofilm on the cathode will be investigated
to supply alternative inexpensive catalysts to achieve the second objective. By
optimizing environmental conditions to select for a community with improved
electron transfer in anode biofilms, the electron transfer rate can be
increased. Work with a single-culture biofilm will allow a full understanding of
how to use operating conditions to manipulate electron transfer in anode
chambers, which will accomplish the third objective.

The educational component will include development of two new courses. One will
be in bioprocess engineering for undergraduate and graduate students and will
focus on how to transform waste into useful products. The second will be a
molecular biology techniques laboratory class. In addition to development of the
two new courses, a program that engages urban high school students in the
science and engineering of microbial fuel cells will be established. High school
teachers will be directly involved in the research and in the development of lab
classes aimed at high schools students that center on microbial fuel cells. The
lab classes will be conducted on the university campus providing high school
students from underachieving schools to visit and learn about the opportunities
in higher education as well as to do hands on learning. With the experience from
the on-campus classes, kits will be developed that will allow extension of the
hands-on learning to other high schools.

