* 0939102
* CPATH-1: Collaborative Research: a Verification-Driven Learning Model that Enriches CS and Related Undergraduate Programs
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Raymond Lang, Xavier University of Louisiana
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2012
* USD 44,982.00

Computer science foundation-building courses at the freshman and sophomore
levels pose the greatest stumbling blocks to undergraduate students' learning.
CS student enrollment has declined over 60% nationwide, even though the demand
for skilled professionals was increasing. There is an urgent need for a more
effective CS learning model.

The main purpose of this research is to enrich the context of the CS learning
process which is important from motivational and educational perspectives. This
project investigates a verification-driven learning model that facilitates
students' involvement in real-world computing tasks starting from their early
computing courses and continuing throughout their entire studies in computing.
This model can significantly reduce the prerequisites for students to study
real-world problems in their early years. The students are tasked to validate
the functionality of software, execute programs, test parts of systems (pre-
decomposed subsystems and components), and locate possible errors. Such
seemingly complex high-level tasks can be done by novice students because
software verification does not require design and implementation, and can be
turned into a learn-by-example process with adequate preparation. This kind of
preparation is wrapped in a Verification-Driven Learning Case, which defines the
configuration to support a verification-driven learning activity, and consists
of elements such as the justification of the system's existence, the requirement
specification, description of the functionality, a set of test cases, and the
decomposition of the system.

The foundation of the verification-driven learning model lies in software
testing theories and techniques. Frequent and progressive exercises on
verification will prepare the students for formal specifications. To realize the
learning model, this project will produce Learning Cases based on faculty
research including computer security, bioinformatics, geographic information
systems, database and data mining techniques, remote sensing, and fuzzy set
techniques. The Learning Cases will expose the students to working software
systems that serve a real-world purpose in scientific research, engineering
development, or social networks.

This project will particularly advocate computer science education in under-
represented minority and woman students. This learning approach will also help
adult students who have rich experience in various areas but need to reposition
themselves in the work force. The final goal of this project is to revitalize
the CS programs and produce more competent graduates capable of computational
thinking.