* 0939906
* EAGER:   Quantitative Analysis of Alternative Splicing in Plants Using Surface Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Joseph Irudayaraj, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 07/31/2012
* USD 299,811.00

PI: Burkhard Schulz (Purdue University) CoPI: Joseph Irudayaraj (Purdue
University)

This project develops and tests a novel method for the detection and
quantification of alternatively spliced genes in plants. Most genes in higher
organisms are structured into exons and introns, the latter interrupting the
protein coding sequence of the genes. Yet these introns are not always precisely
spliced and removed from a precursor RNA during transcription. This results in
different mRNA variants from the same gene. It greatly increases the variability
and number of expressed proteins and explains why there are thousands more
proteins than genes in a cell. It is becoming clear that this process of
alternative splicing (AS) plays an important role in regulating developmental
processes in plants. A precise quantification of different splice variants, also
on the cellular level, is necessary in order to gain a deeper understanding of
the role of this process. This project is an innovative approach to the
detection and quantification of several AS generated mRNA variants in a single
experiment. It is a highly sensitive method for detecting mRNA variants. This
project combines nanotechnology based Surface Enhanced Raman Scattering (SERS)
and the use of novel nanomaterials. SERS uses gold nanoparticles to enhance the
Raman scattering signal of a laser beam by molecules (DNAs, proteins, etc)
within nanometer distance of these signal-enhancing gold nanoparticles. The
objectives of the project are: (1) to develop a nanotechnology toolbox for
detection of mRNA splicing variants in plants; (2) to assess detection limits
for quantification of AS; and, (3) to develop a SERS-based quantification
strategy for the detection of splicing variants in small cell numbers on a sub-
organ level.

This interdisciplinary project is a close collaboration between plant
geneticists and biophysicists to quantitatively profile mRNA variants in plant
cells. It will generate a foundation for the application of nanotechnology
approaches in the broader field of plant sciences with impacts beyond basic
research. The project will create new opportunities for students in engineering
as well as plant sciences that will expand their educational portfolio in fields
not part of their traditional curricula, opening new avenues for their career
development. Outreach activities to the public and during research summer camps
for middle school and high school students are projected. A reference website
that publishes detailed protocols and additional background information will be
established with access through
http://www.hort.purdue.edu/hort/people/faculty/schulz.shtml. It will provide
information on resources, newly developed nanomaterials and educational material
to train students and postdoctoral researchers in nanotechnology. Protocols and
procedures to analyze AS in plants using nanotechnology will also be made
available to the scientific community through publications in appropriate
journals and communications at scientific conferences.