* 0939548
* First International Symposium on Semiconductor and Plasmonics-Active Nanostructures for Photonic Devices and Systems (Electronics and Photonics); Vienna, Austria; October 4-9, 2009
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Jian Xu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Shaochen Chen
* 12/31/2009
* USD 20,470.00

This proposal is for organizing an NSF-sponsored symposium entitled the First
International Symposium on Semiconductor and Plasmonics-Active Nanostructures
for Photonic Devices and Systems. The symposium will be held at Vienna, Austria,
between October 4-9, 2009. It is targeted at reviewing the state-of-the-art
progress and identifying the potential manufacturing challenges at the forefront
of nanotechnology-enabled photonic technology. The symposium will (1) review the
latest progress in the fabrication and assembly of metallic nanostructures,
zero- and one-dimensional semiconductor systems, and photonic crystals; (2)
identify new opportunities for implementing semiconductor and plasmonic active
nanostructures in photonic device applications, and (3) investigate the system-
level integration of nanoscale semiconductor and metallic components with
devices for enhanced performance.

The symposium will bring together researchers working in academia and industry
to stimulate interaction among scientists, engineers, and students working on
various aspects of semiconductor and metallic nanostructures and their
applications. This will help to strengthen this community, to reveal new
directions of research which are key to the ultimate success of nanotechnology
in the real world. Efforts will be made in the conference plan and organization
to increase the college-level student attendance and promote the representation
of women and minorities. As an international symposium co-organized by American
and European scientists, the symposium will also help U.S. researchers promote
communication and establish research connections with overseas institutes and
laboratories.