* 0939153
* CPATH- 2: Teaching Computational Thinking through Integration of Dynamic Systems Modeling
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Dan Stinebring, Oberlin College
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2015
* USD 798,514.00

A paradigm shift has occurred in research in the natural and social sciences,
but this change has not reached the classroom in a systematic way. Computational
modeling has transformed the way science is done and is now a full partner to
experimentation and theory in most disciplines. Despite its importance, students
in the sciences do not know the basics of modeling, make fundamental errors in
application, and are ill-prepared to solve complex, cross-disciplinary problems
using modeling as a tool. Oberlin College proposes to change this and is well
positioned to do so. By introducing dynamic systems modeling into introductory
courses in 11 science disciplines, the College will expose the majority of its
eventual science majors to these powerful techniques at least twice in their
first two years of study. When coupled with follow-up efforts at the
intermediate and advanced level, the College will transform the way that most
science students view complex problem solving. Oberlin will be aided in this
effort by faculty and graduate students from the Center for the Study of Complex
Systems at the University of Michigan, building on a vibrant relationship
between the institutions. Established connections with two nationally recognized
modeling experts will help to anchor the effort and give it external
perspective. More than a dozen Oberlin faculty have been active in this area in
recent years, and they will be among the initial cohort through which this
systemic change will be accomplished. The group of faculty engaged in
computational modeling will expand through the wide range of grant activities.
By using dynamic systems modeling, the College will achieve its five goals for
this project: integrating computational thinking into the science curriculum;
developing a cohort of faculty experienced in teaching and using modeling
techniques; developing a new tool for teaching computational modeling; providing
cross-disciplinary teaching and curriculum development opportunities for
graduate students and a postdoctoral researcher; and assessing, revising, and
disseminating the most successful components.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the
undergraduate institution that leads the nation in students who go on to get
Ph.Ds, Oberlin?s project in modeling pedagogy will have a powerful multiplier
effect as its graduates enter academia and other high-impact careers, carrying
the new modeling paradigm with them. This cohort of young scientists will have
an important effect since computational thinking is the key to complex problem
solving in such diverse fields as public health, economics, climate change, and
biotechnology. Students who have worked with models throughout their science
education will be well equipped to tackle both societal and cutting edge
scientific problems. This project will also produce a key piece of publicly
available software for use in modeling pedagogy and research. Other products
will include pedagogical modeling units across the 11 disciplines involved in
this effort, and these will be disseminated through standard channel&lt;br/&gt;