* 0939392
* EAGER: Fracture of Microelectronic Lead Free Solder Joints under Dynamic Loading Conditions
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Indranath Dutta, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Taleff
* 07/31/2012
* USD 226,625.00

TECHNICAL ABSTRACT

With the proliferation of mobile electronics in everyday life, the ability of
electronic packages to sustain impact loading under drop conditions has become a
paramount reliability concern. Therefore, the fracture behavior of solders at
high strain rates is a critically important design parameter. A new methodology
is proposed for mixed-mode fracture toughness testing of elasto-plastic adhesive
joints under dynamic conditions. It is further proposed that this methodology be
used to generate fundamental mechanistic insight into the role of several
microstructural/process and test variables on the fracture of solder joints,
including the effects of solder pad finish, aging, interfacial intermetallic
structure, strain rate, mode-mixity and electromigration effects. The work will
be of substantial technological importance by developing a new dynamic joint
fracture testing methodology which will be eventually transferred to industry.
Secondly, the work will be of substantial fundamental importance in generating
new mechanistic insights into the role of microstructure on dynamic fracture,
and by developing fracture mechanism maps that can be utilized in the design of
new joining schemes for emerging chip/package interconnection architectures.

NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT

Mobile electronics such as PDAs, MP3 players and ultra-portable laptops are
often dropped during use, making it important to build the electronic packages
which constitute the brains of the system in a robust fashion. The tiny solder
joints that constitute an important part of these packages are highly
susceptible to fracture under drop conditions, and therefore, the fracture
behavior of solders at high strain rates is a critically important design
parameter. In the proposed work a new methodology will be developed for fracture
testing of solder joints under drop conditions, and used to gain knowledge about
how to design highly robust and reliable lead-free solder joints which will be
much more resistant to drops than those currently available. This will lead to
more reliable electronics with longer usable lifetimes.