* 0939823
* Workshop Proposal: Assessment and Dissemination of Educational Innovations in Introductory Engineering Science Courses
* EHR,DUE
* 08/15/2009,10/31/2010
* Thomas Litzinger, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Russell L. Pimmel
* 10/31/2010
* USD 68,896.00

The project is supporting a workshop that is bringing together experts in
assessment and dissemination along with engineering education scholars who have
projects to enhance learning in introductory engineering sciences courses. The
experts in assessment and dissemination are being actively recruited from
outside of engineering as well as from the engineering education community.
Workshop participants are being selected from current awardees via an
application process in which they submit an extended abstract describing their
project with an emphasis on their assessment and dissemination plans. At the
workshop, the engineering education scholars and experts are engaging in
facilitated, small group discussions of the assessment and dissemination plans.
The goals of these discussions are: (1) to identify successful strategies for
assessment of innovations in early engineering science courses by types of
intervention (e.g., hands-on learning) and by category of project goal (e.g.,
improve problem solving skills), (2) to delineate major challenges to successful
dissemination by type of innovation, and (3) to develop strategies for
overcoming these challenges. The organizers are preparing a workshop report
which includes case studies of effective assessment and dissemination approaches
identified during the workshop. They also are planning a workshop on assessment
and dissemination for the ASEE Annual Meeting and a paper for submission to
Advances in Engineering Education to provide wide access of the workshop
findings within the engineering education community.