* 0939812
* Construction and operation of the Alaska Region Research Vessel:  Phase III - Shipyard Construction Costs
* GEO,OCE
* 05/15/2009,09/30/2015
* Daniel Oliver, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Cooperative Agreement
* Bauke Houtman
* 09/30/2015
* USD 148,070,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The award is made to the University of Alaska Fairbanks
(UAF) for the construction of the Alaska Region Research Vessel (ARRV) based on
the approval to proceed received from the National Science Board in March 2009.
Delivery of the vessel is anticipated in mid-2013 with science operations
beginning in 2014.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: The 242-foot
Alaska Region Research Vessel (ARRV) will be a multipurpose research ship that
will dramatically improve access to Arctic waters and expand current scientific
capabilities in the region. It is designed specifically to operate in seasonal
sea ice and open ocean waters near Alaska; including the Chukchi, Beaufort, and
Bering Seas as well as the eastern Arctic. To do so, the hull will be ice-
strengthened to American Bureau of Shipping (ABS) ice classification standards.
The ARRV will provide a much needed, technologically-advanced oceanographic
platform to enable multidisciplinary teams to conduct field research at the ice
edge and in seasonal sea ice up to 3.9 feet thick. The ARRV will have many
advanced capabilities including next-generation science handling systems to
improve safety and efficiency at sea, and a modern suite of satellite
communications to link the ship to educational facilities ashore. It is designed
to have a minimal influence on its own environment, including low underwater
radiated noise (URN) for fisheries and acoustics research, and reduced stack
emissions to enable atmospheric research. With twenty six dedicated science
berths, the ARRV will be able to accommodate over 500 researchers and students
annually and spend as many as 300 days at sea. The anticipated operational
lifetime of the ARRV is at least 30 years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
The Alaska coastline is longer than that of the contiguous forty eight states
combined, and the area of its Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) is approximately two
thirds of the total US EEZ. The Bering Sea and Gulf of Alaska sustain more than
half of the total annual national fish catch. The area supports one of the most
productive marine ecosystems in the world, as well as rich and varied marine
mammal populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Arctic region is changing rapidly.
Perennial sea ice has been estimated to be decreasing by about 9% per decade,
potentially leading to a summer ice-free Arctic Ocean by the end of the century
or even sooner. In the summer of 2008 the Northwest Passage was open for the
first time since satellite imagery has been taken. Along with the significant
ecosystem changes and impact on coastal communities, this change could impact
national security and commerce by providing regular trade routes further into
regions along the north coast of Alaska. Opening this fragile area to commerce
will heighten the importance of scientific research to understand the
effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientific interest in the Arctic region is
intensive and highly varied. For example, dramatic changes in biological
productivity have been predicted as a consequence of progressive warming,
continuing ice recession, changing ocean currents, ocean acidification, and
varying climatic conditions. Changing Arctic climate may well be one of the
critical drivers for climate change over the entire planet. Besides biological
and climatological changes, the Gulf of Alaska and Aleutian areas are also
subject to major seismic processes. Extending our knowledge about subduction
zones and the eruptive history of seafloor volcanoes would help predict the
potential risk for devastating tsunamis. All of these scientific missions and
activities are of continuing interest and great importance not only to the U.S.,
but also to the economic and environmental welfare of the entire
globe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Alaska Region Research Vessel (ARRV) will
provide a safe and highly effective platform for scientific access to these
remote and inhospitable areas that are of such great national and international
importance. The ARRV will replace the R/V ALPHA HELIX which was operated by the
University of Alaska, Fairbanks. When the vessel was retired from service in
2006 it was well past its expected 30-year service life. The ARRV will be the
first NSF-built ship since the 1980?s. Committing to construction of this highly
capable vessel represents a major NSF contribution to the International Polar
Year legacy, advancement of US Arctic Policy, as well as the effort to better
understand global issues, including climate change and ocean circulation.
&lt;br/&gt;