* 0939034
* CPATH-2: Collaborative Research: Building a Community to Incorporate Humanitarian Free and Open Source Software into Undergraduate Computing Education
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Ralph Morelli, Trinity College
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2012
* USD 494,787.00

Free and open source software (FOSS) is software that can be freely shared,
modified, and redistributed. FOSS is developed by collaborative communities and
distributed under licenses that permit its sharing and redistribution.
Humanitarian FOSS (H-FOSS) is FOSS that is developed specifically to benefit the
local and global community. The key concepts underlying FOSS and H-FOSS are
their collaborative development process and community ownership. These concepts
provide the underpinnings for many remarkable software projects, such as free
and open repositories of general knowledge (Wikipedia), standard DNA parts (The
BioBricks Foundation), and scientific research (PLoS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project uses the H-FOSS model to help revitalize undergraduate computing
education by getting students engaged in building free and open software that
benefits the community. During the project's first three years, students from
Trinity College, Wesleyan University, Connecticut College, and elsewhere have
developed H-FOSS in traditional and video-conference courses, independent
studies and capstone projects, and in sponsored summer internships. Working
collaboratively with FOSS practitioners in real and virtual communities,
students have developed software that directly supports a variety of global and
local humanitarian efforts, ranging from disaster management to health care
delivery to volunteer management to search and rescue operations. For more
details about this work, see http://www.hfoss.org. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During
the next two years, this project will have three major goals: (1) to extend the
H-FOSS educational community by creating new H-FOSS Chapters at a wide range of
undergraduate institutions, including community colleges, women's colleges, and
traditionally black schools; (2) to create an H-FOSS Certificate Program that
will recognize student achievement in the study and practice of H-FOSS
development; and (3) to develop a sustainable infrastructure and funding model,
along with industry and community partners, that will enable the H-FOSS effort
to be expanded to a national scope. By getting computing students and faculty
involved in building FOSS that serves the community, this project will thereby
help transform the nature and enhance the attractiveness of undergraduate
computing education itself.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;