* 0939396
* Developing Capacity for Broadening Participation in the Biological Sciences Directorate: Faculty Travel Grant for JAM09
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2011
* Antonio Garcia, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* James Deshler
* 05/31/2011
* USD 106,520.00

This award will provide funds to support a selected group of faculty
investigators to attend and participate in the NSF Joint Annual Meeting (JAM) to
be held June 8-11 2009 at the Omni Shoreham Hotel in Washington DC. The selected
individuals do research in the biological sciences and are members of
underrepresented groups in science. This is the first time that the Directorate
for Biological Sciences (BIO) partners with the Directorate for Education and
Human Resources (EHR) and the Human Resource Development Division (HRD) in
support of JAM. The travel award is one of several strategies to broaden
participation in BIO and an attempt to increase the number of individual
scientists from underrepresented groups that submit proposals to BIO. The event
is also designed to enhance the working relationship between BIO and EHR. The
Joint Annual Meeting provides an opportunity to discuss, present, network,
leverage expertise, and create connections to the many other research and
education projects funded within HRD. JAM09 will provide additional
opportunities for partnerships and networking with BIO staff and grantees as
there are several activities during the meeting designed to interact directly
with Program Directors in BIO. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each invitee of the
Directorate for Biological Sciences will attend one of two Professional
Development Sessions (Funding Opportunities Directorate for Biological Sciences)
and a Collaboration and Networking Dialogue session scheduled for Wednesday June
10 at 10:30 AM. They are also invited to participate on any of the many other
breakout sessions and activities scheduled over the duration of the meeting. In
particular they are encouraged to attend the lunch keynote events. This year the
Keynote Speaker for the Wednesday lunch is Dr. Craig Venter. Break out sessions
will address specific topics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF funds will enable
registration, travel, and lodging support for up to 50 participants as well as
administrative help for requesting names of potential participants, assignment
and management of individual travel awards, and dissemination of the outcome.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;