* 0939431
* Abstract Parsing: Static analysis of dynamically generated string output
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* David Schmidt, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 07/31/2012
* USD 299,327.00

This project provides an automated, formal-methods-based methodology and tool
that analyzes and validates, in advance of its execution, PHP, Perl, or
Javascript programs that dynamically generate HMTL, XML, and SQL documents. Such
document-generator programs are common to the World Wide Web and are notorious
for generating ill-structured, faulty, and dangerous documents that cause
subsequent server errors or security breaches.

The methodology integrates techniques from LR(k)-parsing, data-flow analysis,
and program security to synthesize the program-analysis. Given the program
(e.g., a PHP script) that generates documents and given the context-free
reference grammar for the document language (e.g., a grammar for HTML), the
analysis tool generates an LR(k) parser for the reference grammar and applies a
data-flow analysis to analyze the program and predict the context-free
grammatical structure of the documents to be generated by the program. The tool
computes abstract parse stacks, a novel and innovative structure that encodes a
generated document's context-free structure. Next, the tool applies formal
semantics techniques to compute from an abstract parse stack its context-
sensitive semantics, that is, the meaning of the dynamically generated document.

Dynamically generated documents are often assembled with user-supplied input,
which can be erroneous or malicious. The analysis annotates the abstract parse
stacks to identity where user input might appear, and the semantic analysis
tracks the influence of the user input upon the document's meaning.