* 0939149
* CPATH-2: Modular CS1 from the Inside Out: Computational Thinking for all STEM Students
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Ran Libeskind-Hadas, Harvey Mudd College
* Continuing Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 08/31/2013
* USD 824,692.00

Recent years have seen a diversity of curricula designed to attract students to
computer science. Media, robots, games, and other contexts have brought the
field to life for many students. Yet these and other innovative introductory
courses are not designed to serve the distinct needs of students in the
sciences, mathematics, and engineering disciplines. Although STEM students
require increasingly sophisticated computational capabilities, their formal
training in computation, if any, often focuses on a narrow range of applications
to the exclusion of fundamental and widely transferable Computational Thinking
(CT) concepts and skills. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project's hypothesis is
that the computational thinking curricula for all STEM students will benefit
from the insights gained from contextual "CS1" courses. Harvey Mudd College
(HMC) has recently designed, deployed, and evaluated a breadth first
introductory CS1 curriculum with a STEM-themed context. This work seeks to turn
that course inside-out, spawning a suite of computational thinking modules that
can be flexibly composed into curricula for non-CS STEM students and pre-CS-
majors alike. Instead of "another CS1," the result will be resources that span
STEM-serving computational-thinking courses and provide a compelling
introduction to core CT ideas and skills for students with a broad range of
science and engineering interests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives are
to:&lt;br/&gt;1. Design and assess rich and compelling course modules that can
be assembled into introductory CT courses for a variety of audiences (high
school, undergraduate, and graduate level) in different areas (e.g. computer
science, biology, or engineering) and at different types of institutions (e.g.
liberal-arts colleges and large universities). These modules will be problem-
based, using STEM-motivated labs and assignments to develop and exercise major
concepts.&lt;br/&gt;2. Combine these modules to develop and deploy several
prototype courses including introductory college computer science courses, an
introductory college computation for biology course, a high school computation
course, and a course for information technology graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;3.
Disseminate modules and courses through (1) a structured deployment process that
guides other schools (not directly involved in this project) in choosing
appropriate modules for their contexts and (2) structured workshops, visits to
other schools, and publications and talks at a number of education conferences
and symposia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This work is creating a
flexible, retargetable CT curriculum, grounded in but not limited by core CS
topics, and aimed at students with a broad range of scientific and engineering
interests. The PIs have extensive experience developing novel and engaging CS1
curricula for students outside the CS major: HMC's CS for Scientists course has
proven successful at exciting students across STEM disciplines about how they
can leverage computation in their chosen fields. Adapting this course's
materials to a broad range of institutions is an important step in understanding
how to develop the computational capabilities of all STEM
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This work will directly create CT
curricula for five very different institutions: two large public universities,
one of which serves a large minority population, one liberal arts college, one
public high school and one graduate school. All five curricula will draw
material from a flexible and modular set of resources that will create or inform
CT courses far beyond this initial set of schools. Most importantly, these five
CT courses will enable a thorough and cross-cutting assessment of the impact and
relevance of CT for students throughout STEM disciplines. The approach has
already shown significant improvement in increasing interest in computation
among young women at Harvey Mudd College; this project's much wider assessment
will determine how much these local successes transfer across a diversity of
populations and institutions.