* 0939671
* The Role of Two-year Colleges in Education and Broadening Participation in the Geosciences: A Planning Workshop
* GEO,GEO
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2011
* Laura Guertin, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 08/31/2011
* USD 47,290.00

Two-year colleges (TYC) enroll approximately 45% of all undergraduate students
in the country and have a highly diverse student population. Given this
diversity, TYCs provide a potentially rich conduit for broadening participation
in the geosciences. They also play an important role in contributing to the
geoscience workforce, teaching science to pre-service K-12 teachers, and
producing earth-science literate citizens. However, TYC faculty face challenges
including limited resources, isolation, lack of respect from four-year college
colleagues, and limited opportunities for targeted geoscience professional
development. The goals of this OEDG planning grant include identifying issues,
challenges, and opportunities for geoscience faculty and students in TYC and
making recommendations for next steps in strengthening this important component
of the community. A planning workshop is being convened in the Summer of 2010 to
strategize how to: 1) better support TYC geoscience programs, faculty, and
students; 2) provide more professional support for geoscience faculty in TYC; 3)
identify strategies to broaden participation in the geosciences in ways that
involve TYC; 4) establish networks among TYC geoscience faculty; 5) build
stronger collaborations and connections with four-year colleges and
universities, in an effort to better support recruitment and retention of
students moving through the geoscience pipeline; and, 6) consider how
professional societies and organizations can support TYC faculty, students, and
program. During this workshop ~25 two-year and four-year college and university
faculty, as well as representatives from professional societies, will be brought
together to develop a plan with prioritized recommendations. An associated
website, hosted by the Science Education Resources Center (SERC) at Carleton
College, is being developed to support the project. It will document the
workshop and extend its reach, building resources from the workshop and from
pre- and post-workshop contributions. It will also provide links to professional
society sessions on TYC issues and serve as a foundation for information about
geoscience in TYC more broadly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;