* 0939454
* BEACON:  An NSF Center for the Study of Evolution in Action
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2022
* Robert Pennock, Michigan State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Samuel Scheiner
* 07/31/2022
* USD 48,035,209.00

The Bio/computational Evolution in Action CONsortium (BEACON) is a Science and
Technology Center (STC) that enables research on evolutionary dynamics in
natural and artificial systems and training of multi-disciplinary scientists in
bio/computation, with a unique focus on the intersection of evolutionary
biology, computer science, and engineering. The Center will enhance the
development of applications of computational methods in biology, the use of
artificial intelligence in computer science, and the enhancement of genetic
algorithms in engineering design. Evolution by natural selection defines an
algorithmic approach to finding solutions for complex problems; computer
scientists and engineers have harnessed similar algorithms to a diversity of
challenges that require optimization over multiple competing dimensions.
Likewise, biologists have begun to employ digital modeling of the evolutionary
process to examine evolution of complex biological structures and patterns in
areas such as paleontology and the gene networks, which defy experimental
manipulation in vivo. The Center will promote these interdisciplinary efforts by
coordinating activities through three thrust groups: (1) Evolution of Genomes,
Networks, and Evolvability, (2) Evolution of Behavior and Intelligence, and (3)
Evolution of Communities and Collective Dynamics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
center has the potential to transform both biology and computational sciences by
developing digital experiments to test and apply fundamental principles of
evolutionary biology. The possible impacts will be far reaching: from cyber-
security to everyday computing applications, from the evolution of disease
resistance to the self-organization of social behavior. The BEACON center will
train the next generation of interdisciplinary scientists and educate the public
about evolution and its role in solving real-world problems through significant
educational outreach for K12 students and science museums.