* 0939320
* NUE: Integration of Nanoscale Devices and Environmental Aspects of Nanotechnology into Undergraduate Engineering and Science Curricula
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2011
* F. James Boerio, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Poats
* 09/30/2011
* USD 200,000.00

This Nanotechnology Undergraduate Education (NUE) in Engineering program
entitled, "NUE: Integration of Nanoscale Devices and Environmental Aspects of
Nanotechnology into Undergraduate Engineering and Science Curricula", at the
University of Cincinnati (UC) under the direction of Dr. F. James Boerio, will
enhance undergraduate education at UC by introducing two new courses entitled
Nanoscale Devices and Environmental Aspects of Nanotechnology into the
undergraduate engineering and science curricula. The new courses will build on
the background that students have gained in two existing NUE courses entitled
Introduction to Nanoscale Science and Technology and Experimental Nanoscale
Science and Technology to provide students at UC with outstanding eudcation in
nanoscale science and engineering. All four courses will be offered yearly,
forming the basis for a minor focused on interdisciplinary nanoscale science and
technology that UC will develop subsequently, and will be cross-listed by the
Colleges of Engineering and Arts and Sciences, making them readily available to
students in many different disciplines. The broader impact of this project will
include adapting the experimental modules for presentation to students in grades
4-12 through an extensive outreach program; addressing the need for a
technologically advanced workforce in Ohio in the area of nanomaterials and
nanotechnology; addressing the need for an educational enterprise that creates
such a workforce; and making the experimental modules associated with the new
courses available to all universities participating in the Engineering Research
Center (ERC) for Revolutionizing Metallic Biomaterials in which UC partners.