* 0939850
* EAGER: Polyelectrolyte Devices Based on Ion Current
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,10/31/2012
* Joseph Schlenoff, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 10/31/2012
* USD 240,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A family of circuit components made from
charged polymers and relying on ion current, instead of electron current, is
proposed. Key materials will be based on polyelectrolyte complexes, prepared by
mixing oppositely charged polymers, which form a rugged phase of amorphous, soft
matter. This project involves both synthesis and characterization of polymers
and polymer nanocomposites. The following components are to be made in this new
paradigm: resistor, capacitor, transistor, memory. Each of these components
relies on creative control of ion permeability through ultrathin films of these
polyelectrolyte complexes. The resistors are designed to be controlled by an
external potential. Capacitors rely on electrochemical storage or release of
charge. Memory events will be created by quasipermanent modification of ion
permeability. Transistors are designed to be directly "gated" by
biomacromolecules in solution. In a closely coupled small angle neutron
scattering study (SANS), the conformation of polymer components that make up the
complex will be determined, using deuterated polyelectrolytes and contrast
matching of the background.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Circuits that use current of ions instead of
electrons will be developed using charged polymers. Just as a lump of amorphous
silicon can be transformed into an electronic circuit of the type on which our
civilization is based, so too can a blob of amorphous charged polymer be shaped
into useful devices. These ion current devices will reproduce the behavior of
familiar circuit elements, such as the resistor, diode, capacitor, transistor
and memory. The significance of using ion-based devices is that they are more
easily integrated with natural systems, such as cells, which rely exclusively on
ion currents. Thus, the proposed research will help us to interface the living
world to the electronic environment. The project will exploit the unique ability
of some polymers, many of which are used widely in society for other purposes,
to conduct ion charge at room temperature. During the course of the work,
undergraduate and graduate students will be required to think and operate beyond
the usual definitions and materials for electronic circuits. They will also use
state-of-the art facilities at Oak Ridge National Laboratory to study their
novel materials. Built into the project is a research opportunity for an
underrepresented minority student from Albany State University.