* 0939137
* CPATH-2: Learning Computational Thinking in Context: Using Problems and Cases in Financial Market Regulation
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* David McCaffrey, SUNY at Albany
* Continuing Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 09/30/2013
* USD 799,624.00

Financial markets and their regulation are excellent arenas in which to see the
power and importance of computational thinking. Financial markets are critical
to the nation?s economic health; the current turmoil in the economy has been
driven by instability in the country?s financial markets. The need to track,
monitor, and analyze the large number of transactions in modern markets drives
the use of cutting edge computer science and information technology in financial
market regulation. Also, a large portion of American undergraduate students
major or minor in fields related to business, public policy, and finance. This
provides a large potential audience to learn the relevance and appeal of
computational thinking. This project is integrating computational thinking as an
essential theme in teaching students in computing, business, public policy,
economics, mathematics, and the social sciences about financial markets. The
University at Albany is home to the Center for Financial Market Regulation and
has the nation?s first undergraduate major and minor in Financial Market
Regulation. These programs are the focus in the development of a new
computational thinking curriculum. Over a two-year period, the researchers on
this proposal are engaging government and industry regulators in developing a
set of learning objectives that will drive the creation of problem-based
undergraduate curricula ? first for courses in the financial market regulation
programs, and then in other undergraduate programs across the campus, including
computing. The end result of this work will be cases, modules, and courses that
provide an attractive interdisciplinary learning environment in which students
become interested and proficient in computational thinking and understand its
importance to society. Intellectual Merit. The various disciplines that
contribute to financial market regulation are all mature fields, and are well
represented as academic programs. A major innovation of this work is the
explicit integration of the multidisciplinary partners using computational
thinking as a central focus. This is possible due to the expertise that the
personnel in this proposal bring from their research and educational experience
in the component disciplines, working together in multidisciplinary teams,
partnering with non-academic experts, and designing effective and enjoyable
learning environments for students. In addition, this work is investigating how
experts in the applied field of financial market regulation conceive of critical
computational problems and the thinking skills most relevant to their solution.
Finally, this work is examining the efficacy of problem-based learning curricula
for the development of computational thinking in financial market regulation.

Broader Impacts. Recent events have shown that the nation?s economic health
depends on developing effective regulatory, surveillance, and oversight systems
for our financial markets. The industry has been divided into front-room
operations staffed with sales, business, and legal professionals and back-room
operations staffed with IT and other quantitative professionals, but now sees
the need to integrate these multiple disciplines and acknowledges the need for
computational thinking in all aspects of business strategy. The same holds true
for industry and government regulators. Enabling students to learn about the
role of computational thinking in the financial markets ? in particular its
importance in regulation and oversight ? will promote a workforce that helps the
United States build more effective regulatory and risk management systems that
will grow our economy and provide a safe environment for investors. Further,
this approach to fostering computational thinking in an applied context can
serve as a model for similar programs in other domains, and help diversify the
pool of students learning advanced computational thinking.