* 0939917
* Collaborative Research: RAPID: Developing Real Time Metrics on the Effects of ARRA Investments on Technological Invention
* SBE,SBE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Jose Lobo, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Julia I. Lane
* 08/31/2010
* USD 68,282.00

The American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (ARRA) included a significant
amount of public investments directed at fostering innovations in science and
engineering. Policy-makers, as well as the scientific and engineering
communities, face a challenge in assessing the effectiveness of these
investments. Analysis of one type of invention, patented inventions, has become
a well-established framework for investigating inventive activity and the
effectiveness of R&amp;D investments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nearly all the
research utilizing patents as a window to the knowledge economy has used data on
granted patents. However granted patent data may greatly understate the total
level of current inventive activity since multiple inventor teams and firms may
competing to develop the same new technology, but only one effort may ultimately
be successful in obtaining a patent award for the invention. Patent applications
may provide more information about overall inventive activity since they provide
information about concurrent research efforts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study
develops a database on patent applications, and matches the technology codes
used by the US Patent and Trademark Office to characterize applications with the
technologies prioritized by ARRA to receive Federal R&amp;D funding. It
integrates a granted patent database with application data which provides a
unique opportunity to identify the characteristics of more successful inventors,
organizations, and regions by comparing successful and unsuccessful prior
attempts at patenting. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The particular focus of the
research is to examine the question of what technological advances were achieved
as a result of ARRA's R&amp;D investments by comparing three outcomes before and
after the disbursement of ARRA funding. These outcomes include patent
application rates, the entry of new inventors, and whether inventors who had
previously specialized in specific technologies shift into technologies targeted
by ARRA. The research also examines the mean time from the 'conception' of an
idea and the filing of a patent application, which was less than six months in
2008, and has dropped by more than ten months in five
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond intellectual contributions to policy debates,
this project has several additional impacts. The research results are presented
as short and readable reports, built around tabular and graphical displays of
data and results, and are directed at policy-makers at the State and Federal
levels. The datasets and metrics constructed for the research, as well as the
research results, are made publicly-available on the web.