* 0939065
* CPATH-2: CPACE II: Implementing Constituency-driven Curricular Change that Integrates Computational Thinking Across Engineering Disciplines
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Claudia Vergara, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 08/31/2014
* USD 808,679.00

Abstract

This CPATH award funds an extension of a CPATH community building project
between Michigan State University (MSU), Lansing Community College (LCC), and
the Corporation for Skilled Workforce (CSW) to prepare a globally competitive
engineering workforce that is able to apply Computational Thinking (CT) to a
broad range of societal challenges and opportunities. Broadly defined in the
context of the engineering practice, computational thinking involves solving
problems and designing systems by making use of fundamental computer science
concepts. The goal is to redesign the role of computing within the engineering
programs at MSU and LCC to develop CT competencies informed by industry needs by
infusing CT learning opportunities into the undergraduate engineering
curriculum.

The project has several major activities. A primary focus is on developing and
implementing instructional modules in Chemical Engineering and Civil Engineering
at MSU and the pre-engineering courses at LCC. The approach is to identify and
implement authentic problems for curricular revision in two engineering
disciplinary curricula at MSU and the engineering transfer curricula at LCC and
to identify the computational principles for each disciplinary epitome and use
these principles to help design the instructional modules. The team plans to
develop appropriate materials to support the disciplinary faculty who will be
teaching the modules. Comprehensive evaluation is to be conducted including the
design and implementation of quasi-experimental evaluation and assessment
components to document CT competencies in the engineering students. Finally, the
group plans to improve information and knowledge exchange via the CPACE
Engineering Talent Development Network and dissemination and communication
efforts.

The intellectual merit lies with the strong interdisciplinary team that plans to
redefine the role of computing within engineering programs and the collaborative
network including industry partners that are involved. The project includes
identification of computational thinking concepts and correlation with
engineering competencies. The research results should inform future innovation
in multiple engineering disciplines.

The broader impacts include the diverse group of students and stakeholders
involved and engaged. Transfer from Lansing Community College into engineering
programs is to be facilitated and students should be better prepared using the
resources of this project. Dissemination of the resources and model is broad,
thus allowing for replication and adaptation on a national scale.