* 0939969
* Core Support of the Water Science and Technology Board
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2010
* Stephen Parker, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Paul L. Bishop
* 07/31/2010
* USD 25,000.00

0939969&lt;br/&gt;Parker&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Water Science and Technology
Board is the focal point for studies related to water resources and hydrologic
sciences accomplished under the aegis of the National Academy of Sciences and
the National Academy of Engineering. The Board's objective is to improve the
scientific and technological basis for resolving important national questions
and issues associated with the efficient management and use of ground and
surface water resources. In carrying out its responsibilities and in serving the
national interest, the Board responds to requests for evaluations and advice
through its ad hoc studies concerning specific and generic issues in water
resources, influences action by initiating studies of issues that merit
consideration by public agencies and others, identifies issues and topics of
research related to water resources, and cooperates with other units of the
National Research Council (NRC) and groups with mutual interests outside of the
NRC. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the Board is important in
advancing knowledge and understanding covering the traditional scientific and
engineering aspects of water resources and the economic, institutional, legal,
educational, and social aspects, as well. The Board consists of members from all
of the disciplines involved in water resources activities, and responds to
specific requests from government, state and local agencies, and others. The
Board projects future needs for and capabilities of multi-disciplinary water-
related research and education in the sciences, engineering, and technology.
These projects are separately funded and carried out by ad hoc committees under
the Boards oversight. At meetings of the Board, liaison representatives provide
comments and suggestions to aid the board in developing its program and reports
on its activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Board promotes broader impacts for
its activities by advancing discovery and understanding while promoting
teaching, training and learning in projecting future needs for and capabilities
of multi-disciplinary water-related research and education in the sciences,
engineering, and technology. The experience helped the graduate develop
essential skills different from those attained in academia. Board members and
staff participate in conferences, workshops, and other activities to disseminate
the scientific and technological understanding of its reports. The Boards
findings benefit society by assuring that the activities in water resources
receive attention appropriate to the role water plays in furthering national
interest.