* 0939120
* CPATH-1: Planning for Institutional Transformation through Computational Thinking
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Robin Bargar, CUNY New York City College of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 08/31/2012
* USD 161,486.00

This conceptual development and planning project by the New York City College of
Technology is creating a model of viable general education curriculum revision
based on the tenets of Computational Thinking (CT), and defining changes in the
College?s organizational and technological infrastructure needed to support such
fundamental institutional transformation. This model is needed to be viable
under current conditions of rapid and continuous changes in computer and
information technologies and is applicable across different disciplines.

INTELLECTUAL MERIT. Computational thinking has become the essential competency
for the workforce of the future. Today, the world of information technology is
changing so fast that any isolated effort of computational curriculum update is
likely to become obsolete almost as soon as it is completed. The intellectual
merit of this Conceptual Development and Planning project in the redesign of
City Tech?s curriculum and in the transformation of its organizational and
technological infrastructure as: ? continuous instead of episodic and short-
lived; ? systemic instead of local and isolated; and ? based on tenets of
computational thinking.

To achieve this, the project team is taking a multi-level approach to ensure
that no level of organizational infrastructure has been missed and that all of
the participants (administration, faculty, staff, students, and wider community)
are engaged and that all the elements of the system are mutually reinforcing. An
important part of this process is be development of Key Indicators of
computational thinking?the metrics that can be used to assess the progress of
transformational effort, and course and program outcomes. These is also being
used to serve as the basis for developing Computational Thinking Literacy in the
college core. A set of the exemplary interdisciplinary case studies,
instructional prototypes and curriculum units are being developed by the
department groups and disseminated to the college and wider community.

BROADER IMPACTS: Because City Tech is a Hispanic Serving Institution and one of
the most diverse institutions of higher education in the country, this program
will have impact on an important urban community that is underrepresented in
STEM. Due to advances of computer and information technology, for the first time
in human history, any person, with or without scientific credentials, with or
without special means, may have access to ongoing research activities.
Discovering new ways of teaching and learning through interdisciplinary
computational curricula and providing organizational and technological
infrastructure for these activities will give the students and the broader
community the ability to take advantage of these unique and endless
possibilities, and will thereby fulfill the educational imperative of the
college?s mission. The web of interrelationships among departments and schools
within this college that this project is creating will have far-reaching and
long-lasting effect. Dissemination activities through the web will be continuous
and systemic, reaching outward through internal and external advisory boards and
the online community.