* 0939032
* CPATH-1:  Developing Computational Thinking Skills Across the Undergraduate Curriculum
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Chenglie Hu, Carroll University
* Continuing Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 09/30/2012
* USD 199,595.00

&lt;br/&gt; This Carroll College CPATH Planning Grant is focused on increasing
the number of students developing Computational Thinking (CT) competencies by
infusing CT experiences into the undergraduate general education curriculum. The
project team is: 1) reviewing and revising the BS degree requirements, and
replacing the current math and computer science requirements with two new CT
courses, 2) developing an interdisciplinary undergraduate minor in computational
science, 3) developing an interdisciplinary undergraduate major in computational
science, and finally 4) training faculty to teach new BS courses and help them
integrate CT throughout individual curricula. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: These educators believe, based on the computing education literature that
they have reviewed, that it is essential to begin building CT skills early in
the undergraduate education for all students. Reaching students early in their
undergraduate career ensures that students are prepared with the CT skills that
they need to pursue graduate studies and that are highly desirable for future
employment. Because CT skills will be so integral to the 21st century workplace,
this project begins by developing two lower-level CT courses to be integrated
into the general education curriculum for all BS degree students ? approximately
80% of the Carroll College student body. &lt;br/&gt;To round out the college?s
computational offerings, they are developing undergraduate minor and major
programs in computational science. The computational courses developed through
the proposed minor program will serve as a common area for collaboration among
faculty from different fields. The major and minor programs will also allow
students who have an interest in computational science to explore a variety of
applications while learning the theory behind the techniques. Finally, the
project team is integrating computational techniques into the student learning
experience as a whole. They are working with faculty to keep the introductory-
level courses relevant to current research and thus are ensuring that the
knowledge that students gain early in their time at Carroll will be used
throughout their undergraduate education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact
&lt;br/&gt;This NSF CISE CPATH planning grant is enabling Carroll College, a
predominately undergraduate institution, to make a first critical step towards
invigorating and strengthening offerings in the computational sciences. With
this project, Carroll College will be able to significantly improve the
computational thinking skills of their undergraduate student population.
Additionally, this NSF CISE CPATH grant is enabling the College to develop
faculty expertise in computational science program development that will result
in opportunities for students to acquire computational thinking competency
within multidisciplinary majors. It is expected that this curricular program
will serve as a national model and will demonstrate how to develop computational
thinking competency within a general education curriculum. It is expected that
this program will work to attract more women and underrepresented minority
students into the computational science field while providing the enhanced
curriculum needed to ensure that students succeed in completing major and minor
programs in computational science.&lt;br/&gt;