* 0939167
* CPATH-1: An interdisciplinary, problem-based, collaborative course on computational thinking
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2012
* DAVID STURGILL, Baylor University
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 12/31/2012
* USD 156,277.00

This project is developing and offering a course in computational thinking for
non-computer science undergraduate students at Baylor University. In this
course, computational thinking is viewed algorithmically, thus it helps students
to develop the skills needed to effectively solve problems with algorithms. It
includes such topics as problem abstraction and decomposition, fundamental
programming concepts, and the practical and theoretical limits of
computation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are several distinctive aspects to this
course. First, it is intended for all students rather than only those in
science-related disciplines. Second, it is collaborative. Students work in small
groups that change weekly. Third, it is problem-based. Students learn
computational thinking by solving real problems. Finally, problems given in the
course come from disciplines outside of computer science. Faculty members from
across the university are helping to develop the set of problems to be used in
the class. Because the course focuses on how computational thinking may be used
in other disciplines, it will better train non-computer science majors than the
existing introductory course for computer science
majors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first year of the project is focused upon
curriculum development, including defining a canonical list of problem types,
gathering problems for the course, and selecting appropriate software for
student implementation. The course will be offered twice in the second year of
the project, once each semester. Given the enrollment in traditional
introduction to computer science courses, demand for the course is
high.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;This introductory course
for non-majors gives a broad introduction to computational thinking for non-
computer scientists. The principal investigators each have years of experience
using problem-based, collaborative learning to teach computational thinking to
computer science majors at all levels. A problem-based curriculum, using
problems from external disciplines, serves to motivate the computational topics.
The course also educates students about the breadth of computation?s
application, and introduces them to other fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
course has the potential to be transformative by becoming a model for the
introduction to algorithmic computational thinking. It brings together students
and problems from multiple disciplines, and unites them under a common theme.
The efficacy of the course in training students in computational thinking will
be rigorously evaluated and compared with a traditional introductory computer
science course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;If technology is
to continue to have a positive impact on society, it is essential for the people
who interact with technology to understand how to effectively use and create
with it. To this end, the proposed course broadens participation in computing by
serving students outside the discipline.&lt;br/&gt;It also broadens the
participation of faculty members by including external faculty in course
development. The course enhances education infrastructure by providing a
curriculum, software tools, and a body of problems to be made publicly
available. The PIs have broad support for this course, both from inside the
computer science department and across the faculty in many other departments at
Baylor.&lt;br/&gt;