* 0939445
* Sixth International Workshop on Modeling in Crystal Growth (IWMCG-6) to be held in Lake Geneva, WI, August 9-13, 2009
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Jeffrey Derby, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 06/30/2010
* USD 15,000.00

0939445&lt;br/&gt;Derby&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Sixth International Workshop on
Modeling in Crystal Growth (IWMCG-6) is to be held in Lake Geneva, WI, August
9-13, 2009. This Workshop will bring together top senior and promising junior
researchers of both academe and industry from the United States, Europe, Asia,
and other parts of the world to identify common priorities, allow the exchange
of new ideas, and foster future collaborative work. NSF support is sought to
promote the attendance of academic researchers, especially young investigators
(graduate students, post-doctoral fellows and young faculty). The participation
of the academic community is vital for carrying out the mission of this workshop
and, more importantly, will enable these researchers to advance their work
through international exposure and future collaboration. The International
Workshops on Modeling in Crystal Growth are unique in their blending of
mathematical analysis, numerical algorithms, and physical applications and their
focus on state of the art techniques. Because of the extreme challenges in
representing multiple scales in crystal growth modeling, there is a great need
for extensive discussions of algorithms and numerical methods. The IWMCG
provides a forum that embraces not only in depth discussions of physics but also
presentations explaining modeling methods, from mathematical formulation to
numerical algorithms to software implementations, on an equal plane. In this
regard, more general meetings do not meet the needs of the crystal growth
modeling community. While results from modeling are often well received at these
more general meetings, more extensive discussions of the details of modeling are
not.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit of the proposed activity: In
addition to promoting international discourse and collaboration among
researchers in this area, this workshop will promote an important and timely
research topic. The area of crystal growth is rich in scientific and engineering
content and is technologically and economically important, since the U.S. and
global electronics industries are literally fabricated upon single-crystalline
materials. Modeling the growth of these materials aims to provide needed insight
to the physical mechanisms during growth which determine materials quality as
well as providing a tool for economic process optimization. Crystal growth is
also an area of strategic importance that is in need of strengthening. Indeed,
the National Research Council has completed the MSAC study, to be released in
June 2009, that asserts that the U.S. has lost several critical competencies in
the synthesis of materials due to a lack of federal support for crystal growth.
A workshop dedicated to understanding and advancing the field of crystal growth
will provide an important means to continue the exchange of ideas in the
community and attract newcomers to the area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts resulting from the proposed activity. For the first time, the IWMCG will
be held in conjunction with the largest North American crystal growth
conference, ACCGE-17/OMVPE 14, allowing workshop attendees to discover the
latest advances in all aspects of epitaxial thin film and bulk crystal growth.
The joint ACCGE, OMVPE, and IWMCG conferences will bring together researchers
from industry, government and academia in an informal setting that is isolated
from outside distractions, with ample time for discussion and interaction. They
will strive for gender balance and will provide priority support to individuals
from under-represented groups that are identified. They are firmly committed to
the Americans with Disabilities Act and have ensured that all conference
activities are wheelchair accessible. Beyond these criteria, they will attempt
to provide the most advanced technical meeting possible, with a mixture of
attendees from academic research, industry and educational professions, and also
with a mixture of senior and junior investigators, post-doctoral trainees and
graduate students.