* 0939628
* RUI: Analysis of Intracellular Biogenic Sulfur Using micro-Raman Spectroscopy
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2010,03/31/2016
* Robert Barletta, University of South Alabama
* Standard Grant
* Christian Fritsen
* 03/31/2016
* USD 180,438.00

Biogenic sulfur compounds, such as dimethyl sulfide (DMS), its precursors
dimethyl sulfoniopropionate (DMSP) and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), and its
atmospheric oxidation product, methane sulfonic acid (MSA), are important
components of the global sulfur cycle that significantly impact global climate.
The roles of DMSP and DMSO within the organisms that produce them, as well as
their intracellular concentrations, are poorly understood. DMSO has been
speculated to play a role in intracellular osmoregulation, cryoprotection and
scavenging of reactive oxygen species, but its intracellular concentration in
plankton has only been inferred. Quantitative measurement of the concentration
of biogenic sulfur compounds in vivo is necessary to more completely understand
their biogeochemistry. The principal investigator has developed methods for the
quantitative analysis of biogenic sulfur compounds using Raman spectroscopy,
which have resulted in the detection of DMSO with a sensitivity of &lt;10 mM -
far lower than the current estimates of its intracellular concentrations. The
research will extend this technique to DMSP. The direct determination of the
intracellular DMSP and DMSO, will allow the proposed roles of these compounds in
phytoplankton to be investigated. Lastly, using field-collected cores,
measurements will be made of the intracellular sulfur compounds as well as the
concentration of molecular anions in the sea ice micro-environment. As an RUI
project, successful completion of this work will have a substantial impact on
undergraduate education in the Chemistry Department at the University of South
Alabama, exposing undergraduates and, particularly, under-represented minorities
in the sciences to cutting-edge research. It will provide financial support for
their education and allow them to present research in journal articles and at
technical meetings. Contacts with scientists in the field of Antarctic research
at other institutions will give students the opportunity to interact with
researchers in related fields, broadening their experience base.