* 0939645
* OEDG Planning Grant: Expanding Geoscience Diversity: Alternative Field Environments for Non-Traditional Students
* GEO,GEO
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2011
* Donald Stredney, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 09/30/2011
* USD 39,980.00

This OEDG planning project is exploring new strategies for engaging persons with
physical limitations in geologic field work through surrogate, immersive,
virtual representations, with the goal of bringing more diverse students into
the geosciences. During the initial phase, a partnership between the Ohio
Supercomputer Center (OSC) and the Advanced Computing Center for Arts
and&lt;br/&gt;Design (ACCAD), at Ohio State University (OSU), will design,
develop, and present geoscience content material for a pilot workhop focused on
cave geology, while investigating the efficacy, perception and transfer for
students with limited content knowledge as a result of their lack of direct
access to the field environment. The project brings together researchers in the
fields of information technologies, Earth science, education, art and design,
and disabilities research. Mobility-impaired undergraduate and graduate students
are engaged as active participants during development of the educational
resources, to ensure their utility with this audience. Additional partners in
the project include Ohio's STEM Ability Alliance (OSAA), the Offices of
Disability Services at OSU, Wright State University (WSU), Mammoth Caves
National Park, the National Cave and Karst Research Institute, and the National
Multiple Sclerosis Society.