* 0939178
* EPR Spectroscopy of the Cobalt Water Splitting Catalyst
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2009,01/31/2013
* Ralph Britt, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 01/31/2013
* USD 240,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). This research award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and
Organometallic Chemistry program supports work by Professor R. David Britt at
the University of California Davis to carry out fundamental research on
structural and mechanistic details of water splitting by a simple cobalt
catalyst. Investigators at MIT recently demonstrated that Co(II) in neutral
phosphate buffer spontaneously forms a water splitting catalyst on a polarized
electrode surface. This catalysis provides good current density, self assembles
and self repairs, operates at low overpotential in neutral pH water under
ambient conditions, and forms from cheap, earth-abundant materials. The research
program has long focused on electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) studies of
water splitting in photosynthesis, where a natural manganese cluster is
employed, and the research program is now using the same EPR methods to examine
the cobalt catalyst in detail. The research program is examining the geometric
and electronic structure of the cobalt catalyst as electrochemically generated.
Various EPR techniques will probe the interaction of unpaired electrons on the
cobalt ions with magnetic nuclei of cobalt, phosphate, and water. The research
program is carrying out in situ electrochemistry and rapid freeze quenching to
trap the catalyst during oxygen evolving turnover, and use the same advanced EPR
techniques to probe the catalytic mechanism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students are
very motivated by renewable energy and environmental issues. Two Inorganic
Chemistry graduate students are conducting research in this program. The topics
of this inorganic water splitting program integrate perfectly into the honors
general chemistry sequence that the PI is teaching at UC Davis. The PI
continually emphasizes the relevance of the ongoing science of the oxygen
evolving complex of photosynthesis and of the cobalt and related synthetic
complexes in lectures. Some undergraduates will do research on the project
during the summer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The EPR studies on the new cobalt
catalyst will provide new insights into how this simple system works and thereby
indicate directions for its improvement. Given our crucial needs for clean and
carbon-neutral renewable energy, the development of efficient solar water
splitting catalysts would serve as the basis of a clean renewable energy
technology.