* 0939614
* Core Support for the NRC Geographical Sciences Committee
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2010,05/31/2013
* Mark David Lange, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 05/31/2013
* USD 315,000.00

The National Research Council (NRC) established a Geographical Sciences
Committee (GSC) in 1997 because spatial and place-based approaches to human-
environment science had demonstrated themselves to be of increasing importance
in addressing major societal and environmental topics. This award renews core
support for the GSC, which has as its mission: (1) to bring the theories and
perspectives of the geographical sciences to bear on society's problems; (2) to
foster international cooperation by serving as a liaison to other national
geographical organizations and initiating collaborative research programs among
those organizations; (3) to provide advice to the National Academy of Sciences
(NAS) on all matters pertaining to geography, especially to the NAS Foreign
Secretary on matters concerning international organizations, programs, and
research; and (4) to serve as the official U.S. Liaison to the International
Geographical Union (IGU) and promote and facilitate participation of U.S.
geographers in the IGU. The GSC undertakes its work through the conduct of
special studies and through meetings. Studies that the GSC plans to undertake in
the near future include Measuring Community Resilience, a study initially
requested by the NOAA Coastal Services Center; Community Restoration in the
Aftermath of a Disaster: A Workshop, a workshop initially requested by the
Department of Homeland Security; and Strategic Response to the HIV/AIDS Crisis
in Africa: Geospatial Tools for Analysis, a study initially requested by the
U.S. Department of State.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Continued support for the GSC
will enable this group to continue to advance the role that geographers and
related scientists play in a range of contexts in the U.S. and internationally
through the IGU. The committee will continue to oversee studies like the
recently completed studies that produced the following reports: Strategic
Directions for the Geographical Sciences in the Next Decade; Tools and Methods
for Estimating Populations at Risk from Natural Disasters and Complex
Humanitarian Crises; Contributions of Land Remote Sensing for Decisions About
Food Security and Human Health; and Learning to Think Spatially: GIS as a
Support System in the K-12 Curriculum. The committee also will continue to
improve the effectiveness of the IGU and to promote the effective participation
of U.S. geographers in the activities of the IGU.