* 0939765
* Planning for a charter school-university-museum partnership to enhance diversity in the geosciences
* GEO,GEO
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Robert Ross, Paleontological Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 09/30/2012
* USD 39,055.00

This OEDG Planning Grant is being used to plan a partnership among Cornell
University, the KIPP NYC charter schools, the Cornell Upward Bound program,
which promotes college attainment for students, and the Paleontological Research
Institute (PRI) and its Museum of the Earth. The partnership?s goals are to
enhance participation of underrepresented minorities in the geosciences through
working with large numbers of minority students in an environment where college
enrollment is fostered and science pedagogy is valued. The partnership seeks to
improve the quality of Earth science education across four KIPP middle schools
and 1 high school, and increase student exposure to Earth science content. This
project represents a new direction for the KIPP schools, which have an excellent
record of increasing academic achievement in urban settings, but mostly through
emphasis on reading and math, not inquiry-based science. Bridging of KIPP and
Upward Bound activities are expected to help sustain interest in science beyond
high school and facilitate applications to colleges where geoscience degrees
might be pursued. The partnership seeks to increase awareness of the geosciences
and to enhance the effectiveness of their middle and high school science
preparation to provide a foundation for successful college science experiences.
The main activity of this planning phase is to establish a Roundtable the
explores the most effective implementation strategies to use within the KIPP
school context, including teacher professional development, field trips,
community outreach, geoscience immersion experiences, and college preparation
resources.