* 0939198
* CPATH-2: Globally Distributed Software Development: an Instructional Community Model
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Michal Young, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Nina Amla
* 09/30/2013
* USD 674,507.00

Studies show that "distance matters" in the sense that geographic, temporal, and
cultural differences lead to software engineering coordination and control
problems that differ qualitatively and quantitatively from those in co-located
development. Nonetheless, while software development has become a global
enterprise, computer science education so far remains largely parochial in
course content and student experience. This CPATH project is establishing a
self-sustaining, international community of educators committed to teaching key
computational thinking skills in the context of the human problems of
communication, coordination, and interdisciplinary coordination in globally
distributed software development.

A key premise of this project is that the challenges of globally distributed
projects are an ideal context for students to develop and value computational
thinking skills such as abstraction, modularization, and formalization. The
project will gather and develop a common collection of relevant pedagogic
materials, and assemble the necessary infrastructure for software engineering
project courses in which students work in globally distributed teams. A set of
community-building workshops will bring together parties from universities,
industry, and professional organizations to foster collaboration, generate
ideas, share experience, and improve common pedagogical assets.

Revitalizing computer science education to encompass globally distributed
software development is necessary to prepare the U.S. workforce and maintain
leadership in the future of software engineering. This includes fostering
cultural understanding and sensitivity in the practical exercise of
internationally collaborative work. In addition to developing pedagogical
materials and infrastructure, this CPATH project also addresses systematic
dissemination, formation of teaching partnerships, and other collaboration
between academic institutions and industry. By lowering barriers to adoption and
participation it will grow the teaching community, educate more students, and
include universities in underserved communities.