* 0939910
* Collaborative Research: RAPID: Developing Real Time Metrics on the Effects of ARRA Investments on Technological Invention
* SBE,SBE
* 09/01/2009,01/31/2012
* Deborah Strumsky, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Joshua Rosenbloom
* 01/31/2012
* USD 108,616.00

The American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (ARRA) included a significant
amount of public investments directed at fostering innovations in science and
engineering. Policy-makers, as well as the scientific and engineering
communities, face a challenge in assessing the effectiveness of these
investments. Analysis of one type of invention, patented inventions, has become
a well-established framework for investigating inventive activity and the
effectiveness of R&D investments.

Nearly all the research utilizing patents as a window to the knowledge economy
has used data on granted patents. However granted patent data may greatly
understate the total level of current inventive activity since multiple inventor
teams and firms may competing to develop the same new technology, but only one
effort may ultimately be successful in obtaining a patent award for the
invention. Patent applications may provide more information about overall
inventive activity since they provide information about concurrent research
efforts.

The study develops a database on patent applications, and matches the technology
codes used by the US Patent and Trademark Office to characterize applications
with the technologies prioritized by ARRA to receive Federal R&D funding. It
integrates a granted patent database with application data which provides a
unique opportunity to identify the characteristics of more successful inventors,
organizations, and regions by comparing successful and unsuccessful prior
attempts at patenting.

The particular focus of the research is to examine the question of what
technological advances were achieved as a result of ARRA's R&D investments by
comparing three outcomes before and after the disbursement of ARRA funding.
These outcomes include patent application rates, the entry of new inventors, and
whether inventors who had previously specialized in specific technologies shift
into technologies targeted by ARRA. The research also examines the mean time
from the 'conception' of an idea and the filing of a patent application, which
was less than six months in 2008, and has dropped by more than ten months in
five years.

Beyond intellectual contributions to policy debates, this project has several
additional impacts. The research results are presented as short and readable
reports, built around tabular and graphical displays of data and results, and
are directed at policy-makers at the State and Federal levels. The datasets and
metrics constructed for the research, as well as the research results, are made
publicly-available on the web.