* 0939128
* CPATH-1: Spreading Small Footprints
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2015
* Lynn Stein, Franklin W. Olin College of Engineering
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 07/31/2015
* USD 157,755.00

This CPATH Project extends the Small Footprint model, successfully pioneered and
developed at the Franklin W. Olin College of Engineering, to four other
institutions, Massachusetts Amherst, Harvard, Colby, and Rensselear Polytechnic.
The principal investigator will work with other academic institutions to adapt
the lessons learned at Olin to a broader set of schools, specifically addressing
the diverse needs of different kinds of educational institutions. Among the
virtues of the small footprint curriculum are: a reduced core that concentrates
on the particular elements that are required in order to learn the rest of
computing; an emphasis on teaching students to learn more on their own; room for
and an emphasis on active, hands-on, project-based and inquiry-driven projects,
often carried out in teams; opportunities to collaborate with other disciplines
and to build genuinely joint curriculum; and contextualization of the core of
computing education. A diverse initial group of pioneer collaborators have are
committed to immediate curricular reform. A series of workshops and town hall
meetings as well as an online consultation will be used to identify and recruit
additional partner institutions and to create a national shift in understanding
of what is necessary to the revitalization of computing
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Widespread change in
computing curricula requires careful construction of viable models. The
approaches of this project should provide opportunities for multi-disciplinary
collaboration as the core computing curriculum is refactored to emphasize
computing's durable bones. The PI brings a unique background including prior
successes in growing curricula outwards from single institutions and extensive
experience developing both a small footprint curriculum for computing and an
engineering educational program. The first round partner schools have been
carefully selected to provide diverse models from which to bootstrap a national
conversation and community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The primary
focus of this project is the content and style of teaching, training, and
learning in computing. The project will engage many educators in active
conversation and then transformation of undergraduate computing programs. In
turn, these curricular reforms will change the educational experiences of
students in traditional computing disciplines and create new opportunities for
students through the development of interdisciplinary programs. Initially the
project is geographically centered but over time the project will broaden its
reach through workshops, town hall meetings, publications, electronic and in-
person consultation by the PI, and hands-on curricular revision. Eventually,
every university in the nation should be able to look to at least one successful
adaptation of the small footprint curriculum at a peer institution, so that
curricular reform moves from radical innovation to the easier processes of
emulation and adoption.