* 0939609
* Case Studies in Bayesian Statistics and Machine Learning Workshop Conference Travel; October 2009, Pittsburgh, PA
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2010
* Joseph Kadane, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* David Stoffer
* 07/31/2010
* USD 0.00

The First Workshop in Bayesian Statistics and Machine Learning, to be held at
Carnegie Mellon University, October 15-17, 2009, will hear extended discussion
of the following case studies: "Decision theoretic Bayesian nonparametric
inference for the molecular characterization and stratification of colorectal
cancer using genome-wide arrays", by Christopher C. Holmes, Christopher Yau, Ian
Tomlinson and Jean-Baptiste Cazier; "Calibrating the Universe: A Bayesian
Uncertainty Analysis of Galaxy Simulation" by Ian Vernon, Richard Bower and
Michael Goldstein; "Rigorous Error Analysis for Small Angle Neutron Scattering
Datasets Using Bayesian Inference", by Chip Hogg, Jay Kadane, Jong Soo Lee, and
Sara Majetich. A new investigator's session, a short-course introduction to
Bayesian analysis and machine learning, a session on how to get a grant, and a
mixer, are all aimed at attracting students and recent graduates.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt; This grant supports travel and local expenses for speakers and young
investigators to attend the First Workshop in Bayesian Statistics and Machine
Learning, to be held at Carnegie Mellon University, October 15-17, 2009. The
fields of Bayesian statistics and machine learning are starting to grow
together; we hope that the workshop will accelerate this process by focusing
attention on serious scientific applications of the methods.