* 0939905
* Community-Partnered Repatriation of Inupiat Music
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Aaron Fox, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 09/30/2013
* USD 136,135.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The Center for Ethnomusicology at Columbia University holds valuable recordings
of traditional Iñupiat (Native Alaskan) music recorded in Barrow, Alaska by
collector Laura Boulton in 1946. Co-PIs Fox and Dr. Sakakibara are working with
Iñupiat community leaders, elders, and educators in Barrow, Alaska to
"repatriate" these recordings (and an associated set of photographs held by
Indiana University's Archive of Traditional Music), and to collect oral
historical important information about the recordings (and an associated set of
recently-discovered photographs taken during Boulton's expedition and currently
belonging to Indiana University's Archive of Traditional Music).

By conducting systematic oral historical interviews with elders and community
leaders concerning the contents, significance, and proper future management of
the recordings and photographs, the research team is working to make these
materials useful and accessible for contemporary Iñupiat musicians and dancers,
for Iñupiat language and culture educators, for descendants of the original
performers on the recordings, for the broader community, as well as for scholars
of Inuit history and culture, under terms acceptable to all parties.

Specifically, through this "community partnered" repatriation work, the research
team is working with Iñupiat consultants to develop contemporary applications
for these recordings through the creation of a secure and publicly accessible
digital resource that will embed the original recordings and photographs in a
rich explanatory context reflective of Iñupiat cultural values&#894; they are
helping community-based music and dance performance groups to develop
repertoires based on these recordings (and to explore other archival
collections); they are consulting with leading Iñupiaq educators to develop
language-teaching applications for the materials; and they are working with the
Iñupiat Heritage, Language, and Culture Commission and colleagues to use this
project to model the community's longer-term archiving needs for other valuable
heritage materials in other archives and personal collections.

Importantly, the research team is documenting the project itself through
observation of the effects of our reintroduction of this music into the
community. This project is a model for a new, experimental, approach to
"repatriation" of Native cultural heritage resources. By explicitly testing what
the team proposes are innovative best practices for collaborative repatriation
projects that benefit both Native communities and social scientists who work
with these communities, they hope to demonstrate ways of handling the thousands
of similar scholarly collections of Native cultural resources in archives and
museums in the United States, many of which have not been repatriated at all in
part due to what often appear to be intractable challenges inherent in the
historical status of such archives and the emergent ethical and legal climate in
which their repatriation must now occur. In addition to community-developed
resources, the research will result in scholarly articles and a book intended to
explore the implications of the project for archivists, scholars, and Native
communities alike.

