* 0939122
* CPATH-2: Collaborative Research: Incorporating Communication Outcomes into the Computer Science Curriculum
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2014
* Gerald Gannod, Miami University
* Continuing Grant
* Nina Amla
* 09/30/2014
* USD 461,136.00

To be successful in their careers, computer science graduates need, in addition
to in-depth technical knowledge, the ability to communicate and collaborate with
a variety of audiences. To achieve this goal, it is important that students have
instruction and practice in computational thinking and in communication skills
throughout their curriculum. This project, Incorporating Communication Outcomes
into the Computer Science Curriculum, will build upon two earlier CPATH projects
to create a transformative approach to fully integrate communication instruction
and activities throughout the curriculum in ways that enhance rather than
replace their learning of technical content. The outcomes of this project will
include: model curricula and syllabi for computer science and software
engineering programs that capture and assess student learning outcomes generated
in collaboration with industry; comprehensive support materials, including
communications learning activities to address the learning outcomes identified
by this project; demonstration and evaluation at two institutions with two very
different academic profiles; and dissemination of results to raise nationwide
awareness of this innovative approach. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
generate guiding concepts and disseminate resources that can be adapted by other
institutions to meet nationwide needs for CS and SE graduates with better
communication abilities while maintaining a mastery of technical content and
computational thinking. The new curricula will serve as models for similar
programs at other schools, the development of which will be supported by a
series of workshops involving partners from industry and academia. The industry
involvement will ensure that our graduates have the skills to meet their
communication needs and the involvement of our academic partners will both
leverage their expertise and encourage their adoption of the outcomes,
curricula, and activities developed during this project. Graduating CS and SE
students with effective computational thinking and communication skills will
positively influence interactions and communications between practitioners in CS
and other disciplines and thus enhance the benefits, impact and quality of CS
upon society. We expect that an additional benefit may be that CS and SE will
become more attractive to underrepresented groups, especially women, by making
it clear that communication between people is an essential part of any computing
career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;