* 0939592
* RUI: Xanthomonas Genomics Conference 2009 - Pingree Park -  Colorado State Univ - July 13-15, 2009
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2010
* Adam Bogdanove, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 06/30/2010
* USD 15,000.00

The Xanthomonas Genomics Conference 2009 will provide a venue for researchers
from around the globe to share results and ideas. Xanthomonas constitutes the
largest and most important group of plant-associated bacteria. Members of the
genus cause diseases on many crop and ornamental species, as well as model
species such as Arabidopsis thaliana, rice, tomato, and Medicago truncatula.
Genomics is at the center of a revolution in Xanthomonas biology. Genome
sequence-enabled studies are leading to a better understanding of Xanthomonas
signaling and effector molecules. These studies, integrated with host plant
genome-enabled research, are elucidating important plant processes. Next
generation sequencing technologies are accelerating discovery. A major goal of
this conference is to establish consensus objectives, standardized technologies,
and common resources that will promote continued rapid progress. The 24
confirmed speakers are leaders and emerging leaders in Xanthomonas research,
plant-pathogen interactions, and related fields. Xanthomonas is rapidly becoming
the premier model for understanding functional, regulatory, and evolutionary
aspects of plant-bacterial interactions. As Xanthomonas genomics continues to
drive advances in fundamental biology, it will similarly drive the development
of refined diagnostic, epidemiological, and other tools to prevent and control
the many plant diseases members of the genus cause, and potentially other
bacterial diseases of plants and even animals. To broaden the impact of the
meeting, a white paper stating the conclusions of the roundtable discussions
will be disseminated. Travel grants and fee discounts will be offered to
facilitate attendance of young scientists, women and underrepresented
minorities. All scheduled sessions will include student and postdoctoral
speakers.