* 0939423
* EAGER:   Allopolyploidy and photosynthesis:   a whole-transcriptome approach
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Jeffrey Doyle, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 12/31/2012
* USD 220,078.00

Allopolyploidy (whole genome duplication following hybridization) is an
important speciation mechanism in flowering plants; many crop species, including
soybean (Glycine max), are polyploids. Allopolyploidy is known to lead to
structural and regulatory changes that can result in morphological,
physiological, and ecological novelty. There is considerable interest in
ascertaining whether there are emergent properties ('rules') that could be
responsible for the apparent success of so many allopolyploids. Glycine is an
excellent model for addressing this question; among its approximately 30 species
is a group of eight recently formed allotetraploid species uniting genomes from
eight diploid progenitors in various combinations. Unlike any of the diploids,
which are all confined to Australia, five of the eight allopolyploids have
colonized islands of the Pacific Ocean, suggesting that they have a greater
ecological breadth than their progenitors. Photoprotection - a set of mechanisms
for dissipating potentially damaging excess light energy - is an adaptively
important physiological process that could contribute to the success of Glycine
allopolyploids. We are using a "next generation," high-throughput sequencing
method (Illumina) to obtain a deep and detailed profile of gene expression in
three Glycine allopolyploid species and their diploid progenitors under normal
light and high light stress conditions to assess which genes are involved in
photoprotection, how they are regulated in diploids and polyploids, what the
contribution of the two diploid progenitor genomes is at each of thousands of
expressed genes in each polyploid, and whether there are shared patterns of gene
expression in independently formed allopolyploids that could constitute
predictable 'rules' governing photoprotection in polyploid species of Glycine
and other flowering plants. Broader impacts include deepening our understanding
of polyploidy, a process that has shaped the genomes of many agriculturally
important plant species; the project will also support training of a graduate
student.