* 0939879
* EAGER: An investigation of plasma discharge ignition in harmonically driven bubbles in water with applications for the treatment of contaminated water
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* John Foster, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Arvind Atreyae Atreya
* 08/31/2010
* USD 60,048.00

&lt;br/&gt;AWARD &lt;br/&gt;Public Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title:
An investigation of plasma discharge ignition in harmonically driven bubbles in
water with applications for the treatment of contaminated
water&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Foster, John E. &lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of Michigan Ann Arbor &lt;br/&gt;Proposal No:
CBET-0939879&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is a one-year preliminary
investigation into the feasibility and science of low-temperature plasma
ignition in free gas bubbles passing through a column of water. Products of such
a discharge include ozone, radicals, electrons, hydrogen peroxide, and UV
emission. In water, because these products are strongly antiseptic, they should
automatically treat the water, opening the possibility of plasma-based, point-of
use water treatment for application in underdeveloped countries where water-
borne diseases account for 80% of the deaths of children. In addition, charged
products from the process would also lead to coagulation of particulates, making
filtering relatively straightforward. This plasma approach would circumvent
problems associated with portable filtration and UV
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key is to make plasma in gas bubbles in water
with an RF field whose frequency is in resonance with the natural oscillation
frequency of the bubbles. This resonance would lead to periodic expansions and
compressions, during which the electric field inside the bubble would be
amplified, thus lowering the electrical breakdown threshold. The immediate goals
of this research are (1) demonstrating and quantifying the conditions necessary
to drive the bubble compression, rarefaction, and break-up by Raleigh-Taylor-
driven or electric-field-induced stress with a time-varying imposed voltage at
the resonance frequency; (2) determining the shape, neutral density and pressure
of the bubble over the oscillation period; (3) determining the voltage pulse
characteristics (pulse width, voltage magnitude) necessary to initiate the
discharge in the oscillating bubble. If these tasks can be achieved, longer-term
goals would be characterizing the bubble plasma evolution over a cycle using
time-resolved spectroscopy and assessing the effects of the plasma discharge on
oxidation-reduction markers placed in the water. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will greatly expand our knowledge of the physics of plasma-in-bubble
discharges, forming new guideposts for further research and potentially leading
to a means for implementation in practical plasma-chemical reactors. The
research will involve graduate and undergraduate students and will aid their
education in plasma science and engineering. It also advances broader societal
goals of broader representation by engaging researchers from under-represented
groups. Finally, the possible water-treatment technology would have favorable
societal and technological impacts. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;