* 0939093
* EAGER: Virtual Motion Camouflage based Subspace Optimal Control for Real-Time Trajectory Planning
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2011
* Yunjun Xu, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* George Chiu
* 07/31/2011
* USD 55,762.00

The research objective of this EArly-concept Grants for Exploratory Research
(EAGER) award is to investigate, better understand, and validate a novel and
unique subspace optimal control methodology that will potentially build a
foundation for advancing the state of knowledge in the critical area of real-
time trajectory planning for single or cooperative systems. A new method, based
on the bio-inspired motion camouflage phenomenon and higher order discretization
schemes, will be investigated such that the computational cost in solving
constrained nonlinear optimal trajectory problems can be dramatically reduced. A
systematic tool of judging the optimality of the solution after it is obtained
will be investigated and followed by a theoretically proven guideline on how to
select the virtual prey motion beforehand such that a ?good? subspace can be
constructed a priori. In this EAGER project, two example problems will be used
to validate the methodologies: a Cooperative Electronic Combat Air Vehicles
(ECAVs) problem and a mobile robot collision trajectory planning
problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a potentially transformative technique, the
proposed research will not only provide an innovative approach for real-time
trajectory planning but also contribute to a wide range of other applications
that can be modeled in a standard constrained nonlinear optimal control form.
Even more important, the results of this research will promote the
implementation of biological motion strategies existing in nature to practical
engineering or scientific problems. This research is expected to impact both
theories and applications and bridge the gap between them. The PI and graduate
students will attend forums organized by the NSF CMMI to disseminate our
innovations and findings throughout the project period. Research findings will
be evaluated by project reports, journal publications, and peer feedback. The
biological phenomenon and research subtasks and findings will be used to enrich
the undergraduate dynamics course and the graduate optimal control course. New
teaching materials will be linked to the National Science Digital Library.