* 0939974
* 2009 Workshop on Best Practices for Recruitment and Transition of Engineering Students from Community Colleges to Four Year Institutions
* ENG,EFMA
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2011
* Louis Dale, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Omnia El-Hakim
* 07/31/2011
* USD 184,921.00

Abstract: Proposal number 0939974.&lt;br/&gt;Title: 2009 Workshop on Best
Practices for Recruitment and Transition of Engineering Students from Community
Colleges to Four Year Institutions.&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Louis
Dale&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is an effort to recruit more women and
underrepresented minorities into engineering fields from community colleges and
to facilitate their transition to four year institutions as smooth as possible.
This will be accomplished by involving the Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority
Participation (LSAMP) principal investigators and their community college
partners in a joint workshop designed to identify and review "best practices"
for the recruitment and transition of community college students interested in
engineering and science to four year institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experts
in the field along with students, faculty and administrators from community
colleges and four year institutions will be involved in two days of intensive
dialogue highlighting best practices across the nation. An evaluation of the
workshop will take place and the proceedings will be published to share these
findings with other college and university administrators. The goal of these
efforts is to increase the number of community college students entering four
year institutions to major in engineering, particularly four year LSAMP
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit - The project is an
important step in advancing the knowledge of women and underrepresented minority
students in engineering and science at the community college level through the
recruitment process. The experiences gained by the participants in the proposed
workshop will enhance their knowledge of the recruitment and transition of
underrepresented students and impact their educational programs. The proposed
workshop will assemble experts in important aspects of the community college
recruitment and university transfer and retention process. Effective
dissemination of the outcomes is an important aspect of the success of this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact - The project broadens
participation of underrepresented groups in four year colleges with the real
prospect of increasing the number of such groups attaining bachelor?s degrees in
engineering and science. Discovery and understanding resulting from this project
will be disseminated via a national publication of the workshop proceedings to
other institutions and programs focusing on undergraduate education. The project
has the potential for transforming the procedures and practices of community
college recruitment to the next
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Omnia El-Hakim, Ph.D.-Program
Director &lt;br/&gt;For Diversity and Outreach&lt;br/&gt;National Science
Foundation&lt;br/&gt;Directorate for Engineering&lt;br/&gt;4201 Wilson Blvd.,
Suite 505N&lt;br/&gt;Arlington, VA 22230&lt;br/&gt; Tel: (703) 292-
2149&lt;br/&gt;Fax: (703) 292- 9013&lt;br/&gt;E-Mail: oelhakim@nsf.gov