* 0939853
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: Theoretical development of a general purpose molecular collision simulator
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2009,02/28/2011
* Andrew Sornborger, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ann Orel
* 02/28/2011
* USD 119,242.00

We are in the exploratory stages of developing theoretical methods to use
superconducting electrical circuits to make a general purpose quantum simulator
(time-dependent Schrodinger equation solver), with molecular collision theory as
the principal application,. Our design algorithms will utilize the existing and
demonstrated devices and functionality available from the UC Santa Barbara
superconducting quantum computation program, with the ultimate aim of
demonstrating small simulations of molecular collisions in about five years. We
will use existing Josephson Junction (JJ) circuits for preliminary testing and
demonstration.

The quantum simulation architecture should transform computational quantum
mechanics by providing vastly increased computational power for solving the
Schrodinger equation for a given, but general, time-dependent Hamiltonian.
Application to atomic and molecular scattering provides a natural test bed for
this approach and promises results of immediate interest in chemistry, physics,
and astrophysics.

The development of a general purpose quantum simulator would be an important
milestone in the quest for a quantum computer. The use of solid-state devices to
simulate molecular systems is complementary to other quantum simulation
proposals that use atomic systems to study condensed matter problems. The
education and training of graduate students and postdocs, including women and
other underrepresented groups, involved in our program will be integrated with
every aspect of the research.