* 0939258
* Support for Young US Researchers to Attend the Bari Workshop on Deformation and Failure of Geomaterials, held 6/14-19, 2009 in Puglia, Italy
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2010
* James Jenkins, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Richard J. Fragaszy
* 05/31/2010
* USD 19,200.00

The Bari workshop on the deformation and failure of geomaterials will expose
young researchers to recent developments in the mechanics of granular materials
that are relevant to the behavior of geomaterials. Daily classes on modeling,
simulation, and experiment will be complimented by invited lectures given by
distinguished researchers. The practical problem of interest is the stability of
rocky slopes and the possible prediction of landslide initiation. Consequently,
the focus of the workshop will be on the deformation and failure of geological
materials. Topics to be addressed include the derivation of continuum theories
based on particle interactions, the use discrete element simulations of
particles in developing continuum theory, the implementation of continuum
theories in finite element simulations, and the interpretation of experimental
results. The workshop will be held between Sunday, June 14 and June 19, 2009 in
a country hotel located in Puglia, Italy. Researchers with backgrounds in
engineering, mathematics, physics, and geology are being encouraged to apply.
The daily courses, each lasting a total of six hours during the week, will be
led by Boris Jeremic (University of California, Davis), Cino Viggiani
(Universite Joseph Fourier, France), Julia Morgan (Rice University), and Jean-
Noël Roux (Institut Navier, France). The invited lectures will be given by
Antonio Gens (Universitat Politecnica de Catalunya, Spain), James Jenkins
(Cornell University), David Muir-Wood (Bristol University, UK), and James Rice
(Harvard University). This award will support the participation in the workshop
of up to eight young U.S. researchers. The support will include both travel and
local expenses. The intellectual merit of the proposed activity to the
researchers who are supported is the direct benefit derived from the course
material and the distinguished lectures. The broader impact of their
participation will be their introduction to and interaction with European peers
who share their interest in the mechanics of geomaterials and the incorporation
of this knowledge into research and teaching materials.

