* 0939168
* CPATH-1: Sacramento Regional CPATH Project II
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Vahl Scott Gordon, Los Rios Community College District
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 09/30/2013
* USD 284,889.00

Through this three-year undertaking, the Sacramento Regional CPATH Team is
producing knowledge about key computational thinking (CT) skills and
competencies, developing strategies for measuring such skills, and innovating
instructional strategies that are effective in developing these skills in
students and preparing them for computing courses. Important aspects of this
project is the identification of key CT skills and competencies critical at each
point along the K through 14 education continuum; assessment tools for
accurately measuring acquisition of CT skills; and the small-scale pilot of
infusion strategies to test the promise of the model.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;For over a decade, concern
has continued to rise over the relative lack of enrollment and completion in
STEM programs, particularly at the University level. All segments of education
have tried in various ways to address the leaks in the STEM pipeline, but
without significant success. This project is implementing a strategy that uses
CT skills as both a solution for these long-standing problems and as a measure
of the project's success, emphasizing the higher education success and output to
industry. There are compelling challenges to address, including a cultural
change rate that requires unprecedented agility on the part of education as it
prepares for its input audience (students). At the earliest stages, education
will need to adjust its curriculum, classroom pedagogy and pace to advance its
students through this first section of the pipeline. With better prepared
incoming students, the community college can do a more thorough job of moving
STEM students into the course material and practical experiences which will help
assure their sustained interest in the field. The interest of universities who
receive inputs from community colleges is that students are prepared for the
challenges of the next level of study, and are focused enough to complete their
chosen program. Business and industry rightly expect candidates for their open
positions who are work ready, and possess the CT skills (and others) that will
make them a good investment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Another portion of the
pipeline that has been somewhat neglected is the end, where these long-term
investments drop off the STEM grid. Businesses, educational institutions, and
government agencies work hard to create intellectual capital in their employees,
only to see them disappear with many potential years of productive work life
still ahead of them. This commodity is quite expensive to replace, and may
require years to accomplish. Businesses and other employers who have been part
of the Sacramento Regional CPATH Team meetings agree that they have serious
challenges with losing out on these investments just when they need them most. A
goal of this project is to assist employers, through interaction within the
project team, to address their retention needs through innovative approaches to
optimizing these investments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts
&lt;br/&gt;This project effectively engages CPATH partners in a collaborative
development process that will endure long into the future as the technology
landscape continues to change. The output of this collaboration will not only be
a plan for infusion of CT skill to address the needs of an accelerating
technological economy, but also to secure relationships which will support
adaptation of this plan to address emerging needs. The project team is
cooperating to be agile, effective and efficient in maintaining the integrity of
the K through 14 pipeline for CT-skilled workers. This project has the potential
to benefit a wide range of stakeholders to include the K-12, community college,
and university systems within the greater Sacramento region as well as other
portions of northern California (through dissemination strategies); information
technology employers, and the residents of the region in general as broad
transformation will lead to increased talent and economic competitiveness. It is
significant that this project includes activities at the K-12, community
college, and university levels, maximizing the reach of the project to include a
large and highly diverse student population. The instructional models and new
ways of thinking about computing that are expected to result from this project
will lead to increased enrollment in computing programs in Los Rios and
Sacramento State. This will help to increase the diversity of the computing
workforce in the region.