* 0939014
* Determining Structural Ensembles for Intrinsically Unstructured Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 03/09/2009,03/31/2015
* Gary Daughdrill, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 03/31/2015
* USD 519,778.00

The objective of this project to is study structural variations in a family of
intrinsically unstructured proteins (IUP). Based on the PI's previous work, and
the work of others, it is now clear that IUPs form a diverse set of protein
families that can elicit biological function using a variety of mechanisms. This
project has two aims: (I) Determine structural ensembles for a set of homologous
proteins that are intrinsically unstructured. In this specific aim, paramagnetic
relaxation enhancement will be used to estimate long-range interatomic distances
that can be used to restrain structure calculations. The structural ensembles
will then be validated using residual dipolar couplings and small angle x-ray
scattering. (II) Determine the relationship between sequence identity and
structural similarity for a set of homologous proteins that are intrinsically
unstructured. In this specific aim, eigenvector decomposition of protein contact
maps will be used to identify similarities between the structural ensembles.
This data will then be correlated with genetic distance matrices to determine
the percent sequence identity necessary for structural similarity. Experiments
in this specific aim will also test the importance of amino acid composition for
specifying the structural ensemble. Successful completion of both specific aims
will facilitate the development of models of protein evolution for intrinsically
unstructured proteins that can be used to estimate their dynamic structures
based on sequence identity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI has a strong record of
advancing discovery and understanding while promoting teaching, training, and
learning. This is evidenced by the three peer reviewed publications that have
undergraduate students as authors and five peer reviewed publications that have
authors from underrepresented groups. The PI is also very committed in
disseminating scientific information to general public. In the summer of 2004,
the PI participated in a state funded workshop for secondary education to
science teachers. The PI gave lectures on the general principles of protein
structure and function as well as a tutorial for using molecular graphics
programs in the classroom. This project will involve two undergraduate students
and a female research technician and the PI will continue his efforts to involve
science teachers in basic scientific research by holding an annual workshop
whose purpose would be to introduce science teachers to the latest breakthroughs
and make them aware of new web-based tools for scientific discovery. &lt;br/&gt;