* 0939188
* Organization of Grand Challenges in Cyber Security
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2009,12/31/2013
* Giovanni Vigna, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 12/31/2013
* USD 49,968.00

National Science Foundation &lt;br/&gt;CISE/CNS&lt;br/&gt;Form 7 Review Analysis
and Recommendation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
0939188&lt;br/&gt;Panel: N/A&lt;br/&gt;PI: Giovanni Vigna&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of California ? Santa Barbara&lt;br/&gt;Title: Organization of Grand
Challenges in Cyber Security&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Proposal summary and
intellectual merit: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Inspired by the DARPA Urban Challenge,
the PI offers to run a grand challenge competition in computer security. . DARPA
reports very positive results from its competition wherein teams who developed
fully automated automobiles, the automation attained by new methods in sensing
and artificial intelligence, competed for prizes and glory.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The security challenge, the focus of this proposal, is to
be run in conjunction with USENIX Security, 2009. Particularly challenging for a
security challenge wherein a team has to defend itself against attacks, is the
need for a clear, well-specified set of rules which unambiguously define
criteria for success and for choosing a winner. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For this
challenge, the task of the participant teams is to build a system such that the
provided servers are self-defending and resilient against attacks. During the
competition an automated scoring system will record the services that remain
functional. At the same time, an automated attack system will perform disruptive
attacks against the services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prizes, provided by private
companies, will be awarded to the teams whose servers provide the highest
service level but also above a minimal threshold.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Together
with Nicholas Weaver (ICSI) and Anup Ghosh (GMU), the PI has created the
infrastructure required to run the competition, including the attacking and
scoring systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The funds requested would be used to
reimburse the expenses of graduate and undergraduate students participating in
the competition. The workshop is to take place on August 12-13, 2009 in
Montreal. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;