* 0939734
* Fueling the Geosciences Educational Pipeline: The development of a K-12 Network to Support Minority Participation
* GEO,GEO
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2011
* Karen McNeal, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 09/30/2011
* USD 39,828.00

This Opportunities for Enhancing Diversity in the Geosciences planning grant is
working to build a network of educators and administrators interested in
strengthening geoscience education at the K-12 level throughout the state of
Mississippi. A survey of Mississippi science teachers will establish a baseline
of teacher attitudes toward science and the level of interest in the geosciences
in the State of Mississippi. The survey will also help to identify those areas
of the geosciences that science teachers find most engaging or relevant, in
order to determine specific opportunities for K-12/University interaction during
a subsequent summer planning meeting. Select K-12 teachers and administrators
from 25 minority-serving school districts within a 100-mile radius of
Mississippi State University will attend a summer meeting with university
geoscience faculty members. The teams will develop geoscience-focused curriculum
ideas that best fit with state and national standards and their district's
existing science curriculum. In addition, the workshop will be used to explore
opportunities to utilize university research and facilities in appropriate
activities that can increase K-12 teacher interest and content knowledge in the
geosciences. Appropriate curricular materials will be identified and made
available through a website; the website will also facilitate participation of
teachers who could not attend the summer workshop in person.