* 0939063
* NUE: Integrated Approach to Environmentally Responsible Nanotechnology Education
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2013
* Peter Lelkes, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 12/31/2013
* USD 200,000.00

This NUE in Engineering program entitled, "NUE: Integrated Approach to
Environmentally Responsible Nanotechnology Education", at Drexel University
under the direction of Dr. Mira S. Olson, has as its goal to educate the next
generation of engineers to meet the challenge of developing modules for
predicting the potential impact of engineered nanomaterials on the environment
and human health. The specific objectives of this proposal are to: 1) Develop a
nanomaterials risk assessment framework for integration into an
interdisciplinary nanotechnology education program. 2) Integrate research
opportunities to environmental and health impacts of nanomaterials into the
undergraduate curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Direct impacts at Drexel include
a new university-wide undergraduate course entitled, Environmental and Health
Impacts of Nanotechnology targeting 25-30 students per year and intensive
research opportunities for 12 students in the College of Engineering the the
School of Biomedical Engineering, Science and Health Systems. Broader impacts
outside of Drexel focus on publishing lab materials and course modules developed
in this course, creating a central library for nanotechnology risk, introducing
course modules into the curriculum at two local community colleges, and
community outreach for inner-city middle school girls through the Drexel-
Blankenburg Science Fair Club for Girls.