* 0939552
* Iowa EPSCoR: Harnessing Energy Flows in the Biosphere to Build Sustainable Energy Systems
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Robert Brown, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Kelvin Chu
* 08/31/2010
* USD 200,000.00

Abstract

Proposal Number: EPS-0939552 Lead Institution: Iowa State University Project
Director: Robert C. Brown

Proposal Title: Iowa EPSCoR: Harnessing Energy Flows in the Biosphere to Build
Sustainable Energy Systems

Project Description The vision for the Iowa EPSCoR project is to build research
capacity within the state to support a transition in energy supply from mining
subsurface (fossil) energy stores to harnessing renewable energy flows at or
near the earth's surface. Inherent to this new energy paradigm is large-scale
interventions in the biosphere, which require a fundamental rethinking of the
interactions between human societies and the natural environment. If future
energy use is to be truly sustainable, then energy flows and processes must be
studied and managed from a holistic systems perspective that considers
technical, economic, social and environmental constraints and impacts. This
comprehensive program will enable innovative research, educate students, train a
clean-tech workforce and engage diverse communities in implementing
environmentally and economically sustainable solutions to growing energy
demands.

Intellectual Merit Through a coordinated planning effort, it is expected that
collaboration will increase between and among academic institutions in the State
of Iowa. The planning process will be used to develop collaborations among the
three public research institutions, (Iowa State University, University of Iowa,
Northern Iowa University), and one private college (Grinnell) and two community
colleges (Kirkwood Community College and Indian Hills Community College). The
planning committee represents major institutions across Iowa and this committee
will provide the leadership needed to successfully execute the elements outlined
for this project. The vision incorporates principles such as exploration of
innovations to concentrate, store, and distribute inherently diffuse and
intermittent renewable energy and recognition of three fundamental economies to
devise renewable energy paradigms, namely the financial economy, the energy
economy, and the carbon economy; which are subject to constraints of food
production, protection of wild spaces, and other land use priorities.

Broader Impacts By establishing closer relationships between and among Iowa?s
institutions of higher learning, this project will improve the educational
experience of science and technology students at all levels, and increase the
educational opportunities of under-represented groups. The results of these
efforts are expected to significantly increase the capabilities of Iowa?s
researchers to successfully compete federal and private sector research and
development funding.

The project seeks to foster partnerships between scientists, industry, and the
communities where the proposed technologies are to be deployed to assure
commercial adoption of renewable energy technologies and establish resilient
rural communities.

