* 0939080
* Workshop: NSF FIND Workshop
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2011
* David Clark, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Darleen L. Fisher
* 05/31/2011
* USD 49,931.00

This award funds a workshop for principal investigators (PIs) supported by
NetSE-FIND grants to meet, present their work, and facilitate future
collaboration by providing a workshop environment in which to identify important
open problems for future research. The NetSE-FIND programmatic area is
distinctive from many other NSF activities, both in its technical emphasis and
its approach to research. NetSE-FIND seeks to involve the research community in
a collective exploration of what the Internet of 15 years from now should be.
This effort requires a long-range perspective, the invention of new concepts not
fettered by the constraints of today?s networks, an understanding of the larger
social, economic and legal issues that arise from the interplay between the
Internet and society, and a willingness to collaborate on larger visions that
build on the ideas developed in individual research grants. Because of the value
that NetSE-FIND places on integration and collaboration, it is important that
PIs working on the parts of the program have opportunities to meet and discuss
objectives, approaches and opportunities. NetSE-FIND has held five prior
meetings for NetSE-FIND PIs, as well as others associated with this effort.

Intellectual merit The agenda of this workshop has been centered on exploring
the work that has been done in the NetSE-FIND programmatic area and the
identification and discussion of open questions?aspects of a future network that
are not yet being explored elsewhere. Investigators will present their work, and
a set of invited external observers will provide their impressions of the NetSE-
FIND activities to NSF. Through this process the research agenda can be
sharpened and focused on important issues.

Broader impact The workshop will further the objectives of the NetSE-FIND
activities, which is an important part of the NSF networking agenda. The
workshop will also allow investigators to discover opportunities for
collaboration and the incorporation of research results across different grants.
The slides from the presentations will be posted to the public FIND web site
www.nets-find.net, where present and potential NetSE-FIND participants can use
them to further their understanding of the NetSE-FIND effort.