* 0939089
* CPATH-2: Advancing the Successful IT Student through Enhanced Computational Thinking (ASSECT)
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Paula Velluto, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Continuing Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 08/31/2014
* USD 799,909.00

This CPATH award brings together community colleges and universities in five
regions including Bunker Hill Community College and University of Massachusetts
Boston in Massachusetts, Northern Virginia Community College and George Mason
University in Virginia, Ivy Tech Community College and Purdue University in
Indiana, Cameron University in Oklahoma and City College of San Francisco and
California State - Monterrey in California. The partners plan to revitalize
undergraduate computing education through new research that correlates
Computational Thinking (CT) with the new Information Technology Volume developed
by the Special Interest Group for Information Technology Education of the
Association for Computing Machinery to develop a CT framework for researching
and building instructional elements. This resulting product identifies core
computing concepts, methodologies, frameworks, and tools that may be applied
across a variety of institutions and inform teaching and learning in
undergraduate computing in a variety of environments. Each of the five
partnerships consists of a paired team comprised of a university and a community
college. The benefit of this arrangement is to ensure the focus is firmly set on
undergraduate computing and that the outcomes and findings of this project
develop core CT skills that improve matriculation and transfer from lower to
upper division IT and computer science programs.

Intellectual Merit: This project develops innovative instructional scenarios and
related assessments specifically aligned to develop and enhance CT outcomes for
lower division computing students. The project partners will develop
instructional elements and techniques that not only impart cognitive knowledge
but that also pose authentic situations for students wherein CT attributes can
be developed and demonstrated. In order to differentiate between cognitive
knowledge gains and improvement in CT skills, faculty working with the treatment
groups will develop enhanced student assessments using Principled Assessment
Design for Inquiry which produces evidence-centered assessment design. An
excellent team has been assembled to lead this project which has the potential
to produce new disciplinary foundations and serve as a model for computing for
the future.

Broader Impacts: In explicitly including lower division and community college IT
courses in computational thinking frameworks, this proposal breaks new ground.
The project is to be disseminated to a broad audience covering the spectrum of
undergraduate computing education and broadening participation organization.
Each regional partner has additional regional dissemination foci, and the team
is particularly interested in national dissemination of the results obtained
through the pedagogical approaches investigated in this work, particularly as
they may inform others with an interest in improving matriculation and transfer
from lower to upper division IT programs. The models and results from the
project thus have the potential to reach a diverse set of institutions with
different student populations and thus provide pathways for preparing computing
students for the workforce of the future.