* 0939565
* Increasing Indigenous Use of Scientific and Traditional Knowledge in  Resource Management and Policy in the Arctic
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2010
* David Gordon, Pacific Environment and Resources Center
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 08/31/2010
* USD 34,255.00

&lt;br/&gt;This project will support the participation of Arctic indigenous
peoples at the annual Sosnovka Coalition Meeting in October 2009. The Sosnovka
conference brings together international scientists, environmental advocates,
and Russian policy makers to discuss the effects of governmental policy on
indigenous environments and resources. This project will bring a larger and more
diverse group of indigenous people, Buryat, Chukchi, Evenk, Itelmen, Sakha, Shor
and Udege people to the conference. Many of the members of these cultural groups
have been strongly involved in projects through Pacific Environment, an NGO that
focuses on governance and the environment in Russia, that incorporate scientific
and traditional knowledge into public policy and governance; and although some
of the participants are not geographically Arctic, the participation of the
southern Siberian people, Buryat, Shor, Sakha and Udege, with northern Siberian
peoples, Chukchi, Evenk, and Itelmen in this conference will facilitate the
sharing of knowledge and training. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the goals of the
Arctic Social Sciences Program is to engage communities in science and equally
important is to engage scientists in the issues that are of most concern to
Arctic communities. The Sosnovka Coalition conference is very much an applied
science conference, it brings together science and community members, along with
policy makers, to discuss their mutual interests - how they can provide the best
knowledge (scientific and traditional) to policy makers when decisions are of
critical importance to the concerns of communities, such as: natural resource
development, fishing and hunting regulations, economic development plans,
transportation corridors, etc. These decisions have the potential to affect
indigenous lifeways in the Arctic, as well as other regions in Russia, and thus
are of greatest concern to rural residents. The Sosnovka conference is a space
where communities can learn how to bring the best information to the policy
table; how to make the most cogent argument on behalf of indigenous community
interests; and how to partner with scientists in this process. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project is notable through the collaboration of scientists and
indigenous knowledge scholars in the conference dialog on issues of wildlife
habitat, environmental policy, indigenous management regimes, and resource
development strategies. In addition bringing the voices of under-respresented
groups to the table with scientists to inform public policy decisions is an
important science goal. In addition, the project will bring 5 young indigenous
leaders to participate and develop the Young Sosnovka program to entrain the
next generation of scientists and environmentalist and encourage a model of
public policy based on good scientific data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of
the Sosnovka project will be disseminated broadly through letters, web sites and
listserves of NGOs, scientists, scientific and indigenous organizations, and
others, including the national press. This dissemination plan adds to the
broader impacts of the project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;