* 0939511
* NSF Science and Technology Center: Emergent Behaviors of Integrated Cellular Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2022
* Melissa Kemp, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Cooperative Agreement
* Sohi Rastegar
* 08/31/2022
* USD 47,925,511.00

The STC on Emergent Behavior of Integrated Cellular Systems (EBICS) will develop
the science and technology needed to engineer clusters of living cells (also
called biological machines) that have desired functionalities and can perform
prescribed tasks. These machines will consist of sensing, information
processing, actuation, protein expression, and transport elements that can be
effectively combined to create functional units. It is envisioned that these
biological machines will perform tasks such as processing systems that detect
toxins in the environment and neutralize them; smart plants that sense and
respond to the need for water and nutrients, surrogate organs that are used in
place of animals to test new drugs; and biological factories that sequester CO2
in a continuous flow process. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit of the proposed STC
lies in the realization of the field of engineered biological systems that seeks
to understand how cell systems interact to produce coordinated, emergent
behavior under the control of local micro-environmental cues consisting of
biochemical factors and physical stimuli. Recently, much attention has focused
on research into the creation of single-cell machines or factories. While such
uni-cellular machines hold enormous promise, the potential impact of multi-
cellular systems that incorporate populations of specialized cells assembled
into a single integrated unit is far greater. New insights and understanding
into cell-cell and cell-matrix interactions are critical to attaining this goal,
and this will require new technological platforms to bridge molecular scale
interactions with macroscale behavior of complex biological systems. The
proposed research direction is truly transformative and revolutionary at the
interface of science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of
EBICS include the potential to significantly enhance the understanding of
emergent biological behaviors under integrated biochemical and physical cues at
the cellular, cell network, and cell population levels; and an outreach and
knowledge transfer program that will attract more young students into science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM), and particularly into the
interdisciplinary field between biology and engineering. The center, through its
alliance with minority serving institutions and active collaborative research
plans with those institutions will improve the participation of underrepresented
minorities in STEM. The EBICS education plan includes a two-track, integrated
graduate program that effectively merges the essential sciences and technologies
needed, a graduate teaching consortium to offer a selection of courses
synchronously in all partnering institutions via the internet, and international
experiences by internships. Graduate courses developed by EBICS will be recorded
and made widely and freely accessible through OpenCourseWare. The novel and
revolutionary nature of the research will attract the best and the brightest
students into this program and strengthen the future US workforce?s
competitiveness in a global economy. Applications based on the Center?s
potential discoveries will have direct impact on critical national needs such as
energy, the environment, security, and healthcare. The vision of the proposed
STC is clearly aligned with the national research and education strategic
priorities.