* 0939403
* RAPID:   Is postfire recruitment of chaparral shrubs constrained by local adaptation to soils (serpentine vs sandstone) or microclimates (north vs south slopes)?
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2010
* Nishanta Rajakaruna, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 06/30/2010
* USD 30,000.00

Fire plays a key role in the ecology of chaparral, or evergreen shrublands, an
ecosystem unique to the five Mediterranean-climate regions of the world
including California. Seeds of many chaparral plants germinate only in the year
after a fire, and so the age, reproduction, dispersal potential, and community
composition of chaparral plants are controlled by the infrequent occurrence of
fire, typically once every 1-10 decades. Prescribed burns are seldom possible in
Californian chaparral. What research has been done on the fire ecology of this
ecosystem has been largely opportunistic, taking advantage of naturally
occurring fires. More than 5,000 hectares of accessible public lands burned in
2008, creating a rare opportunity to examine whether three dominant chaparral
shrub species are locally adapted to the sites on which they are found. Tests
will be performed to determine if regeneration occurs only from seed produced on
particular soil types (sandstone or serpentine) or on particular slope types
(warm south-facing or cool north-facing), or whether seed produced in a
particular habitat can successfully germinate and establish in other soil types
or on slopes with different aspects. Results from this study will provide
additional information for science-based management of chaparral ecosystems.
This information will contribute to both the restoration of degraded chaparral
and to the ability of resource managers to predict and plan for shifts in
species distributions in response to climate change.