* 0939455
* EAGER:  Do Air Pollutants Modify the Strength and Quality of Floral Scents?
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Jose Fuentes, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 06/30/2012
* USD 161,427.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chemical signals consisting of volatile
organic compounds emitted by plants play important roles in ecological
interactions and atmospheric chemistry. Recently, it was hypothesized that such
interactions may be perturbed by air pollution: In polluted air masses, floral
scents are destroyed by chemical reactions and therefore travel less far than in
clean air, which may alter the pollination patterns of flowering plants. This
project involves laboratory and field experiments to explore which scent-
mediated interactions are likely to be affected by pollutants. Floral scents and
products arising from their reactions with ozone, hydroxyl radical, and nitrate
radical are being investigated in the laboratory to learn their chemical and
scent attributes. Olfactory responses of pollinators to threshold amounts of
individual compounds and mixtures are also being quantified through laboratory
studies. In the field, spatio-temporal variations in olfactory signals within
and above alfalfa plant canopies will be investigated in situ at the Penn State
University Entomology Farm where alfalfa will be grown during the 2010 growing
season. Alfalfa flowers will be studied for their volatile emissions. Honey bees
and alfalfa leaf cutter bees will be used in the scent-insect interaction
studies. The anticipated results will indicate whether the ambient "blend
composition" of parent floral scents and reaction products exist in the
threshold amounts necessary to stimulate a response by
pollinators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This exploratory research will provide crucial
information that ecologists, agronomists, and atmospheric scientists can utilize
to develop broader studies to assess the impacts of airborne pollution on
pollination of flowering plants. Data sets will be used to develop and update
numerical models to estimate the effective distances traveled by floral plumes
away from sources. With the view to enhance diversity in ecology and atmospheric
sciences, at least one minority student will be recruited to participate in all
facets of the research.