* 0940417
* CDI Type I: Real-time adaptive imaging algorithms for atomic force microscopy
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2013
* Andrea Bertozzi, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 12/31/2013
* USD 632,000.00

AWARD

Proposal Title: Real-time adaptive imaging algorithms for atomic force
microscopy Principal Investigator: Bertozzi, Andrea Institution: University of
California-Los Angeles Proposal No: 0940417

This research project forges an interdisciplinary intellectual partnership
between UCLAs Applied Mathematics program and Lawrence Berkeley Laboratorys
Molecular Foundry, with the goal of designing transformative computation-based
methods for real-time data acquisition and analysis in atomic force microscopy
(AFM). The work combines expertise in (a) high-precision AFM instrumentation for
imaging and force spectroscopy experiments, (b) the pioneering use of AFM to
investigate the dynamics of oxidation, crystallization, and assembly of
inorganic and macromolecular systems with (c) advanced algorithms for real-time
mobile data acquisition and state-of-the-art image processing algorithms.

The research focuses on two case studies: Potassium bromide oxidation, an
important process in understanding tropospheric chemistry, and S-layer protein
array formation on lipid bilayers, an in vitro model of microbial membrane
development. Both problems have dynamic behavior on a time-scale too fast for
current AFM imaging technologies. The work involves state-of-the-art algorithm
development involving compressive sensing, image inpainting, image segmentation
and deblurring, combined with real-time tip steering using ideas from recent
work in control theory and mobile sensors. In addition, to the new algorithm
development, the project addresses new scientific results for the example
problems, and a modular software package for control of the AFM sensor that
could be adapted for diverse AFM imaging applications.

The research program involves the training of two graduate students, one in
mathematics and one in microscopy, in cutting-edge interdisciplinary science.
Additionally, undergraduate students are involved in algorithm software and
hardware implementation. The impact on science is profound namely the ability to
observe biological and chemical processes at higher speeds at the level of
detail of AFM and to further increase the resolution and imaging power of
existing AFM hardware technologies, through software and control methodologies.
The Molecular Foundry is a user facility providing support to nanoscience
researchers in academic, government and industrial laboratories around the
world. Thus, advances made through this research program have an immediate user
audience through the many researchers visiting the Foundry. Technology developed
under this research program is also disseminated to commercial AFM
manufacturers.