* 0940658
* Conservation Paleobiology in the Coming Decades; Ithaca, NY; September 25-26, 2009
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2009,09/30/2012
* Gregory Dietl, Paleontological Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 09/30/2012
* USD 29,624.00

Conservation Paleobiology in the Coming Decades Greg Dietl Paleontological
Research Institute EAR-0940658

Abstract:

Conservation paleobiology is a new, socially relevant subdiscipline in
paleontology that applies geohistorical data and analyses to current problems
related to conservation biology and human-induced environmental change. This new
field is part of a growing awareness that cross-disciplinary team efforts are
necessary to solve complex scientific problems facing humanity. This proposal
seeks support for a workshop that would attempt to refine the scope and content
of conservation paleobiology and explore how it can fulfill its
interdisciplinary potential. In particular, the workshop, Conservation
Paleobiology in the Coming Decades (CPCD), is designed to identify the
infrastructural needs that will best facilitate disciplinary and cross-
disciplinary research directed towards understanding how societal activities
have impinged on the natural world. The CPCD workshop will be held later this
year at the Paleontological Research Institution, Ithaca, NY. A final report
will be prepared outlining the recommendations of the steering committee, which
summarizes the ideas generated during the workshop. This endeavor has promise to
change the way we address challenges as a community rather than only as
individual researchers, thus potentially establishing this new field as
inherently interdisciplinary at the outset.