* 0940545
* G2CS - Girls Gather for Computer Science. Developing a modular summer day camp to introduce girls to computer science, with female scientists and industry professionals as leaders.
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2014
* Jeffrey Barlow, Pacific University
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cuny
* 03/31/2014
* USD 554,248.00

Pacific University proposes to engage girls in computing with a multifaceted,
modular pedagogical strategy that focuses on women computer scientists as
leaders. The approach will feature a four-week long computer science summer camp
for 7th and 8th grade girls - G2CS (Girls Gather for Computer Science) - with
original curriculum that utilizes active learning and focuses on computational
thinking, a mentoring program, a multi-media approach and interactive web site,
as well as a ten-year commitment to the students involved. Using female computer
science leaders as instructors and removing students from their usual
surroundings and preoccupations free young women to concentrate on the science,
and imagine themselves as scientists. The camp will run for three years and
systematic follow-on activities within electronic environments will create an
ongoing community of students, their families, mentors and teachers as well as
partners. The focus in this particular project is on overcoming the lack of
young women in computer science, though its approach would be suitable for use
in a variety of scientific fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is a
partnership between Pacific University and Oregon's nationally recognized public
broadcasting station, Oregon Public Broadcasting (OPB). Other partners include
the Berglund Center for Internet Studies at Pacific, the Intel Corporation, the
educational media company Flying Rhinoceros, Vernier Software &amp; Technology,
leaders from tribal groups, local Latino community representatives, and local
school district heads. The outcomes of the project include video coverage of the
camp, featuring young scientists and their mentors at work, game-like
"interactives" for the camp web site, and a broad collection of media tools.