* 0940226
* Airborne Imaging Spectrometer, Spectrometer Algorithm Development, and Spectrometer Components
* BIO,EF
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Michele Kuester, National Ecological Observatory Network, Inc
* Cooperative Agreement
* Elizabeth Blood
* 09/30/2013
* USD 9,962,780.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The biosphere is experiencing a period
of unprecedented change. The biosphere is responding to multiple drivers of
change simultaneously operating over scales from the individual organism (e.g.
invasive species), region (e.g. landuse change) to the globe (e.g. climate
change). Our fundamental understanding of the effects of climate and landuse
change, and invasive species on the biosphere have largely been formed through
the study of the properties and processes of living systems at scales from
individual organisms to watersheds. But the most compelling scientific questions
about the biosphere involve events at larger scales, from landscapes to
continents. Understanding these co-occurring processes and responses has been
hampered by the lack of an instrument platform that has the capabilities to
measure the structure, composition, processes, and dynamics of the biosphere
from sub-meter to regional scales, regional scales to the continent, and
continental to global. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funds from this award will provide
a vital new tool to understanding the biosphere at these critical scales. The
award will provide funds to fabricate and test a ?state-of-the-art? Airborne
Imaging Spectrometer, develop initial data algorithms to interpret spectra, and
purchase long lead components for two additional spectrometers. The Imaging
Spectrometer is a new design that will provide remote sensing data of land cover
and land use, plant biochemistry and biophysical properties, and detection of
invasive plant species at the sampling resolution and spectral sensing range not
available in spectrometers today. Both the spectrometer precision and spectral
range will permit analyses of biological phenomena not possible using the
existing technology available to the research community and provide the
intermediate-scale measurements necessary to scale from in situ measurements to
continental scale satellite remote sensing. The proposed spectrometer
performance characteristics will make significant advances over existing
satellite and airborne spectrometers and these capabilities will transform the
field of remote sensing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The data will contribute to an
innovative multi-disciplinary approach to educate undergraduate and graduate
students, the public, and policy-making individuals about landuse change and
environmental concerns. The data will aid visualizing and understanding complex
information about the spatial relationships between ecological conditions and
processes and the environment and aid in a better understanding of land use
decisions on regional scales. Such spatial images are often more intuitive to
interpret (e.g., detailed spatial maps and distributions of environmental
changes) than other forms of information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;