* 0940201
* RDE-FRI: Supporting Math Access for Middle and High School Blind Students Through Adaptive Math Tutoring Technology (STEM Access)
* EDU,EES
* 04/01/2009,07/31/2010
* Carole Beal, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 07/31/2010
* USD 135,600.00

The project RDE-FRI: Supporting Math Access for Middle and High School Blind
Students Through Adaptive Math Tutoring Technology (STEMAccess) is a 24-month,
$300,000 dollar award funded by the Research in Disabilities Education (RDE)
program's Focused Research Initiatives (FRI) track. The primary goal of this
project is to address the relatively poor math achievement of middle and high
school students who are blind and who have the academic ability to participate
in STEM fields. This goal is addressed through a series of experiments to study
three (3) primary objectives: The investigation of math problem solving
cognitive processes in blind students with a focus on characteristics of word
problems associated with successful problem representation; the evaluation of
the contribution of mathematics motivation to math learning in blind students
with a focus on self-regulated behaviors such as help-seeking and persistence;
and the adaptation of technology-based instruction to help improve math problem
solving in blind students. This project builds on the prior success of the PI's
current and previous work on the cognitive and motivational outcomes of tutoring
technology for non-disabled students in mathematics that was funded by NSF
(DRL-0411886) and the US Education Department's Institute of Educational
Sciences (R305K050086).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This highly experienced team from
the University of Southern California (USC), which is lead by an expert research
psychologist, is conducting three (3) experiments with blind middle and high
school students using quasi-experimental designs to compare the mathematics
performance of the blind students to each other and to the mathematics
performance of sighted students. The experiments involve 60 middle and high
school students who are blind and recruited through an existing partnership with
the Los Angeles Unified School District's (LAUSD) Program for Students with
Visual Impairments. The data for the sighted students includes comparison data
from 60 sighted peers as well as using an existing dataset with performance data
from over 500 sighted student subjects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
primarily addresses one (1) of the FRI track goals: To investigate effective
instructional methods and practices for people with disabilities in STEM. There
is a formative and summative project evaluation plan being conducted by an
experienced independent external evaluator, Valerie Shute, from Florida State
University. Additional formative project input is provided by a team of expert
advisors who are experienced in STEM education for blind students, spatial
cognition and working memory, and the use of technologies for learning. There is
also a dissemination plan which includes sharing information with the RDE
community and publishing in peer-reviewed professional journals.