* 0940744
* Collaborative proposal: The political and Security Impacts of Abrupt Climate Change on Modern Populations: An Integrated Computational Model
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2010,05/31/2016
* John Orbell, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 05/31/2016
* USD 906,609.00

Since the 1970s, climate scientists have developed increasingly sophisticated
models of the world climate system. These models are converging on predictions
about climate changes that are likely to occur in coming decades. Such changes
are certain to provoke human responses and many commentators have suggested what
those responses are likely to be in particular parts of the world. Nevertheless,
human populations are complex systems in which changes in one part of the system
can have significant consequences for other, perhaps quite remote, parts of the
system - meaning that human responses to climate change must also be studied as
processes in a complex system involving, potentially at least, all human
societies. To date, however, the social sciences have not produced models of
large scale human population systems that integrate predictions from climate
models. One reason for this neglect may be that such work requires knowledge not
only of the basic principles of human behavior and the techniques for modeling
it, but also of (1) current climate models; (2) geographic information systems
(GIS) which provide a means for organizing geographic data worldwide, including
human population data; (3) statistical techniques for analyzing the large
amounts of data produced from population simulations; and (4) actual human
responses to climate changes both in the recent past (e.g., Darfur) and in the
more remote past (e.g., ancient Maya). Accordingly, the present project includes
two political scientists with background in behavioral modeling; a climatologist
who has worked extensively on climate modeling; an expert in geographic
information systems; an expert in applied mathematics and statistics; and an
archaeologist. Initial steps toward the behavioral model will be tested against
known cases of climate change in the recent past (e.g. Darfur) and the more
remote past (e.g., the Mayan collapse). To the extent predictions from the
developing model do not match known human responses in such cases, its
parameters will be adjusted - and, subsequently, tested against further such
cases.

Archaeological evidence shows that climate change has undermined many
civilizations in the past but also that the climate changes per se were often
less damaging than the human responses to those changes - including mass
migration and armed conflict. In the interdependent modern world, human
responses to climate changes have the potential to ripple well beyond an
immediately affected area, and responses to such changes in different and
perhaps quite remote areas might interact in negative ways. Thus, well developed
models of likely human responses to expected climate changes - including abrupt
changes - will allow policy makers to anticipate not only local consequences of
local climate changes, but also geographically perhaps quite remote
consequences. The project takes initial steps toward more fully developed models
of human responses to climate change, just as early climate models can now be
seen as initial steps toward the more fully developed climate models that
presently exist.