* 0940479
* CAREER:  Creating tools for the analysis of microbial glycosylation using chemical biology
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2009,03/31/2012
* Lara Mahal, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 03/31/2012
* USD 357,345.00

With the support of the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program in the
Chemistry Division, Professor Lara K. Mahal of the University of Texas- Austin
will develop lectin-based microarrays for rapid identification of microbial
lectins. Traditional methods such as HPLC, and capillary electrophoresis are
tedious, laborious, and not particularly efficient in analyzing the carbohydrate
constituents, and thus an array-based system would be a welcomed and important
contribution to the field. Professor Mahal's work has three main objectives: 1)
to create new analytical tools for the study of microbial glycosylation using
interdisciplinary research methodology, 2) to increase science interest and the
retention of scientists by creating a dynamic, web-based role model network and
3) to improve training at the chemistry/biology interface at the University of
Texas at Austin. The first objective will involve the expansion of her lectin
microarray technology for the study of microbial glycosylation. Lectins are
carbohydrate-binding proteins that have been used in glycan analysis for
decades. The analytical capacity of the array will be enhanced through the
cloning and directed evolution, using synthetic carbohydrate antigens, of a
panel of microbial-derived lectins to create novel carbohydrate-binding
proteins. For the second objective Professor Mahal will create a unique
mentoring website, Projectscientists.com. This website will consist of profiles
of working scientists, associated monthly weblogs by the scientists, and a
commentary section for users to post questions and comments. This will help
young people to gain insight into the lives of working scientists and provide an
interactive network of role models. For the third objective, a chemical biology
upper division undergraduate/graduate course at the University of Texas- Austin
will be created. And, integration of biochemical course material in
undergraduate organic chemistry and undergraduate and graduate interdisciplinary
research projects will be integrated into her laboratory.

With the support of this CAREER award from the Organic and Macromolecular
Chemistry Program, Professor Mahal's work will extend the analytical capacity of
the lectin microarray via the cloning and evolution of discrete carbohydrate-
binding domains, providing a unique and much needed tool for the rapid analysis
of cell surface glycans in both microbial and non-microbial systems. In addition
to providing new analytical tools for study of microbial glycans, the research
and teaching described presents an ideal opportunity for the cross-disciplinary
training of students in both chemical and biological methodology, an integrated
skill set of increasing value within the scientific community. In addition, the
website Projectscientists.blogspot.com will aid in the retention of students in
science by providing contemporary and accessible role models and insight into
life as a scientist to those at the beginnings of their careers. Integration of
the website into the Women in Natural Sciences Freshman Interest Group curricula
will provide outreach and career guidance to early stage female scientists.