* 0940844
* "Modern Challenges in Nonlinear Plasma Physics" Conference 2009; Sani, Halkidiki, Greece
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2010
* Dimitrios Vassiliadis, Sarissa, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kile B. Baker
* 08/31/2010
* USD 7,000.00

The "Modern Challenges in Nonlinear Plasma Physics" Conference 2009 will provide
a forum for discussing progress in plasma physics research, with specific
emphasis on geospace, solar, and laboratory plasma physics. While focused
research topics will be covered (such as Coronal Mass Ejections, structures
developed in edge turbulence, and so forth), emphasis will be placed on
interdisciplinary questions (such as reconnection growth rate as a function of
dimensionless parameters, the qualitative effects of a guide field on
reconnection, properties of shocks or solitons, etc.). In this 2009 conference,
these interdisciplinary topics will be the focus of a large number of attending
theorists and experimentalists.

This conference will expose younger scientists, students, and postdocs to
exciting current topics in nonlinear plasma physics. Introductory talks in
particular subdisciplines will be followed by a large number of invited review
talks on specialized topics. Junior scientists will present their own work
(mostly in poster form) in two separate sessions. After the conference adjourns,
a brief summary will be submitted for publication in an academic newsletter and
a record of the presentations will be made available online as part of the
conference's website. In addition, a Conference Proceedings volume will be
published.