* 0940804
* The Distribution and Social Impact of Mortgage Foreclosures in the United States
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2010
* Andrew Beveridge, CUNY Queens College
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 05/31/2010
* USD 144,995.00

SES-0937219 Andrew A. Beveridge Elena Vesselinov CUNY Queens College

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

This project focuses on understanding the impact of foreclosures on
neighborhoods in the United States. We address two sets of research questions:
1) Which neighborhoods, communities, and metropolitan areas have been hit
hardest by the foreclosure crisis? and 2) How does neighborhood racial, ethnic
and economic composition affect the impact of foreclosures? Three theoretical
models will help us interpret the results of our research: the place
stratification model; the spatial assimilation model; and the ethnic community
model. The expectations based on the place stratification model are that the
neighborhoods of African Americans, as well as other minorities who are darker
complexioned, including some Latinos, immigrants from the Caribbean and some
from South Asia, will be hit the hardest by the foreclosure crisis. Following
the spatial assimilation model, we expect that the neighborhoods of minorities
of higher socio-economic status will be as affected as neighborhoods of whites
of similar socio-economic status. Finally, the ethnic community model posits
that the neighborhoods of better off minorities will be less affected than the
neighborhoods of comparable whites.

The project is based on a unique dataset constructed for our specific aims, with
georeferenced information for all foreclosures in the United States, which will
define the foreclosure patterns. To analyze them we are combining the
foreclosure information with data from the 2000 Census, as well as data from the
2005 through 2008 American Community Surveys, and data from the 2000 through
2008 Home Mortgage Disclosure Act filings. The significance and the broader
impact of this project are two-fold. First, we will be able to determine and
examine the social characteristics of neighborhoods that have been hardest hit
by the foreclosure crisis throughout the United States. Second, we will make the
foreclosure maps and some of the foreclosure data available to the public
through Social Explorer (www.socialexplorer.com), a popular demographics website
through which visitors made more than 2.8 million maps and over 250,000 reports
in the last year.