* 0940495
* BPC-AE: Collaborative Research: Extending "Georgia Computes!": A Statewide Vertical Alliance to Broaden Participation through Innovative, Inviting, and Relevant Computing Education
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Wayne Summers, Columbus State University
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cuny
* 08/31/2011
* USD 121,329.00

The Georgia Institute of Technology in collaboration with Columbus State
University proposes an extension to the "Georgia Computes!" Alliance. Georgia
Computes! has made dramatic strides in improving computing education throughout
the state, at all levels of the pipeline. Its efforts start at 4th grade with
summer camps, and continue through middle school with camps and outreach with
the Girl Scouts, YWCA, and Cool Girls, extend to high school with camps and
teacher professional development, and end in undergraduate education with
faculty workshops. Georgia Computes! successes include exponential growth in the
number of Girl Scouts taking their computing workshops, the creation of eight
new regional summer computing camps, a doubling of the number of institutions
offering Advanced Placement Computer Science (APCS), a doubling of the number of
Hispanic students taking the APCS exam, and change at a quarter of the computing
programs in the University System of Georgia. With this Extension, they propose
to scale, and broaden their alliance interventions. Georgia Computes! will grow
its teacher education efforts to include two regional centers of expertise, at
Columbus State and at Armstrong Atlantic State University. In order to offer
inservice workshops throughout the state, it will develop on-line materials,
including courses that provide on-line access to Georgia's new computer science
teaching endorsement. Georgia Computes! will grow its already successful K-12
outreach efforts to help students to develop a broader definition of computing.
It will use more diverse student mentors, including high school students and
disabled undergraduate students. Most importantly, this Extension will create
infrastructure for careful measurement of individual university computing
programs in the state and to track individuals from workshops and camps, through
high school classes, to university degrees.