* 0940632
* BPC-DP: Let's CONNECT!
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2015
* Tracy Camp, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cuny
* 03/31/2015
* USD 598,604.00

The Colorado School of Mines proposes a project to develop CONNECT (Creating
Open Networks aNd Expanding Connections with Technology), a tool that provides
networking assistance for attendees of conferences aimed at broadening
participation. Attendees at such conferences as the Grace Hopper Celebration of
Women in Computing, the Richard Tapia Celebration of Diversity in Computing, and
the Colorado Celebration of Women in Computing, for example, consistently state
that networking is an extremely valuable component of the conference.
Professional networking is particularly important to underrepresented
populations, as barriers to participation include a lack of mentors and the
feeling of isolation that one doesn't belong. CONNECT uses technology to help
BPC conference attendees develop a support network at the conference and, more
importantly, sustain those connections after the conference ends. With CONNECT,
attendees of a conference set networking goals prior to the event. Then, when
two (or more) people want to CONNECT and exchange contact information,
conference badges are scanned. CONNECT attendees also receive networking tips, a
daily progress email that details which of their networking goals are being met,
and suggestions on the types of people to try and meet the next day. At the end
of the conference, contact information of the connections made by an attendee is
shared. Feedback from an initial pilot of the system will be used to
significantly improve upon the CONNECT system, adding, for example, the
development of stationary CONNECT stations that do not require personnel to
oversee, the ability to make a connection by transmitting a text message from a
cell phone, which avoids the need to scan badges, the integration of connections
with other social network systems, a face-to-face mentoring opportunity at the
conference venue, a networking game component that can be used as an icebreaker,
and the facilitation of forming BPC communities of individuals that share common
interests. The CONNECT system will be deployed and evaluated at several
different types of BPC conferences and meetings.