* 0940575
* BPC-LSA: Scaling and Adapting Computing Alliance of Hispanic-Serving Institutions (CAHSI) Initiatives
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2014
* Rocio Guillen-Castrillo, Miami Dade College
* Continuing Grant
* Janice Cuny
* 01/31/2014
* USD 970,219.00

Miami Dade College, California State University San Marco, and the University of
Texas Pan-American propose a program-called SACI for "Scaling and Adapting
Computing Alliance of Hispanic-Serving Institutions (CAHSI) Inititatives" which
will join with CAHSI and apply CAHSI best practices to advance student success
among Hispanics and other groups underrepresented in computing fields. CAHSI is
an NSF-funded Alliance with seven universities that has developed and
demonstrated the effectiveness of a series of initiatives. The SACI partners
will adapt five CAHSI strategies: (1) a new introductory course designed to
attract students and prepare them for majors in computing fields, (2) a peer-led
team learning structure, to provide academic support and motivation for students
to persist in computing disciplines, (3) an affinity research group model, to
promote undergraduate retention through early research experiences and prepare
students for success in upper-division and graduate studies, (4) faculty and
peer mentoring, to improve student retention and success, and (5) outreach
workshops, to stimulate interest in computing careers among high school and
undergraduate students and to disseminate project research and evaluation
findings. SACI will join CAHSI, significantly extending the Alliance and its
impact, and leveraging the Alliance's educational and research strengths; SACI
will participate in the CAHSI Alliance-wide evaluation.