* 0940671
* CDI-Type II: Integrating Algorithmic and Stochastic Modeling Techniques for Environmental Prediction
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Xuanlong Nguyen, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2015
* USD 1,591,869.00

Predicting biodiversity, i.e., abundance of species, in response to climate
change is a goal of environmental change research. Despite recent valuable
advances in understanding biodiversity and climate, the current grasp is
limited. There are two widely recognized obstacles: first, because of the
complexity of the underlying processes, the existing models intended for
understanding and prediction are not (computationally) scalable. Second, the
coarse-scale environment models fail to capture interactions among species,
which control biodiversity, and the models based on fine-scale, short-term
observations are unable to make long-term predictions. This project aims to
develop a prediction framework that coherently combines broad-scale pattern data
with fine-scale data on species interactions and that is computationally
scalable. It focuses on prediction at the geographic scale and in using
geographic-scale data to better understanding at the scales where species
interactions occur.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal is to develop a multiscale
modeling framework and to design algorithms that make environmental models
computationally scalable. The approach hinges upon strong interplay of
algorithmic and statistical techniques. Statistical inference brings stochastic
modeling sophistication in space and time, yielding improved characterization of
the process and the possibility of full inference. Sophisticated algorithms make
models and processes scalable and provide trade-offs between accuracy and
efficiency. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project draws on a wide range of topics in
computer science and statistics, including geometric algorithms, approximation
algorithms, hierarchical specifications within a Bayesian framework, and space-
time process modeling. The problem areas address in the proposed prototypical
example indicate more broadly applicable consequential challenges for both
computer science and statistics. These include maintaining/updating
distributions and summaries, dynamic algorithms, data driven algorithms,
stochastic optimization, and assessing uncertainty and multi-scale nonlinear
interactions in inference. Techniques for obtaining trade-offs between
conflicting goals are needed in order to optimize the overall performance of the
model.