* 0940604
* BCP-LSA: After-School Apprenticeships
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2013
* Eric Schwarz, Citizen Schools
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 01/31/2013
* USD 1,000,000.00

Citizen Schools proposes to engage 5,700 disadvantaged middle school students in
hands-on computing and related STEM projects across its 7-state network of
after-school and extended learning programs. By working side-by-side with
professionals and graduate students from information technology and other
scientific fields, middle school students will realize a connection between
their after-school computing apprenticeships and the college and career
opportunities to which they can aspire. In the 11-week apprenticeship courses
offered within existing Citizen Schools after-school programs, middle school
students will create authentic projects that develop a combination of hard and
soft skills. Students will build relationships with the adult volunteers who
will lead their apprenticeship courses, and these volunteers will speak credibly
to students, sharing with them career opportunities in the computing and STEM
fields and discussing the academic preparation necessary to pursue them. As a
result, disadvantaged middle school students will be more likely to enroll in
challenging courses when they enter high school, to better prepare for college,
and ultimately to pursue careers in computing and other scientific fields. The
project will include four types of apprenticeships: Programming in Computer Game
Design, Programming in Robotics, Web Design and Web Related Projects, and
Apprenticeships in Astronomy, Solar Energy, Biotechnology, Engineering, and
other STEM fields. The project will be evaluated based on pre-post assessments
of students? interest in pursuing computing and STEM careers, their
understanding of the educational requirements for entry and advancement in those
fields, and their sense of efficacy in their ability to attain college admission
and career opportunity.