* 0940912
* Symposium:  The Ecological Genomics Symposium, Kansas State University, November 13-15, 2009, at the Downtown Marriott, Kansas City, Missouri
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2011
* Loretta Johnson, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 08/31/2011
* USD 23,470.00

A comprehensive understanding of how organisms genetically respond to changing
ecological and environmental conditions is one of the most challenging questions
currently facing modern biological research and is the focus of the field of
Ecological Genomics. This project aims to advance the field of ecological
genomics through support of the seventh annual Ecological Genomics Symposium to
be hosted by the Kansas State University from the 13th to the 15th of November
2009, in Kansas City, Missouri. This symposium provides the only annual forum
for the dissemination of the rapidly advancing and diverse research in
ecological genomics in the world. Therefore, this symposium provides an
essential venue for exchanging scientific information from diverse disciplines
and fostering novel research directions that can lead to important discoveries.
The project will specifically support travel and lodging costs for nine speakers
and seven student fellowships. The scientists that will speak at the symposium
include established and emerging leaders of the field that represent both
scientific and cultural diversity. The student fellowships will support young
scientists working in ecological genomics. These fellowships will be targeted to
support individuals from historically underrepresented groups in science. The
meeting is designed around a single set of non-overlapping invited talks over a
two-day period so there is ample opportunity to cultivate interactions among the
participants.