* 0940956
* Linguistic Anthropological Description and Analysis of Ban Khor Sign Language
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2009,01/31/2014
* Angela Nonaka, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 01/31/2014
* USD 256,591.00

This research project, directed by PI Angela Nonaka, is the US portion of a
larger international collaboration that was conceived under the European Science
Foundation's EUROCORES Programme, EuroBABEL. The full EuroBABEL project will
study endangered sign languages in village communities, and involves a
collaboration of researchers from five countries, including the U.S., the United
Kingdom, Germany, the Netherlands, and Israel. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The U.S.
project undertakes the linguistic anthropological documentation, description,
and comparative analysis of Ban Khor Sign Language (BKSL), a language isolate
used only in the village of Ban Khor, Thailand. BKSL is an 'indigenous' or
'village' sign language -- a language variety that spontaneously develops in
small communities with large numbers of deaf people; labor-intensive economies;
low intra-community educational and occupational differentiation between deaf
and hearing people; and relatively positive attitudes toward sign language and
deafness. This unusual language ecology currently distinguishes
indigenous/village sign languages from other types of sign languages, e.g.,
'national' or 'original' varieties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Little is known about
the characteristic linguistic features of indigenous/village sign languages. Yet
preliminary analysis indicates that BKSL, like other language isolates,
preserves unusual linguistic features, and there is growing consensus that study
of this language variety can enrich understanding of language typologies,
historical linguistics, universal grammar, etc. Regrettably, BKSL and other
indigenous/village sign languages are endangered. They often exhibit compressed
life cycles that lend urgency to and pose challenges for language documentation
and description as well as for language preservation and
revitalization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed study of BKSL is part of a
collaborative endeavor to gather and evaluate linguistic anthropological data
from indigenous/village sign languages around the world. More specifically,
drawing on the combined expertise of hearing and Deaf linguists and
anthropologists, this pioneering project creates standardized research protocols
and employs systematic data collection to pursue detailed description of an
under-documented and endangered sign language variety. By sharing their
findings, the research partners will generate a robust, new data corpus that
will allow for unprecedented cross-linguistic and cross-cultural study of
indigenous/village sign languages, a critical step toward development of a
formal typology of sign languages. Consistent with the goals of the sponsoring
EuroBabel initiative, this international partnership will develop "better
analyses based on endangered languages."