* 0940976
* Probability Distribution Functions of Field Variations, Non-Gaussianity and Intermittency in the Turbulent Solar Wind
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2014
* Brigitte Ragot, Helio Research
* Continuing Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 01/31/2014
* USD 343,690.00

The proposer plans to study solar wind turbulence by applying statistical
analysis techniques to ACE, Wind, and Helios 2 spacecraft data. Specifically,
she will analyze magnetic field probability distribution functions (PDFs) in
order to seek the causes of intermittency and the departures of solar wind
plasma structures from Gaussian profiles. She expects to determine whether phase
correlation or spectral variability is the main cause of observed non-Gaussian
PDFs of magnetic field variations. In this investigation, she will extend her
prior calculations and modeling of non-Gaussian PDFs to a broader range of solar
wind parameters, testing both random-phase and phase-correlated models. The
proposer will thereby produce theoretical predictions of these PDFs, from the
largest to the smallest separation scales, and provide definitive tests of the
relative impacts of variability and phase correlations on the non-Gaussian
nature of such probability distribution functions.

The proposer explains that her new model of intermittent turbulence will be
valuable for estimating the scattering of solar wind energetic particles and for
quantifying the dispersal of solar wind magnetic field lines. She notes that
such information is crucial to accurate space weather predictions of solar
energetic particle intensities at the Earth. As a female scientist, the proposer
is a member of an underrepresented group in solar physics. Therefore, funding
this research will contribute to broadening diversity in the field.