* 0940818
* DataNet Full Proposal: Terra Populus: A Global Population/Environment Data Network
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2017
* Steven Manson, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Cooperative Agreement
* Amy Walton
* 08/31/2017
* USD 8,168,230.00

Terra Populus: A Global Population/Environment Data Network (TerraPop) will
develop organizational and technical infrastructure that will integrate,
preserve, and disseminate data describing changes in the human population and
environment over time. A plethora of high-quality environmental and population
datasets are available, but they are widely dispersed, have incompatible or
inadequate metadata, and have incompatible geographic identifiers. The project
will enable researchers to identify and merge data from heterogeneous sources to
study the relationships between human behavior and the natural world.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TerraPop will focus on four specific kinds of data: (1)
census and survey microdata describing the characteristics of individuals and
their families and households; (2) aggregate census and survey data, describing
the characteristics of places, including aggregate population characteristics,
land use, and land cover; (3) remote-sensing data describing land cover and
other environmental characteristics; and (4) climate data describing
temperature, precipitation, and other climate-related variables. All four data
types have an important temporal dimension; most of the data span the past five
decades, and some sources reach back to the nineteenth century. TerraPop will
make these data interoperable across time and space, disseminate them to the
public and to multiple research communities, and preserve them for future
generations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding of interactions between
population and the environment has been hampered by the dearth of
internationally comparable data. This infrastructure will expand the quality and
quantity of such data while making them highly interoperable and easily
accessible. Population data closely integrated with data on the environment will
allow us to describe the unfolding transformation of human and ecological
systems. Data on the human population are crucial for understanding changes in
the Earth?s biological and climate processes; equally important, data on climate
and land provide essential tools for understanding the impact of environmental
change on human behavior. By creating a framework for locating, analyzing, and
visualizing the world's population and environment in time and space, TerraPop
will provide unprecedented opportunities for investigating the agents of change,
assessing their implications for human society and the environment, and
developing policies to meet future challenges. The data collection and its
analysis tools will contribute to education and public understanding. It will
allow teachers to integrate research and teaching, bringing the excitement of
discovery into the classroom from primary school to graduate school. More
broadly, TerraPop will be a model for the sustainable expansion, maintenance,
and improvement of a global data resource.