* 0940094
* A Platform For Self-Referencing Optrodic Sensing
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2011
* David Porterfield, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Cort L. Anderson
* 06/30/2011
* USD 120,000.00

Cellular organelles are subunits that perform specific cellular functions.
Recent studies have shown that variations, or heterogeneity, in organelles such
as the mitochondria and chloroplasts play an essential role in processes such as
molecular metabolism, programmed cell death and energy production. Experimental
measurements that study only the average of large populations of organelles are
standard, but insufficient for emerging needs. Understanding individual
variations requires a new method for studying single organelle physiology with
sufficient resolution.&lt;br/&gt;The device developed in this project, a
platform for self-referencing optrodic sensing, is based on integration of a
frequency domain lifetime fluorometer with digital data acquisition and nano-
positioning, allowing measurement of chemical fluxes as low as atto mol (10^-18)
per square centimeter per second. &lt;br/&gt;The instrument will enable
exploring the limits of biology in the new realm of organelle physiology.
Keystone tests will be the first to measure oxygen flux from single isolated
mitochondria or chloroplasts. &lt;br/&gt;Coordination with the Purdue Discovery
Learning Center will provide broad interdisciplinary opportunities for
undergraduate research by emphasizing the interaction between biologists and
engineers. Working with the Burton D. Morgan Entrepreneurial Center will
facilitate outreach and commercialization of the novel instrumentation and
technology.