* 0940143
* Nanoscale Informal Science Education Network
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2010,02/28/2017
* Robert Semper, Museum of Science
* Continuing Grant
* Alphonse Desena
* 02/28/2017
* USD 21,742,585.00

The Museum of Science, Boston (MOS) and its primary collaborators, the Science
Museum of Minnesota (St. Paul, MN) and the Exploratorium (San Francisco, CA),
are continuing and expanding the Nanoscale Informal Science Education Network
(NISE Net), which has been in operation since 2005. NISE Net has established a
national infrastructure of over one-hundred hands-on science centers and
universities within seven regional hubs with the goal of fostering public
awareness, engagement and understanding of nanoscale science and engineering
(NSE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of this undertaking, NISE Net partners have:
&lt;br/&gt;- created a nation-wide set of annual events called NanoDays;
&lt;br/&gt;- developed dozens of interactive exhibits, media-based products,
programs, and public forums based on NSE; &lt;br/&gt;- generated new knowledge
about the design for learning about NSE, its applications, and societal
implications; &lt;br/&gt;- produced a network that involves informal educators
and researchers; and&lt;br/&gt;- developed a Web site for professionals,
www.nisenet.org, that includes several resources for educators and researchers,
including a catalog of educational products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the
next five years (2010 - 2014), NISE Net will continue to develop new educational
products, deepen the involvement of current partnerships in nanoscale informal
science education, and expand the number of partners overall to 300
organizations. The advisory committee, content steering committee, regional
hubs, and other work groups will continue to develop collaborative relationships
between museums and university-based NSE research centers, including Materials
Research Science and Engineering Research Centers (MRSECs) and Nanoscale Science
and Engineering Centers (NSECs). A Diversity, Equity, and Access group will
actively support, foster, and encourage the NISE Net's efforts to reach diverse
audiences with regard to geography, dis/ability, gender, race/ethnicity,
language, and income. Four research studies will be conducted: Partnership and
Network, Institutional Change, Learning Progressions, and Evidence-Based
Decision Making.