* 0940347
* Workshop on Energy Transport and Control in Solids and Structures; University of Rome "La Sapienza"; 2010
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2015
* Adnan Akay, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Massimo Ruzzene
* 09/30/2015
* USD 49,950.00

Considerable advances have been made over the years in understanding wave
propagation and energy transport mechanisms within structures. In particular,
new methods emerged to estimate vibratory energy absorption by components
attached within a complex structure, such as pipes, pumps, and such, within a
submarine or building. In recent years, several studies started to appear on
methods to design systems such that vibratory energy can be channeled to
specific parts of the structure where it can be trapped and dissipated, as
desired. It is observed that the underlying fundamentals of some of these
approaches are common to nano-materials and physics communities, where
applications such as designing materials to trap energy or change the direction
of light are considered.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes to hold a
workshop to bring together experts from different communities working on wave
energy transport in structures to review advances, exchange views, and discuss
research needs, directions and opportunities. Of particular interest are
advances in wave propagation across scales in complex structures, design of
advanced materials, and development of new methodologies for wave propagation in
complex structures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will be hosted by the
University of Rome La Sapienza where the co-organizer has an appointment. The
workshop will be preceded by advanced preparation including preparation of
specific written material, which will be compiled in a book form to be published
for dissemination.&lt;br/&gt;