* 0940048
* U.S. - Pakistan International Planning Visit: Economical Computing Substrate for Developing Regions
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Ali Butt, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 07/31/2011
* USD 4,382.00

0940048 &lt;br/&gt;Butt&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is to
support a planning visit by Dr. Ali Butt, Computer Science Department, Virginia
Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg, Virginia. The foreign
collaborator is Dr. Umar Saif at the Lahore University of Management Sciences,
Lahore, Pakistan. The PI will have in-person interactions with the foreign
collaborators to evaluate the available resources, facilities and to interview
prospective graduate researchers, and assess the feasibility of conducting the
proposed research. The purpose is to finalize plans for a collaborative proposal
to be submitted in response to NSF/CNS later in 2009. The foreign scientist, Dr.
Umar Saif is a highly accomplished young scientist who has research experience
at a prestigious US university. Saif?s research is on ubiquitous computing,
operating and distributed systems, mobile systems, high-speed routing
architectures and the impact of IT in developing world countries. These skills
complement the PI?s expertise in developing robust economical resource-sharing
systems, grid computing, and system-level optimizations for data-intensive
computing. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit The increasing reliance on computers in
our daily lives is driving the demand for easily accessible computing resources.
Providing computational, storage, and network resources to sustain modern
applications is a challenge, especially in under-privileged areas where
economical constraints limit even basic computer services. The projected
research aims to design an economical computing substrate that transparently
harvests unused resources from well-provisioned setups to support applications
of under-privileged users. Use of such a substrate can also be employed when
acquisition of dedicated resources is not justified, e.g., academic
experimentation. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact Research results from the proposed
project will have a broad impact on wide-ranging computer use, as diverse as
basic computing in under-privileged regions, academic experimentation, and
mitigating resource wastage in enterprise computing. The collaboration will open
new horizons for collaborative research, and will enable identification of
specific research problems faced by users in developing. &lt;br/&gt;