* 0940839
* CDI-Type II Proposal: VHub: Collaborative Research: Cyberinfrastructure for Volcano Eruption and Hazards Modeling and Simulation
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2013
* Charles Connor, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 12/31/2013
* USD 136,217.00

&lt;br/&gt;SUNY at Buffalo, in collaboration with the University of South
Florida and Michigan Technological University, will develop VHub: Collaborative
Research: Cyberinfrastructure for Volcano Eruption and Hazards Modeling and
Simulation, a virtual organization that will enable the integration of
multidisciplinary computational thinking into volcanology research and
applications. The VHub cyberinfrastructure will provide a mechanism for globally
collaborative research and development of computational models of volcanic
processes and their integration with complex geospatial, observational, and
experimental data. VHub will promote seamless accessibility of appropriate
models and data to organizations around the world charged with assessing and
reducing risk, reaching across resource levels and cultural boundaries. The
cyberinfrastructure challenges in this effort arise from solving difficult
research problems involving multi-scale physics and complex datasets, and
developing the structures needed to ensure accessibility to civil protection
workers for real-world decision making. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Vhub will enable
the advancement of understanding of volcanic processes by accelerating the broad
adaptation of computation within volcanology and driving our modeling
capabilities toward fewer simplifications, and enabling important collaborations
with other disciplines that focus on similar flow phenomena. VHub will provide a
venue for developing benchmarking of complex models, and for model comparison
and multi-model analysis. VHub will be structured to promote the integration of
cutting-edge science with global hazard mitigation, including in developing
countries where risk is large but economic and/or cultural barriers have
prevented organizations from using cutting-edge capabilities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Educational materials designed and implemented through
VHub will serve to recruit new students into the geosciences and computational
sciences who will learn to conduct quantitative volcanological research within a
framework that views fundamental research and societal applications as an
integrated whole.