* 0940842
* Improving the Use of Computer Data Analysis Skills in Undergraduate Meteorology
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Todd Ellis, SUNY College at Oneonta
* Standard Grant
* Jane Prey
* 08/31/2013
* USD 199,592.00

Atmospheric Sciences (41)&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the incorporation of
scientific inquiry at all levels of the meteorology curriculum using real-time
atmospheric data through the acquisition and use of updated computing
facilities. Enhanced computing facilities are supporting the acquisition of
real-time meteorological data and forecasts, and allowing students to visualize
these data, operate research-quality weather models to understand atmospheric
processes, and develop programming skills needed for their future success in the
atmospheric sciences. The project is investigating how scientific inquiry
improves students' comprehension of basic atmospheric processes at the
introductory level, and how improved data analysis and computer programming
capabilities contributes to increasing the skills and employability of students
majoring in meteorology.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. Many previous studies
have shown scientific inquiry to be a vital part of training future scientists
and student scientists. This program is adding to that body of work by studying
how incorporating inquiry into the meteorology curriculum can lead to improving
the skills of students of varying abilities. Non-majors are being exposed to an
improved inquiry-based approach as part of their introductory meteorology lab.
Meteorology majors are gaining the vital computer skills necessary to obtain,
analyze and visualize the large datasets typical of the earth sciences. Majors
also are gaining experience operating their own forecasting models in classroom
and research settings. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. Students completing
activities using these facilities are enhancing their understanding of how to
visualize and interpret atmospheric data. For non-majors, these kinds of
inquiry-based activities are extremely relevant to the education of citizen-
scientists at a time when it is becoming ever more important to develop a
science-literate populace. These activities are also helping develop more
research-savvy graduates, armed with skills necessary to be competitive in the
workforce and in graduate research programs. The results of this effort are
being shared with the education community in an effort to help improve earth
science education as a whole.