* 0940796
* Keeping Atitlan Blue:  Coordination of Future Collaborative Research to Improve Water Quality at Lake Atitlan, Guatemala
* O/D,OISE
* 01/15/2010,06/30/2010
* Charles Goldman, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 06/30/2010
* USD 18,392.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OISE-0940796 ? Keeping Atitlan Blue: Coordination
of Future Collaborative Research to Improve Water Quality at Lake Atitlan,
Guatemala &lt;br/&gt;Eliska Rejmankova&lt;br/&gt;Department of Environmental
Science and Policy &lt;br/&gt;University of California -
Davis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lake Atitlan, a caldera lake located in the highlands
of Guatemala, has been described by many as one of the world?s most beautiful
lakes. Having already experienced ecological catastrophe in 1980?s with the
extinction of the Atitlan grebe (Hunter 1980), the lake is presently facing
problems with increasing water pollution. Without remediation, this may present
a serious threat to the predominantly Tzutujil Indian community dependent on the
lake for their livelihood as well as lead to the loss of Atitlan?s unique
aesthetic status. Uncontrolled nutrient input into the lake has led to high
phosphorus levels, initiating the formation of cyanobacterial blooms. These
blooms, capable of producing various toxins, can directly impact residents via
drinking water and bioaccumulation along the food chain.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant supports a planning visit for a team of
researchers from the University of California-Davis to Guatemala to meet with
Guatemalan colleagues, to visit the lake, and to design a research program aimed
to protect the water quality in the lake. The visitors are meeting with Drs.
Nancy Girón, Cristina Bailey, and Pablo Mayorga of the Universidad Rafael
Landívar; Dr. Margaret Dix of the Universidad del Valle de Guatemala; Dr.
Alberto Rivera Gutiérrez of the Reserva Natural Atitlán; and Dr. Juan Skinner of
the Lake Atitlán Environmental Protection Society. The goals of joint US ?
Guatemalan activities are to be the following: (1) to evaluate external and
internal P loading; (2) to set up a monitoring system for water quality; (3) to
predict threshold values for P input that would sustain the lake?s oligotrophic
status; (4) to assess the dynamics of cyanobacterial growth; (5) to analyze
cyanobacteria and higher trophic levels for presence of cyanotoxins; (6) to
develop an affordable bioassay for cyanotoxins; (7) to initiate steps to prevent
and reduce future P input; and (8) to educate and involve local residents in a
movement to prevent future lake deterioration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; It is
considered that Lake Atitlan is indicative of ecosystems that are at risk for
deterioration as a result of human activity and global climate change. Thus, the
collaborative research to be planned in this visit is timely and environmentally
critical. The scientific approach to be undertaken carries significant
intellectual merit, and the potential consequences for the local communities as
well as the implications for other ecosystems, such as Lake Tahoe, constitute
valuable broad impact. The involvement of young researchers in the planning
visit and the establishment of a meaningful international collaboration are also
notable. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;