* 0940484
* Collaborative Research:  A Cultural Shift in Computer Science:  Introducing Computation through E-Textiles
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2015
* Michael Eisenberg, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cuny
* 01/31/2015
* USD 397,748.00

The Massachusetts Institute of Technology, in collaboration with the University
of Colorado at Boulder, proposes a project to introduce computation through
e-textiles. Computer science in the United States is an overwhelmingly male
discipline. Many of the the crucial factors in this gender imbalance are
cultural; that is, the culture that has grown up around computer science has a
variety of attributes that appeal more to males than females. In response, this
project seeks to design an alternative cultural pathway into the subject -- a
pathway that does not purport to change or even implicitly criticize the
existing CS culture, but rather seeks to provide a very different culture
through which new populations (and especially females) can become fascinated
with computing. Specifically, this project will develop and disseminate tools
for engaging people in computing through the medium of fabrics and electronic
textiles (or e-textiles). The work will build upon ongoing efforts to create
accessible, powerful tools and materials that allow users to design and build
their own programmable interactive fashion. The types of projects that users
undertake within this alternative culture of computer science are rich in
content, but refreshingly nontraditional: they are tangible, colorful, dramatic,
richly interactive, and beautiful. This project proposes to encourage the growth
of this new culture via two complementary avenues of work: the development of a
visual programming environment for the LilyPad Arduino (a toolkit developed by
the PIs that enables people to build e-textiles) and the development,
dissemination, and evaluation of an "E-textiles in-a-Box" kit for educators.
This kit will be disseminated through the large network developed by the
National Center for Women and Information Technology (NCWIT) and its
effectiveness will be assessed by NCWIT's social science team. These efforts are
crucial next steps in engaging a broad audience in e-textiles and -- via this
engagement -- a new and diverse audience in computing.