* 0940217
* Collaborative Research:  CEDAR--Application of the RENOIR System in Brazil to Study the Gravity Wave Trigger Mechanism In the Production of Equatorial Spread F and Scintillations
* GEO,AGS
* 01/15/2010,12/31/2013
* John Meriwether, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Therese Moretto Jorgensen
* 12/31/2013
* USD 174,024.00

This project is a 3-year collaborative effort between University of Illinois and
Clemson University. The objective is to utilize observations from a suite of
instruments newly deployed in northeastern Brazil to study the effects caused by
thermosphere-ionosphere (TI) coupling and equatorial plasma instabilities,
particularly those effects that are initiated by thermospheric gravity wave (GW)
activity. The Remote Equatorial Nighttime Observatory for Ionospheric Regions
(RENOIR) consists of two Fabry-Perot interferometers (FPI), a single wide-field
imaging system, a dual-frequency GPS receiver, and two arrays of single-
frequency GPS scintillation monitors. The two FPI instruments will be used in a
bi-static configuration to measure thermospheric wind and temperature
fluctuations within a common volume region. This will provide evidence for
gravity wave activity that is one of the suggested trigger mechanisms for the
production of equatorial spread-F (ESF) and plasma bubbles. ESF activity will be
documented through two-dimensional maps of 630.0-nm and 777.4-nm nightglow
intensities using the wide-field airglow imaging system. In addition, as part of
these routine observations, GPS measurements of the total electron content (TEC)
and scintillation properties associated with ionospheric irregularities will be
made.

RENOIR in Brazil represents an international collaboration between Clemson
University, the University of Illinois, the Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas
Espaciais (INPE), and the Federal University at Campina Grande. Students from
institutions in both the United States and Brazil will be involved in all
aspects of this project, enhancing their education while training the next
generation of scientists and engineers. The results of this project will advance
the understanding of equatorial ionospheric irregularities, which has direct
societal benefits through the adverse effects these irregularities can have on
trans-ionospheric radio wave propagation