* 0940875
* 2010 Auditory System and GRS Conference, Symposia &amp; Workshops -Auditory System @ Colby-Sawyer College 6-13-18-2010 &amp; Second Graduate Research Seminar 6-12-13-2010 in New Lo
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2010,12/31/2010
* Nancy Gray, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Karen A. Mesce
* 12/31/2010
* USD 15,000.00

The ability to hear and understand complex sound stimuli depends on precisely
organized networks of neurons with specialized properties that enable detection
and perception of sounds quickly and over a wide range of intensities and
frequencies. Hearing begins with the detection of sound by mechanosensitive hair
cells in the inner ear. This information is encoded and faithfully transmitted
to the central nervous system by the spiral ganglion. Subsequently, a series of
processing events occur in parallel in the auditory brainstem, converging once
again in the inferior colliculus. The inferior colliculus projects to the
auditory thalamus and on to the auditory cortex, which is the seat of sound
perception. Most auditory research groups focus on discrete elements of auditory
processing, such as hair cell function or the electrophysiological properties of
auditory neurons. However, the perception of sound is ultimately a product of
all of these independent events, many of which influence each other. A failure
at any level of the auditory circuitry has ramifications for the entire system,
especially during development when mechanisms of plasticity can induce permanent
changes in wiring. The study of these issues is the goal of the second biennial
Gordon Research Conference on The Auditory System, which will take place at
Colby-Sawyer College from June 13-18, 2010 and will be preceded by the second
associated Graduate Research Seminar on June 12-13, 2010. This award provides
support for graduate students and postdoctoral fellows to attend these events,
which will provide a rich training environment and advance the understanding of
auditory circuit assembly and function at all levels.