* 0940723
* EAGER: Drummer Game: A Massive-Interactive Socially-Enabled Strategy Game
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Francis Quek, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 09/30/2012
* USD 149,648.00

The goal of this project is to foster new research collaborations across
different disciplines by developing a novel massive interaction game that
represents a unique genre wherein teams of users strategically direct armies of
virtual 3D "terra cotta" soldiers by employing physical drum beats as control
signals to determine the warriors' behavior. It is intended that the game will
engage and enthrall both user teams and a live audience with the special demands
of cooperative and competitive game play in a compelling and creative scenario.
Successful completion of the research will require intensive collaboration
across multiple fields of computational science, art, and music. The culmination
of the project will be a social event centrally located on the Virginia Tech
campus, in which the finished game is publically introduced to the community at
large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve these goals, the PI team will engage
interactive game design approaches to draft and enrich the overall game
experience. They will adopt commoditized Graphics Processing Units (GPUs) to
meet the computational challenges of real-time simulation, animation, and
rendering of massive number of 3D characters. Novel numerical methods will be
developed to enhance the efficiency of global path finding for massive crowd
simulation. The individual combat behavior of the virtual soldiers will be
automatically regulated by an artificially intelligent component, which is
supported by GPU accelerated agent-based simulation. In order to provide
visualization capacity for a massive crowd in an enormous environment, the
investigators will develop technologies to enable level-of-detail rendering and
animation. For massive interaction support, signal processing and computer
vision approaches will be used to recognize the drumbeats and to interpret the
audience participation behavior (which will be tracked with the aid of
microphones embedded among the members of audience and cameras aimed at them).
Synthetic music generation approaches will be utilized to produce real-time
accompaniment to the drums.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The outcome
outlined above will be the result of broad and intensive collaboration between
engineering and the arts. Computer engineers will design and develop the overall
game engine architecture, graphics rendering technologies, numerical solutions
for character path planning, and approaches to recognize drum beats. Graphics
artists will design 3D geometry models and animations for "terra cotta"
soldiers, and will work closely with engineers to build a smooth "pipeline" to
import digital content into the game software system. Researchers in modern
music will produce accompaniment to the cadence of the drums. The team-based
approach adopted in this project will expose students to cross-disciplinary
research, so that they come away with an understanding and appreciation of the
need to function cooperatively to achieve rewarding and exciting results.
Teaming of undergraduate students with graduate students will, it is hoped, lead
some of the undergraduates to choose research related career paths while also
encouraging the graduate students to learn how to better mentor others. The PI
team hopes that the mass media event at the culmination of the project will
imbue the broader public (and especially K-12 students) with the excitement of
computing and the arts.