* 0940592
* BPC-LSA: STRONG Computing Pipeline
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2014
* Syed Masud Mahmud, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cuny
* 04/30/2014
* USD 647,653.00

Wayne State University, in partnership with local community organizations,
proposes a demonstration project that integrates K-12 outreach activities, pre-
college bridge programs, and undergraduate computing degree programs in Detroit,
MI to increase the participation and success of under-represented students in
computer science, particularly African-Americans and women. The pipeline is
novel in that it joins K-12 outreach efforts with adult learners and
undergraduate students in an urban context. The pipeline will offer a selection
of summer camps, Saturday classes, after school and in-school programs in
conjunction with community organizations having experience with the K-12
educational processes and with recruiting minority students. These activities
will target students from 2nd grade through high school. Parents will also
participate, in the form of parent caf√©s, in which they engage in dialog with
computing educators about how to support and encourage their children in the
computing disciplines. Finally, the project will offer pre-college and first
year bridge instruction which remediates academic deficiencies and explicitly
prepares disadvantaged students for undergraduate education in the computing
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All pipeline activities will incorporate a
suite of interventions designed to explicitly counter stereotype threat, promote
a growth-oriented mindset, and encourage learning as well as feelings of self-
efficacy, particularly with respect to the computing disciplines. These
activities include coaching of students and teachers about the growth-oriented
nature of intelligence, developing and providing culturally-relevant role models
who demonstrate striving and a growth-oriented view of intelligence, and asking
the students to develop themselves or Alice-generated representations of self as
role models and exemplars of striving and learning for others. Similar
interventions have been shown to eliminate a significant share of the black-
white achievement gap in urban settings; this project is the first to explore
their use in large scale for computer science and
engineering&lt;br/&gt;education.