* 0940650
* Collaborative Research: Anisotropy, Abrupt Climate Change, and the Deep Ice in West Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2009,05/31/2012
* Erin C Pettit, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Julie Palais
* 05/31/2012
* USD 273,922.00

Pettit/0636795&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a project to constrain
the accumulation rate, thickness, and temperature history for Siple Dome using a
vertical velocity profile that includes the effects of an evolving fabric on
deformation through time, to invert the depth-profile of fabric determined from
sonic velocity measurements and grain size observed in thin sections in Siple
Dome for the surface temperature and accumulation rate changes in the past,
focusing on the apparent abrupt climate change events at 22ka and 15ka. The
intellectual merit of the work is that it will extract past climate information
from a number of physical properties of the deep ice using a coupled fabric
evolution and ice-sheet flow model. The focus will be on the deep ice-age ice at
Siple Dome, where the ice-core record shows puzzling signals and where modeling
results imply intriguing deformation patterns. The method will also be applied
to the records from Byrd Station and Taylor Dome to ultimately form a basis for
future analysis of the West Antarctic Divide core. The broader impacts of the
project are that it will ultimately contribute to our understanding of the
effects of anisotropy on ice flow dynamics in West Antarctica. It will
contribute to our understanding of the connection between ice flow and the
paleoclimate record in ice cores, particularly with respect to the relationship
between the chemical record and ice deformation. And it will contribute a new
ice-flow model that includes the effects of anisotropy and fabric evolution. The
project will also contribute to advancing the career of a new, young, female
investigator and will support a couple of graduate students. Finally, the work
will encouraging diversity in the physical sciences by directly helping to
support the Girls on Ice a program that encourages young women to explore
science and the natural world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;