* 0940801
* Developing the Preliminary Design for the Deep Underground Science and Engineering Laboratory (DUSEL)
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* William Roggenthen, University of California-Berkeley
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 09/30/2012
* USD 42,602,809.00

Studies funded by NSF are underway at the Homestake Mine, a former gold mine,
located approximately 45 miles northwest of Rapid City, South Dakota, to better
understand and define the scope, schedule and cost for establishing a world-
class underground research facility in the mine. The proposed Deep Underground
Science and Engineering Laboratory (DUSEL) would use land, existing buildings
and infrastructure, and underground mine workings donated by the Homestake
Mining Company to the South Dakota Science and Technology Authority (SDSTA) in
2006. The SDSTA was created by the South Dakota legislature to accept the
Homestake donation, to re-open the Homestake Mine, and convert the mine to a
dedicated center for science, engineering and education. This award provides
$29.019 million over 2 years to support ongoing studies with the goal of
completing a Preliminary Design Report for the proposed DUSEL facility by the
end of calendar year 2010. The DUSEL Preliminary Design is expected to allow
appropriately informed consideration by NSF of DUSEL for Major Research
Equipment and Facilities Construction (MREFC) funding. Highly sensitive
experiments envisioned for DUSEL require the massive amounts of overburden
available at the Homestake Mine to shield cosmic rays. The experimental programs
envisioned for DUSEL are intended to answer a rich array of scientific and
engineering questions, constituting a program of strong intellectual merit.
Physics and astrophysical research thrusts will explore the nature of dark
matter; advance the understanding of neutrinos; study matter-antimatter
asymmetry evident today relative to the early universe; probe the fundamental
stability of matter through study of proton decay; investigate how the universe
evolved through studies of the solar neutrino flux; and pursue other topics of
fundamental interest. Also of interest are studies of life underground that
evolves in extreme conditions; studies of rock porosity, strength, stresses,
internal heat flow and other characteristics; in situ studies of coupled
thermal, hydrological, chemical, mechanical, and biological processes on a large
dimensional scale, at unprecedented depth, and with little anthropological
interferences; and the creation of opportunities for important new intellectual
synergies across these various disciplines.

An education and outreach program is planned for DUSEL to enhance science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics research and education opportunities to
under- represented persons, including American Indians, as well as to the local
public and those who will be drawn to the area by the underground lab. Outreach
efforts will be needed to engage historically underrepresented groups in areas
of science and technology; to make science education available for the general
public; to create DUSEL-related research opportunities for students and
teachers; and seek to be partners with regional institutions. Outreach at
national and international scales is envisioned using virtual environments to
facilitate broader, intellectual and educational connections.