* 0940858
* EAGER:   Control of Animal and Plant ABA receptor interaction with Associated G-Protein
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2010
* Fedora Sutton, South Dakota State University
* Standard Grant
* Mark R. Brodl
* 07/31/2010
* USD 100,000.00

Name: Fedora Sutton&lt;br/&gt;Proposal #: IOS 0940858&lt;br/&gt;Title: EAGER:
Control of Animal and Plant ABA receptor interaction with&lt;br/&gt;Associated
G-Protein&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abscisic acid (ABA) is a
hormone naturally produced in plants to regulate stress responses, including
stomatal closure in times of drought. Identification of the ABA receptor has
been pursued for more than 20 years. To date, no ABA receptors have been
identified in animals; however, pancreatic cells have been shown to produce ABA
and respond to ABA suggesting the presence of a pancreatic ABA receptor. The
investigators propose that the pancreatic ABA receptor interacts with other
proteins in order to function. As a result the investigators propose using the
interacting proteins to isolate the ABA receptor by use of the yeast two-hybrid
molecular technique. If the hypothesis is correct, the researchers will identify
an animal ABA receptor and corresponding regulators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
following aspects of the project are broader impacts of the work. The project
activity includes the education of two undergraduates and two women scientists.
Recent findings suggest that ABA may play an important regulatory role in animal
cells, including activation of human granulocytes and stimulation of insulin
release through an ABA signaling pathway in human and rat pancreatic cells.
Therefore, not only could the increased understanding of these signaling
pathways lead to additional drought-tolerance strategies in plants, treatments
for Type II diabetes and obesity in humans could also follow. Thus, the project
has broader impacts in the area of potentially impacting agricultural plant
productivity under environmental stress, and also in the area of human
health.&lt;br/&gt;