* 0940793
* European Social Cognition Network: International Travel to Warsaw, 2009
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2010
* Margo Monteith, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Kellina Craig-Henderson
* 07/31/2010
* USD 6,965.00

This travel grant supports travel expenses for the PI and two graduate students
to participate in the eleventh annual Transfer of Knowledge Conference of the
European Social Cognition Network (ESCON) in Warsaw, Poland. The conference is
to be held August 26-30, 2009. Approximately 120 participants will take part in
the conference, and they will come from 15 European countries and the US. The
conference will include 90 presentations in four parallel sessions, and also
four plenary sessions with keynote speakers. This conference provides a forum
where junior researchers can present their latest research related to social
cognition and receive feedback, with the ultimate aim that the conference
fulfill training and networking functions for the new generation of social
cognition researchers. The PI, as one of the plenary speakers, will present her
research to the international audience and discuss her work both in the session
and more informally through other conference interaction contexts. The two
graduate students to accompany the PI will also present their research and have
the opportunity to benefit from feedback and interaction with junior and senior
social cognition researchers. Overall, the conference will provide ample
opportunity for networking, learning, and the stimulation of research related to
social cognition in a context that enables knowledge sharing across nations.