* 0940277
* CubeSat: Colorado Student Space Weather Experiment
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2015
* Xinlin Li, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Irfan S. Azeem
* 06/30/2015
* USD 1,001,936.00

The objective of this three-year cross-disciplinary team effort is to build and
operate a tiny, so-called CubeSat, spacecraft. The purpose of the 3U Cubesat
carrying an energetic particle sensor is to address fundamental space weather
science questions relating to the relationship between solar flares, energetic
particles, and geomagnetic storms in the near Earth space environment. The
particle instrument is the Relativistic Electron and Proton Telescope integrated
little experiment (REPTile). REPTile is designed to measure directional
differential flux of energetic protons, 10-40 MeV, and electrons, 0.5 to &gt;3
MeV. The instrument is a miniaturization of the Relativistic Electron and Proton
Telescope (REPT) currently being developed and built at the Laboratory for
Atmospheric and Space Physics (LASP) for the NASA/Radiation Belt Storm Probe
(RBSP) mission. Energetic protons and electrons coming from both the Sun during
Solare Energetic Particle (SEP) events and the Earth's radiation belt will be
measured. The energetic particle measurements will be used in conjunction with
solar flare measurements from other spacecraft, e.g., NASA's Solar Dynamics
Observatory Extreme Ultraviolet Variability Experiment and current NOAA's GOES-
Solar X-ray Imager, to investigate the correlations between flare parameters and
SEP characteristics. The specific science objectives for the project are to
investigate the relationships between solar energetic particles, flares, and
coronal mass ejections, and to characterize the variations of the Earth's
radiation belt electrons. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Space weather refers to
conditions in space that can influence the performance and reliability of space-
borne and ground-based technological systems. Understanding the relationships
between SEPs observed at the ground and solar flares and CMEs, eventually
leading to the prediction of SEP events, is a high priority space weather
research goal, as is the full characterization of the variations of the Earth's
radiation belt electrons. In addition, the development of the miniature REPTile
instrument will facilitate future space weather research and monitoring
conducted by constellations of small (cubesat-sized) spacecraft and demonstrate
the usefulness of nano-satellites as space weather
monitors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will pursue scientific discovery
while providing unique and inspiring educational opportunities. It relies on
extensive undergraduate and graduate student involvement through all aspects of
the mission. This is a collaborative effort between the Department of Aerospace
Engineering Sciences and the Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics at the
University of Colorado, which includes the integration of students, faculty, and
professional engineers. The project is focused around a currently existing space
hardware design course. The new, largely unproven technology involved in cubesat
missions, inherently makes the project associated with significant risks. On the
other hand, however, the project has tremendous potential to be transformational
not only within its own research area but also for the larger field of space
science and atmospheric research as well as within aerospace engineering and
education.