* 0940248
* CEDAR:  Natural and Rocket-Triggered Lightning in the Mesosphere-Lower Thermosphere-Ionosphere (MLTI) System
* GEO,AGS
* 01/15/2010,12/31/2013
* Robert Moore, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Sunanda Basu
* 12/31/2013
* USD 275,000.00

The research project will quantitatively investigate the effects of both natural
and rocket-triggered lightning in the mesosphere-lower thermosphere-ionosphere
(MLTI) region of the atmosphere between 60 and 100 km altitude. The experimental
effort will focus on several outstanding questions regarding the production of
light-emitting phenomena known collectively as transient luminous events (TLEs)
by natural lightning and will investigate the possible role of rocket-triggered
lightning as a source for these disturbances. The primary theoretical effort
will combine state-of-the-art numerical models to predict the
mesospheric/ionospheric reaction to realistic return-stroke currents consistent
with observations. The experimental effort centers on lightning observed at and
near the International Center for Lightning Research and Testing (ICLRT) in Camp
Blanding, Florida. The project will provide simultaneous wideband (1 Hz-20 MHz)
observations of the causative lightning waveforms (both natural and rocket-
triggered), photometric observations for the optical detection of transient
luminous events, and narrowband (200-Hz bandwidth) observations of very low
frequency (VLF, 3-30 kHz) signals that are sensitive to conductivity changes in
the D-region ionosphere. These systems will provide continuous monitoring of
ionospheric events related to natural lightning throughout the three-year period
of the award. Attempts to trigger lightning using the classical rocket-and-wire
technique will be performed during intense nighttime thunderstorms. This program
will address the following questions: &lt;br/&gt;1) What are the wideband (1
Hz-20 MHz) characteristics of lightning that successfully produce TLEs?
&lt;br/&gt;2) What are the wideband characteristics of lightning that
successfully produce ionospheric conductivity changes that scatter VLF signals?
&lt;br/&gt;3) What characteristics of TLEs are most closely associated with the
observed VLF scattering? &lt;br/&gt;