* 0940674
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:  Neolithic Transition in the South-Western Caucasus
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Zinovi Matskevich, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2010
* USD 14,800.00

Under the direction of Dr. Ofer Bar-Yosef, Mr. Zinovi Matskevich will collect
data for his doctoral dissertation. With NSF support he will explore the nature
of social interactions and 'prehistoric ethnicity' during the spread of the
Neolithic complex - domesticated plants and animals - from a heartland in the
Near East into the Southern Caucasus region. The project will investigate the
potential mechanisms which include diffusion, migration or indigenous
transformation responsible for this expansion. In collaboration with Georgian
colleagues, he will conduct small scale excavations at four prehistoric sites in
the Caucasus which span the Mesolithic, Neolithic and Eneolithic (ca 11,000 -
4,000 BC) The fieldwork is expected to provide stratified assemblages of
material culture which encompass the period when agriculture and pastoralism
first appeared. Radiocarbon dating will provide the basis for an absolute
chronology. A combined study of archaeological assemblages from prior
excavations, currently stored in the State Museum of Georgia, as well as those
obtained in the course of the present study will be considered in a broader
context of the archaeology of the spread of agriculture in the Near East and
South-Eastern Europe.

The Neolithic marks a profound change in humans' relation both to the
environment and to one another. With the domestication of plants and animals a
trajectory was established which led from hunter gatherers living in small bands
to early civilizations encompassing tens of thousands of individuals. While
archaeologists have focused considerable attention on the multiple 'cradles' of
domestication, much less is understood about how they spread across cultures and
space. Multiple mechanisms including the diffusion of people vs. plants and
animals per se vs. ideas have been proposed. This research will help to
establish the basic cultural and chronological context in a region adjacent to
such a cradle and permit multiple hypotheses to be examined.

The research will also further the academic and intellectual advancement of a
promising graduate student and strengthen scientific relations between the US
and the Republic of Georgia.