* 0940857
* New Faculty Workshop for TYC Physics Faculty
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2014
* Warren Hein, American Association of Physics Teachers
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 04/30/2014
* USD 199,987.00

Two-year colleges play a significant role in the United States' higher education
system, and approximately 37% of students in higher education attend a two-year
college. A recent American Institute of Physics (AIP) report found that 54% of
two-year colleges have only one full-time physics professor. As a consequence,
many new physics faculty in two-year colleges do not receive mentoring from a
more senior physicist at their institution. Over 60% of two-year physics
instructors indicate that they correspond with colleagues about teaching less
than once a week. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While traditional instruction provides
discipline-based content, it frequently does not engage students in the learning
process. Substantial efforts have been made to develop research-based active
engagement instructional strategies in physics. The American Institute of
Physics (AIP) recently administered a survey on the use of these strategies in
higher education. While two-year colleges had the highest response rate at 54%,
the results showed that traditional lecture occurred in over 60% of the classes
the majority of the time and that 43% of the respondents were not using a single
innovative strategy listed on the survey. Without having any knowledge of
researched-based instructional strategies in physics and no mentor or colleague
to discuss teaching with, it is not surprising that the majority of two-year
college physics instructors do not use any of these proven strategies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project consists of an intensive educational
experience to enhance STEM student learning through developing new physics
faculty at two-year colleges. The New Faculty Workshop for TYC Physics Faculty
consists of 18 months of mentoring and developing physics faculty who are in
their first five years of teaching. This experience includes online discussions
of seminal papers in physics education research, a four-day intensive
conference, 15 months of mentoring for the participants, and a two-day
commencement conference held in tandem with an American Association of Physics
Teachers national summer meeting. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project impacts 30
new instructors, changing the way these instructors interact with students over
the course of their careers. By scheduling the follow-up sessions in conjunction
with the AAPT national meeting, the project is able to introduce participants to
the professional development opportunities available to them through this
professional organization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit
includes: &lt;br/&gt;Reaching a significant number of new physics instructors to
give them a working knowledge of recent developments in physics pedagogy.
&lt;br/&gt;Presenting the material in an active engagement environment that
models the type of classroom management that they will implement.
&lt;br/&gt;Mentoring the participants to provide them the support they need to
make significant change in their program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts include: &lt;br/&gt;A significant impact on the manner in which students
are taught at the participants' institutions. &lt;br/&gt;Students from
participants' institutions who are better prepared in the content of the
material covered in the physics courses at these institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;Students who have developed skill sets that are valued by employers
due to the experience of being taught physics using strategies known to promote
a deeper understanding of physics content.