* 0940491
* BPC-DP:Animal Tlatoque: A Synergy between Mesoamerican Cultural History and Endangered  Species to attract and retain Latina/os and Females in Computer Science
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2014
* Gerardo Aldana, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cuny
* 03/31/2014
* USD 541,520.00

The University of California-Santa Barbara proposes to create a program that
integrates computing education with topics -- Mesoamerican culture and
conservation of endangered species -- that are culturally relevant and
attractive to Latina/os and females and their families. The focus is not on
ecology or cultural studies as an end, but rather as a means to interest
students in computing. The themes will motivate students from the targeted
groups to excel in school, attend college, and choose computing as a career. The
goal is to attract new students, students who are not already interested in
computing. The program will include a summer program, in conjunction with long-
term mentoring, advising, and tracking. Over the course of the 4 week summer
program, students will learn about culture, history, and conservation as
motivators for the real goal: learning about computer science. Participants will
then use programming and web technology to create and share art, stories, and
games with their peers and their parents through the eVoices web site. A
comprehensive follow-up plan will engage and retains students from middle school
through university with hierarchical mentoring and support from existing
university programs (Pathways). The approach, if successful, can be replicated
at many institutions using different culturally-relevant topics that appeal to
their target populations.