* 0940372
* Support for the Core Research Activities and Studies of the Computer Science and Telecommunications Board
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2014
* Jon Eisenberg, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 09/30/2014
* USD 600,002.00

This CISE special project award funds the core operations of the Computer
Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB) of the National Academy of Sciences.
The CSTB provides objective, nonpartisan, scholarly analysis, blending expertise
in computer science (CS), electrical engineering, telecommunications, and
various applications and impacts of information technology (IT). It engages
experts from the entire IT community in mixed collaborative groups, developing
ideas, explanations, assessments, and recommendations reflecting diverse points
of view and rigorous peer review. It is a focal point for engaging the research
community in the development of new research agendas and in raising the level of
policy debate. CSTB is a leader in information technology policy analysis, a
source of strategic thinking for research funding agencies, and an exponent of
how and why IT research should be done. Core support enables it to plan for,
oversee, and follow up on projects and to be forward-thinking and proactive in
formulating new activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CSTB has an ambitious program
of activities addressing the health of U.S. computer science,
telecommunications, and their applications. It draws on the expertise and
perspectives of a wide range of people from the public and private sectors with
interests in the evolving nature and needs of research across computer science
and telecommunications and the condition of the human resources and institutions
responsible for producing IT. Projects leverage computer scientists? deep
insights into what IT is, how it works, and where it is going together with
insights from other fields such as biology, the social sciences, economics, and
law. CSTB's work is known and used by a wide and growing circle of agencies,
officials, and experts in the field; CSTB has come to be seen as an
authoritative source on IT trends, IT policies, and their implications for
broader public policy. CSTB delivers its reports and provides briefings to key
decision-makers and practitioners in the research, education, and policy-making
communities. Its study groups engage significant numbers of women, minorities,
and people from across the country. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
The results of studies and other activities enabled by this core support provide
a source of strategic thinking for researchers, educator, and research funding
agencies on IT trends and issues and their implications for broader public
policy, including how and why IT research should be done. Much of this work also
blends IT knowledge with insights from other fields such as biology, the social
sciences, economics, and law to provide interdisciplinary perspectives on
applications of IT and its social and economic impacts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: CSTB provides a forum for the exchange of
information on CS, IT, and telecommunications and for the exploration of how
economic, social, and legal trends may shape and be shaped by the environment
for IT in the future. The result of studies and other activities enable by this
core support provide independent, authoritative information to a wide array of
federal agencies and officials, researchers and educators, and information
technology experts. They engage members of the IT technical and research
communities in the development of new research agendas and in informing policy
debates related to information technology. Reports and briefings are provided to
key decision-makers and practitioners in the research, education, and policy-
making communities. Experts participating in CSTB activities learn about the
relationship between their research and larger contexts, both within IT research
and within the larger economy and society.&lt;br/&gt;