* 0940478
* BPC-AE: Collaborative Research: Strengthening and Expanding the Empowering Leadership Alliance
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2012
* Benjamin Hescott, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cuny
* 01/31/2012
* USD 29,198.00

Rice University leads a collaborative proposal to extend the impact of the
Empowering Leadership: Computing Scholars of Tomorrow Alliance (ELA) through
partnerships with new institutions and regional collaboratives that will adopt
and expand ELA's successful models of engagement. The goal of ELA is to increase
the number of students from underrepresented groups who major in computing at
the nation's research universities. Additionally, ELA supports these students in
securing positions in computing following graduation. The premise of the ELA is
that minority students at research universities face challenges that can be
mitigated by a supportive community that provides academic, social, and personal
support. National in scope, the ELA is developing a network of computing faculty
and leaders dedicated to providing this support. In addition to Rice University,
ELA originally included Boston University, the University of California,
Berkeley, and the University of Texas, Austin. With this proposal, the ELA will
add the University of Georgia, Clemson University, Tufts University, and Stony
Brook University as new lead institutions, along with several new partners
including MentorNet, the Computer Science Teachers Association (CSTA), and the
New England Computer Science Chairs (NECSC). The ELA uses three intersecting
models of engagement, including the National, Regional and Local Models. The
National Model seeks out and supports individuals across the country, building a
virtual (and sometimes in-person) network; the Regional Model builds a support
network among multiple universities within a region; and the Local Model builds
a local support community within a single university. These three models serve
to connect ELA students with each other and with tailored opportunities
including internships, mentoring, conference participation, and summer research
programs. The proposed extension will strengthen the three models at their
current sites and test their scalability and transfer to the new lead
institutions. It will also add programs developed under BPC demonstration
projects to the suite of ELA offerings and test their scalability.