* 0940537
* BPC-AE: Collaborative Research: The Alliance for the Advancement of African-American Researcher in Computing (A4RC)
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Cheryl Swanier, Fort Valley State University
* Continuing Grant
* Janice Cuny
* 08/31/2011
* USD 48,472.00

North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, together with
collaborating institutions Clemson University, Prairie View A&amp;M University,
the University of Colorado, the University of Wisconsin, Auburn University, the
University of Indiana, Norfolk State University, Virginia Polytechnic Institute
and State University, Fort Valley Sate University, and Jackson State University,
proposes an extension of the successful Alliance for the Advancement of African-
American Researchers in Computing (A4RC, pronounced "A-Force"). A4RC aims to
increase the number of African-Americans obtaining advanced degrees in
computing, particularly at the Ph.D. level. A4RC establishes and develops
student pipelines from HBCUs to universities offering advanced degrees in
Computing. A4RC has amassed a body of knowledge and experience with respect to
what it takes to build effective HBCU/R1 faculty collaborations, develop
productive HBCU/R1 research teams that include graduate and undergraduate
students, and prepare undergraduate and master's students for research at the
Ph.D. level. A4RC uses a "research pod" concept that is efficient, flexible, and
effective in terms of HBCU/R1 research collaborations. With this extension, A4RC
plans to expand the alliance to include a greater number of HBCU/R1 research
collaborations, and to build new partnerships. A new category of partners --
Affiliate Partners -- will engage additional HBCUs and national labs and A4RC
will become formal partners with the very effective BPC Demonstration Project,
African-American Researchers in Computing Sciences (AARCS). A4RC will build
collaborations with the BPC STARS and Empowering Leadership Alliances, and ADMI:
The Symposium on Computing at Minority Institutions.