* 0940663
* EC-US Task Force on Biotechnology Research Workshop - A Global Look at Women's Leadership in Biotechnology
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2010
* Fiona Murray, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Gorman
* 06/30/2010
* USD 45,960.00

This project involves a workshop sponsored by the EC-US Biotechnology Task Force
to investigate women's position in the top ranks of international biotechnology
research. It probes the roles and contributions of women in this field, the
effect of the globalization of the biotechnology industry on opportunities and
barriers for women's advancement, the achievements towards gender balance at the
top levels of leadership, and the remaining work that needs to be
done.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biotechnology is a growth industry that is
increasingly global in its influence and execution. Marshalling a globally
distributed, diverse, biotech-ready workforce is essential if we want to fully
harness the potential of this industry. Women are an essential part of that
workforce. They have a strong interest in the life sciences as is clear from
high levels of enrolment at the undergraduate level. However, they are
consistently underrepresented at higher levels of academia and
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The shortage of talented biotechnology
researchers has led policy-makers to take action. Decisions have been made that
have successfully increased the number of women receiving graduate education and
making innovations in biotechnology companies. Yet the number of women in life
science academic and industry leadership positions has remained low. The
workshop will explore what has worked and what hasn't in efforts to increase the
number of women in leadership positions and explore opportunities for
improvement in this area.