* 0940773
* Building a National Program to Improve STEM Education and Lifelong Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2009,05/31/2010
* Tim Buehner, The ASTA Group, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 05/31/2010
* USD 164,758.00

DRL-0940773 &lt;br/&gt;PI: Brent, Linda&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An Early Concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER)
has been given to The ASTA Group, LLC to create a blueprint for an International
Conference on Cyberlearning that would explore radically different approaches to
both formal and informal learning at a national level. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
EAGER will bring together essential individuals and organizations across a range
of STEM disciplines committed to advancing Cyberlearning for the improvement of
STEM education and how to use technology to connect underrepresented groups with
resources and tools to which they have never before been exposed. ASTA and the
national defense industrial community have encountered and solved many of the
same implementation issues arising now in education and have actively sought
ways that technology can improve education and training effectiveness,
efficiency, and accessibility. The Defense and Defense-related industries
operate at the scale necessary for successful transfer of small research
projects to wide-scale application. Through ASTA's extensive R&amp;D knowledge
of advanced technologies, most specifically their work in multi-user virtual
environments (MUVEs), modeling and simulation (M&amp;S), and game-based learning
as applied in the military's education, training, and workforce development
programs, they will bring the highest level of expertise to the development of a
blueprint for an international conference on Cyberlearning that will forge
unprecedented partnerships across government, academia, and industry. ASTA and
the National Training and Simulation Association (NTSA) as Principal
Investigator, will submit a proposal for an international conference in 2010
based upon the blueprint developed by the EAGER grant. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It
is anticipated that technology will be used during the EAGER phase to plan the
conference, disseminate conference-related information, and serve as an
interface for activities. A website and/or Internet portal will be established
and will be used to facilitate on-going partnerships, monitoring, and
information sharing. It may have both public and participant levels of access.
Details, as well as partners for development, maintenance, and funding will be
determined through the EAGER planning period.