* 0940824
* DataNet Full Proposal: Sustainable Environment through Actionable Data (SEAD)
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2017
* Praveen Kumar, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Cooperative Agreement
* Amy Walton
* 09/30/2017
* USD 8,074,920.00

Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Award Number ? 0940824&lt;br/&gt;Title: DataNet Full
Proposal: Sustainable Environment through Actionable Data
(SEAD)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The universities of Michigan, Indiana, and Illinois
propose a DataNet partnership called Sustainable Environment through Actionable
Data (SEAD). SEAD will enable new modalities of sustainability science - the
study of dynamic interactions between nature and society. Advancing the science
of sustainability requires integration of social science, natural science, and
environmental data at multiple spatial and temporal scales that is rich in local
and location-specific observations; referenced for regional, national, and
global comparability and scale; and integrated to enable end users to detect
interactions among multiple phenomena. SEAD will respond to the expressed needs
of sustainability science researchers for long-term management of heterogeneous
data by developing new capabilities for data integration, dissemination, and
long-term preservation. SEAD will provide researchers with tools for active
curation and use social networking to engage data producers and users in
community curation, gradually shifting curatorial and collection development
responsibilities from professional curators to the producer and user
communities. Our focus is on the "long tail" of social and environmental data:
derived data products, data collections from individual PI's and small group
investigations, and data sets of local, regional or topical significance that
are critical to sustainability science but are of limited value until they can
be referenced geo-spatially and temporally, combined with related data and
observations, and modeled consistently. SEAD will make data accessible to
diverse users, including domain scientists, local, national and international
policy makers, manufacturers of sustainable technologies, citizen scientists,
and informed consumers. SEAD will take advantage of existing robust digital
library and institutional repository (IR) infrastructures at the three
universities for access, storage, and preservation to ensure wide accessibility
of data, linkages between data and scientific publications, and
persistence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SEAD will serve researchers efficiently and in
a financially sustainable way via active curation, make innovative use of social
networking, integrate data with existing digital library infrastructures, and
provide synthesis services that significantly increase the research and societal
value of data. Our work will establish a new active curation paradigm that can
be readily integrated into the scientific workflow and that leverages social
networking technologies to engage the science community in data curation. Our
research program will produce novel solutions to the synthesis of heterogeneous
data across different levels of spatio-temporal granularity and scope;
management of logical contexts and data models; appropriate sharing of data with
privacy and proprietary restrictions; and preservation through emulation and
migration-based-technologies and policies for distributed stewardship. Our
cyberinfrastructure development work will support a network of repositories that
functions on several levels: locally through integration of SEAD data into
campus digital library/repository infrastructures, inter-institutionally through
a model for distributed data curation and storage, and nationally and
internationally by extending our approach to other IRs, other DataNet Partners,
sensor and observational networks, and topical data archives. Our financial
sustainability plan will identify appropriate incentive mechanisms and business
models based on a tight coupling of preservation and access services with
research library managed IR infrastructure and ongoing involvement of scientists
and users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SEAD will build national and global capabilities
for science-informed sustainability policy and planning in land use, natural
resource management, agriculture, energy, economic development, "green"
manufacturing, and related areas where critical decisions will be made in the
next decade. The project will engage the community that preserves and shares
scientific data, thus enhancing the public investment in scientific research and
making taxpayer funded data widely available and easier to use which will
provide high-value cost-effective curation and preservation capabilities through
partnerships with other "small science" domains.