* 0940709
* Conference:  Promoting Diversity and Visibility for Production Engineering Research at the CIRP 2009 General Assembly; Boston, Massachusetts; August 23-29, 2009
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Christopher Brown, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 06/30/2010
* USD 39,150.00

This award will encourage the participation of U.S. researchers in the 59th
General Assembly of the CIRP, the International Academy for Production
Engineering, in Boston in August of 2009. The CIRP is the premier global
organization for promoting international research discussion and collaboration
for production, or manufacturing engineering. Founded in 1951, the CIRP covers a
broad spectrum of essential production engineering disciplines, including
details of manufacturing processes, and the dynamics of production
organizations. At the General Assembly in Boston about 500 leaders from about 35
countries will participate in the presentation of papers on current research,
in-depth discussion of current research issues, sharing recent developments in
their laboratories, and planning for joint research. The award provides support
for at least fifteen women and underrepresented minorities participation and
young scholars and graduate students from U.S. institutions to attend and
participate in the General Assembly in Boston. These minorities, women and young
researchers will interact with many of the best manufacturing researchers in the
world, giving them direct exposure to some of the most interesting and important
production engineering research projects and laboratories internationally. This
will promote the understanding of and participation in research in production
engineering among a broader group of minorities, women and young researchers
than would otherwise be possible.