* 0940177
* EAGER:  Plant chromatin remodeling in response to the bacterial pathogen Pseudomonas syringae
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* James Alfano, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 06/30/2012
* USD 299,929.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The plant innate immune system
represents an important barrier that microbial pathogens need to circumvent in
order to cause disease. Evidence in the literature suggests that host
transcriptional activity in response to pathogen stress is at least partly
controlled by the modification of proteins called histones that organize DNA.
However, these pathogen-induced processes are not well understood and have not
been adequately explored. The bacterial plant pathogen Pseudomonas syringae
injects proteins called type III effectors (T3Es) into plant cells, and it
requires these to be pathogenic. It now appears that the majority of P. syringae
T3Es contribute to disease in plants primarily by suppression of plant immunity.
It seems plausible that T3Es alter the modifications of histones, which would
alter plant transcription. Identifying innate immune responses that are under
this type of control and the extent that T3Es can alter these modifications will
lead to a better understanding of bacterial pathogenic strategies, and it may
reveal new components of the ability of the host to remodel their chromatin to
favor gene expression. The objective of this project is to determine if
chromatin remodeling occurs in response to different P. syringae strains and if
T3Es can alter these modifications. To investigate chromatin remolding several
different assays including chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays and ChIP
assays followed by pyrosequencing (ChIP-Seq) to identify plant genes that are
under epigenetic control in response to biotic stress. The long term goal of
this research is to better understand the plant innate immune system and
engineer plants that are more resistant to microbial pathogens.
&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The project would have many of the broader impacts
present in a standard NSF project including the training of undergraduate and
graduate students. However, because Co-PI van Dijk is in the Biology Department
at Creighton University, which is primarily an undergraduate institution, she
will be able to reach many more undergraduates. These students do not have as
many research opportunities as students attending research universities. The PIs
have established an informal program where an undergraduate from the van Dijk
laboratory at Creighton spends the summer working in the Alfano laboratory at
the University of Nebraska. This project will allow us to scale-up this
undergraduate summer research experience to reach more students. In addition,
these students will return back to Creighton to continue their research projects
in the van Dijk laboratory.