* 0940914
* The Topology of Peptide/Protein Interaction Space
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2010
* Neal Woodbury, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Michele McGuirl
* 07/31/2010
* USD 300,000.00

Recent advances in high throughput, array-based synthesis of peptides make it
possible to generate a detailed map of peptide/protein interaction space. Such a
map will be created for the interaction of 17-amino acid peptides with four
specific proteins. This map will help define in a precise way how the primary
structure (amino acid sequence) of a peptide relates to its ability to bind a
specific protein. This is of fundamental importance to our understanding of
molecular recognition (the ability of one molecule to specifically recognize
another). Molecular recognition is a key element in all almost aspects of
biochemistry (binding, catalysis, etc.) and an understanding of how to predict
molecular recognition based on the structure of a molecule will empower myriad
practical applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technology that will be used to
accomplish this is in many respects revolutionary. It has grown out of a type of
synthetic approach developed by the pioneers of the DNA chip industry. DNA chips
are made by synthesizing up to millions of different DNA oligonucleotides at a
time on a glass slide in an ordered array. Intel has adapted and improved this
process so that it is compatible with their platform for electronic chip
manufacturing. This makes it possible to pattern the production of peptides on a
silicon wafer with a resolution approaching that of patterned electronic
components (on the order of two hundred nanometers). The high density allows the
creation of libraries with up to hundreds of millions of peptides. It also
allows the fabrication of peptides directly on electronic devices which will
open the door for direct electronic/biochemical
interfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
development of this technology has far reaching implications for chemistry,
biochemistry and biology. There is a huge interest in peptide ligands as parts
of biosensor systems used in environmental and industrial monitoring and as
specific molecular probes for fundamental biological research. Beyond that, the
chemistry of this approach is much more general than just peptide chemistry. In
fact, a large variety of molecules can be made on these surfaces, allowing the
exploration of many other chemical spaces besides peptide space. This has clear
implications for the development of new catalysts, the optimization of chemical
reactions, the development of new materials, and molecular interfaces with
electronics devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This project will also involve a
postdoctoral fellow, advancing that individual's career and preparing him/her as
a leader in this developing field. In addition, the postdoc will mentor a high
school teacher/high school student pair during the summer, passing on enthusiasm
for a general understanding of science.