* 0940922
* US-Africa EAGER Research: An Inititative to Promote CERT Capacity Building in Africa
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2009,03/31/2012
* Arun Sood, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* DeAndra Beck
* 03/31/2012
* USD 149,832.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Arun Sood of George Mason
University will lead this project to promote CERT (Computer Emergency Response
Team) capacity building in Africa, since vulnerabilities in Africa have the
potential to affect the security of the US computing community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The developed and emerging nations of
the world have ICT networks and information systems that are connected,
comprising the global information infrastructure. Because of this connectivity,
and the reality of modern ICT vulnerabilities in a world rife with malicious
actors in a continuum from hackers to nation states that regularly launch
successful cyber attacks. The developed world is threatened by vulnerable, high-
risk systems in the developing world, which can serve as unwitting launching
pads for cyber attacks. Accordingly, it is in the manifest interest of the
developed nations to partner with emerging nations to promote national cyber
security capacity, in general, and CERTs, in particular, and a collaboration
framework among developing nations and with regional and global organizations to
manage and reduce risk and enhance coordinated preparedness to respond to cyber
attacks and recover from disruptions. The heart of this proposed initiative is
to partner with key internal and external stakeholders to drive a strategic and
coordinated approach to these challenges and opportunities that will build on
past efforts and leverage progress that has been made and some that are ongoing.
Key stakeholders within African countries and the continent must participate in
the formulation and execution of the strategy, generally, and the development
and implementation of the business case for each national CERT, in particular.
This initiative requires modern expertise and an inherently interdisciplinary
approach at each stage or phase of the initiative. Some may view this as a "high
risk-high payoff" because it involves approaches that are radically different
than those that are traditionally undertaken. Those legacy approaches have not,
and will not work, in this context. The methodology of this research will be to
collaborate with key stakeholders within selected African nations, across the
continent of Africa, and with regional and global CERTs and centers of
excellence to promote CERT capacity in Africa, by taking the following steps:
(1) conduct an inventory of the human, technological, and other resources
available in government, academia, and the private sector, to promote and
support CERT development and success; (2) identify African nations that are well
positioned to develop or enhance capabilities to build a national CERTs; and (3)
to model several approaches for CERT development in Africa. The outcome of this
research will be a plan for prioritized, cost-effective CERT development for
Africa and a framework for collaboration and information sharing among the
emerging CERTs and with global organizations and centers of excellence to be
presented to the African Union. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
Generally, this effort will contribute to greater international information
sharing and collaboration regarding ICT risk and response and recovery
preparedness. More specifically, the greatest benefit of this effort will be
two-fold: (1) the positive impact on development of information technology
infrastructure in Africa and its effect on socio-economic progress, and (2) of
particular benefit to the United States and other developed nations, this effort
will result in significant African contribution to enhancing global and regional
ICT risk assessment and mitigation, and international situational awareness and
response. Students will find the interdisciplinary and Africa centric focus
attractive. We believe that this effort will attract minority students to
consider Computer Science for higher studies. The US based graduate students
involved in this project will have the opportunity to work in an international
and interdisciplinary setting. The faculty involved in this activity, will be
able share this experience with the students. The PI has often used
international and interdisciplinary experience to motivate and illustrate class
topics and he expects to include this experience to provide real life examples
in his classes. Getting prepared for a CERT building initiative requires
education and training in the African country. It is inevitable that some of the
participants will decide to undertake graduate studies in the US and add a new
dimension to the student body.&lt;br/&gt;