* 0940257
* CEDAR:  Dynamics of the Neutral Upper Atmosphere and Coupling to the Topside Ionosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 02/15/2010,01/31/2016
* John Noto, Scientific Solutions Incorporated
* Continuing Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 01/31/2016
* USD 777,720.00

This is a 5-year project to investigate observationally the dynamic and chemical
coupling of the neutral upper thermosphere to the exosphere, to the ionosphere,
and to the lower thermosphere using passive optical and incoherent scatter radar
(ISR) techniques. The project builds on upgraded instrumentation and advanced
experimental optical and infrared techniques that were developed under the
proposing team's previous CEDAR grant. Three recently upgraded Fabry-Perot
Interferometers (FPIs) at Arecibo Observatory will be used to study nightglow
emissions from O, H, He. The main science goal is to quantify the nighttime
neutral transport from the lower thermosphere to the exosphere using the three
high resolution FPIs to measure neutral temperatures and winds. Simultaneous ISR
measurements of ion densities, ion drifts, ion temperatures, and electron
temperature in the topside ionosphere will also be obtained. This allows for the
investigation of the dynamic thermal and chemical coupling between the major
neutral and ionic species in the upper thermosphere, exosphere and topside
ionosphere. Specifically, the three FPIs and two photometers will be operated in
campaign-mode, during four new moon periods each year of the five-year program,
which carries this observational research effort through the next solar maximum.
Two of these campaigns are scheduled in the fall and winter each year, a third
in the spring, and a fourth near September equinox. Based on this, a number of
specific outstanding science questions will be addressed, including: 1) Is there
a persistent population of hot oxygen in the upper thermosphere and topside
ionosphere? 2) Is the enhancement of tropospheric methane abundance during the
second half of the 20th century altering the composition at the top of
atmosphere? 3) How do neutral winds vary with altitude in the thermosphere and
exosphere? 4) What is magnitude and semi-diurnal behavior of vertical neutral
winds near the F2-peak? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has significant
broader impacts. The measurements and scientific findings that will result from
the project are relevant both to space weather and climate research. The project
will support the early career development of a Hispanic female scientist as well
as two other female professionals and also will support the infrastructure at
Arecibo Observatory through the further development of the current
instrumentation there and through extensive collaboration with the observatory
personnel.