* 0940720
* Understanding Dendrite Abatement in Reaction-Engineered Convection Battery
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Galen Suppes, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 06/30/2010
* USD 50,000.00

0940720&lt;br/&gt;Suppes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a proof of concept with fundamental
investigation on a "convection battery" that has inherent design features
allowing it to immediately overcome the following barriers to lithium
batteries:&lt;br/&gt;* Dendrite and Geometry-Based Failure -Large distances and
pipes (versus a thin polymer or glass fiber separator) separate electrodes in
the convection battery creating expanses far too great for this type of short-
circuit mode of failure.&lt;br/&gt;* Battery Exotherm - The oxidizing and
reducing substrates are in separate vessels where exotherms are limited by the
amount of electrolyte in the vessel.&lt;br/&gt;* Battery Costs - Separators in
traditional spiral-wound batteries are not used in the convection battery which
saves on weight, materials, and processing costs (not for convection
batteries).&lt;br/&gt;* Heat Removal - Heat removal in the convection battery is
easy through the incorporation of a radiator in the electrolyte circulation
loop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rather than relying on diffusion for the transport of
ions from on electrode to another, the convection battery uses a pump to
convectively flow electrolyte through a non-conductive (no free electron flow)
pipe network and packed bed electrodes. This design is not practical for small
batteries (e.g. 0.1 kWh); however, at sizes above 1 kWh the flow batteries will
cost less (and weigh less) than traditional batteries. The pumping energy is
minimal, expected to be about 5% of the pumping cost of a radiator pump on a
typical automobile.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The four tasks of this project will
proceed as follows:&lt;br/&gt;* Proof of Concept&lt;br/&gt;* Lithium Dispersion
Studies&lt;br/&gt;* Insight Studies and Alternative
Chemistries&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's group has demonstrated an expertise in
fabricating the carbon packing and active components in preliminary studies. The
unknowns for the convection battery design include the degree of capacity fade
from SEI and dendrite fracturing losses, new failure modes that might replace
the four barriers overcome by this design, and the manner in which the design
degrees of freedom (carbon properties, lithium to carbon ratio on anode, flow
rate of electrolyte, particle sizes, and operation mode) can achieve desired
performance. These will be investigated with an agenda to better understand
dendrite formation and SEI formation as well as how to control these
phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit - The convection battery is a
novel/innovative and high impact approach for energy storage that is based on
reaction engineering to understand and overcome barriers to typical batteries.
Advancing of knowledge will occur because it creates new and improved methods to
study and overcome key performance limitations related to dendrite formation and
solid-electrolyte interface layer (SEI) formation. The Task 2 view cells will
allow the following of dendrite formation along with new degrees of freedom such
as flow rate, concentration of electrolyte, and flow direction/reversal to
provide an improved understanding of dendrite and SEI formation and to develop
methods to overcome these barriers. The research team brings expertise in
packed-bed catalysis along with a track record of success from the previous NSF-
PFI award on carbon production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact - Convection
batteries and solutions to dendrite and SEI problems will lead to improved
energy storage technology with impact on applications for PHEV vehicles and
electric grid energy storage. The social benefits of advances in this area would
be in the creation of a new, stable, and competitive manufacturing industry in
the U.S. The laboratories of PI actively recruit and foster undergraduate
researchers including minorities and females who are encouraged to pursue
graduate degrees-in total these labs have about 8 undergraduate researchers. The
undergraduate research program is a key part of the chemical engineering program
and the equipment and resources of this effort will enhance that infrastructure.
The results of this research will be published in engineering journals with
several presentations at professional conferences.