* 0940646
* BPC-LSA: The Computer Science Collaboration Project
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2010,08/31/2013
* Jill Denner, EdLab Group Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cuny
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,500,000.00

The Puget Sound Center for Teaching, Learning and Technology proposes the
Computer Science Collaboration (CSC) Project, which will build capacity among
K-12 programs that aim to increase diversity in computing. Many K-12
organizations and activities are designed to address the continuing
underrepresentation in computing among people with disabilities, women, and
certain racial/ethnic minorities. Yet we have seen few gains in representation
among these groups. This is, at least in part, due to the isolation of outreach
organizations and their inconsistent capacity to access and implement best
practices. The CSC Project aims to change this by building collaborations and
connections between existing programs. It will use the most successful elements
of the National Girls Collaborative Project to work with the Alliances and K-12
outreach organizations that are already part of the BPC community, specifically
focusing on outreach to persons with disabilities, African Americans, Hispanics,
American Indians, Alaska Natives, Native Hawaiians, Pacific Islanders, and
women. The CSC Project aims to maximize access to shared resources within
organizations (public and private) serving underrepresented youth in computing,
strengthening their capacity by sharing best practice research and program
models, outcomes, and products through training and dissemination. In this way,
the project hopes to create the tipping point, creating a community of projects,
initiatives, and stakeholders dedicated to transforming the computing workforce
with equitable participation.