* 0940835
* Tree-thinking in Introductory Biology Evolution Education
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2014
* John Gibson, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 12/31/2014
* USD 149,992.00

Biological Sciences (61). Despite its importance in the biological sciences,
evolutionary theory is not widely understood or accepted in the general public,
and there is tremendous variation in coverage of evolution and related topics in
pre-college and college-level science education. Consequently, many
undergraduate students enter and may leave introductory level biology with a
poor knowledge foundation about evolution. In response to calls for more active,
student-focused science education in general, and more effective teaching of
evolution in particular, this project is developing a curriculum comprised of a
series of active learning modules that can be used in an introductory-level
biology course for majors and non-majors, one that is aimed at increasing
student understanding and appreciation of evolution as a fundamental principle
of modern biology. Because surveys also report a positive correlation between
understanding of the principles of genetics and inheritance and the acceptance
and understanding of evolutionary principles, the modules emphasize the link
between phylogeny and genetic data. By emphasizing a phylogenetic perspective
called tree thinking, the strength of genetic data that reveal the unbroken
chain of inherited information among different lineages can be built upon to
explain other evolutionary and biological phenomena. The modules include group
problem sets, case studies, peer learning, and inquiry-based exercises that can
be used in a lecture or laboratory setting. Because the modules depend upon
awareness of and expertise with tree-thinking, active learning techniques and
current educational technology, the project also includes an interactive
pedagogy workshop for graduate students teaching in these courses. The pedagogy
forum provides experience and exposure to current research in science education
and is designed to complement the research skills the graduate students are
developing. The modules are impacting over 375 undergraduate students at the
University of Oklahoma each year; approximately 10 graduate students per year
participate in the program and receive training in science pedagogy to foster
development of this critical aspect of their professional development. The
effect of the modules on student learning is being assessed through multiple-
choice pre- and post-module assessments, concept maps, and open ended surveys.
Results of the project are being shared with other units at the University of
Oklahoma whose mission includes science education, presented at professional
scientific conferences, and published in the science pedagogy literature.