* 0940040
* Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on Radiation and Climate in 2009; New London, New Hampshire
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2010
* Nancy Gray, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 07/31/2010
* USD 20,000.00

The grant is to support the Gordon Research Conference (GRC) 2009 on Radiation
and Climate. The conference will be held at the Colby-Sawyer College, New
London, NH on July 5-10, 2009. It will present cutting-edge research on the
outstanding issues in global climate change with focus on the radiative forcing
and sensitivity of the climate system and associated physical processes. The
conference will feature a wide range of topics, including grand challenges in
radiation and climate, radiative forcing, climate feedbacks, cloud processes in
climate system, hydrological cycle in changing climate, absorbing aerosols and
Asian monsoon, recent climate changes, and geo-engineering. The invited speakers
will present the recent most important advances and future challenges in these
areas. The Conference will bring together a collection of leading investigators
who are at the forefront of their field, and will provide opportunities for
scientists especially junior scientists and graduate students to present their
work in poster format and exchange ideas with leaders in the field. This
Conference with programmed discussion sessions provides an avenue for scientists
from different disciplines to brainstorm and promotes cross-disciplinary
collaborations in the various research areas represented. GRC participants have
the opportunity to discuss unpublished work and to explore new issues and ideas
in the formative stage. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Knowledge transfer and networking
for young scientists is an expected outcome from this grant.