* 0940459
* KUMUNU 2009
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2010
* Brian Harbourne, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Zongzhu Lin
* 08/31/2010
* USD 9,290.00

ABSTRACT

Principal Investigator: Cooper, Susan M. Proposal Number: DMS - 0940459
Institution: University of Nebraska-Lincoln Title: KUMUNU 2009

ABSTRACT: The 2009 KUMUNU conference will be held at the University of Nebraska-
Lincoln, September 19-20. KUMUNU is an annual weekend conference anchored by the
Universities of Kansas (KU), Missouri-Columbia (MU) and Nebraska-Lincoln (NU),
promoting interaction among researchers, post docs and graduate students in
commutative algebra and related disciplines (such as algebraic geometry,
K-theory and coding theory) at regional schools (which in 2008 included 16
different institutions). Although the KUMUNU triad has significant strength in
these areas, geographic separation raises a hurdle to taking the most advantage
of this strength. Fortunately, the distances are small enough to allow
scheduling in such a way that regional participants can inexpensively gather at
a central location for a weekend conference. The KUMUNU conference series thus
provides a cost-effective annual venue for regional researchers at various
stages of their careers, including graduate students, recent Ph.D.s and faculty
at nonPh.D. granting institutions, to interact with each other and with
experienced researchers based at KU, MU, NU and a limited number of invited
experts from outside the region.

Travel and lodging support to facilitate participation, especially for graduate
students, is a key element for KUMUNU to achieve its main goals. These include:
playing a strong regional mentoring role at all levels by showcasing the
research of post docs and young faculty and by helping recent Ph.D.s and
graduate students in commutative algebra and related disciplines enrich their
research programs by meeting senior researchers based at KU, MU, NU and
elsewhere; and promoting research in commutative algebra by providing a venue
for discussion of the latest developments in the field, for exchanging ideas and
for setting the basis for future research collaborations. The conference design
also furthers these goals: KUMUNU comprises a limited number of talks, which are
encouraged to be accessible to graduate students, by speakers representing a
geographically diverse mix of senior researchers, young faculty and post docs,
with plenty of time reserved outside of talks for additional interaction. The
relatively small size of the meeting and its geographic and disciplinary focus
also encourage participants to establish productive collaborative relationships.
In addition to the stimulation and enrichment of the research careers of the
students and early career participants, participants from nonPh.D. granting
institutions will take ideas from the conference back to their colleagues and
students, stimulating further research and mathematical enrichment at their home
institutions.