* 0940673
* Global Biodiversity Information Facility 2009 - 2011
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2013
* David Remsen, Global Biodiversity Information Facility Secretariat
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 03/31/2013
* USD 3,061,200.00

The Global Biodiversity Information Facility (GBIF) is awarded a grant to cover
the United States participation in the single largest biodiversity informatics
initiative worldwide. GBIF provides access to over174 million primary
biodiversity records and over 1 million name records, active development of
informatics tools and software, and interaction with a global network of peers
in biodiversity science and biodiversity informatics. GBIF provides a unique
combination of rich biodiversity data and expertise in biodiversity informatics.
GBIF offers a portal to the largest storehouse of primary, research-class
biodiversity data?accessed from hundreds of institutions globally in a
distributed fashion. GBIF-developed or GBIF-funded informatics tools are
increasingly used in diverse informatics applications, ranging from dynamic
?encyclopedia of life? mashups to utilities for large-scale downloads of primary
research data. This biodiversity collaboratory thus represents a catalyzing
force for rich developments across an emerging field of informatics. The GBIF
initiative offers a rich arena for global collaboration in biodiversity science.
It includes dimensions of data repatriation to countries of origin, broad
enabling of biodiversity conservation efforts, prioritizing areas for public
health remediation, and other dimensions of policy-making. The GBIF effort has
trained hundreds of scientists, both in the US and globally, in aspects of the
emerging field of biodiversity informatics. As such, this initiative has rich
global implications and positive impacts.

Under this award, GBIF will seek to transform the working prototype into a fully
functional information facility. Under the reorganization of GBIF into two
thematic areas, Informatics and Participation, the GBIF Work Programme for
2009-2010 (http://www2.gbif.org/WP2009-10.pdf) lays out a bold suite of advances
toward a comprehensive global biodiversity information infrastructure that will
support both science and policy decision making, and that will ensure that GBIF
Informatics prioritizes development in accordance with the needs expressed via
the Participation thematic area on behalf of participants. The proposed
advances, based on concrete stakeholder demands and years of experience with the
informatics infrastructure so far, will bring the GBIF information resources
from prototype to full operation as "the primary World Wide Web source for all
data and information about biodiversity," as laid out in the 2007-2011 GBIF
Strategic Plan.