* 0940701
* Student Travel Support for SIGMETRICS 2009
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2010
* Abhishek Chandra, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Mohamed G. Gouda
* 05/31/2010
* USD 4,200.00

The ACM SIGMETRICS/Performance 2009 Conference will be held in Seattle, WA, from
June 15-19, 2009. Sigmetrics brings together 150 or more professionals from
academic and industrial backgrounds in what has become a premier forum for
discussing the development and application of state-of-the-art, broadly
applicable analytic, simulation, and measurement-based performance evaluation
techniques. There are several workshops and student activities also being
organized along with Sigmetrics 2009 including:&lt;br/&gt;? Student Thesis Panel
that provides a live forum for students to promote and get feedback on their
work, exchange research experiences, and interact with established
researchers,&lt;br/&gt;? Demo Competition to communicate research ideas in a
live, interactive forum, and&lt;br/&gt;? Industrial Information Session that
would provide students a communication channel to interact with industrial
researchers and learn more about their cutting-edge work. This proposal requests
funding to support the conference registration and travel-related costs of 6
graduate students from the U.S. Participation in leading conferences is an
extremely important part of the graduate school experience, providing the
opportunity to interact with more senior researchers and to be exposed to
leading edge work.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The Sigmetrics conference
emphasizes both innovative research and quantified or illuminating experience.
Sigmetrics 2009 seeks to present innovative, exciting work related to all
aspects of performance, including speed and scalability as well as reliability,
availability, and&lt;br/&gt;manageability of systems. Contributions containing
highly original ideas, new approaches, and/or groundbreaking results are
particularly encouraged. There will also be a poster session for the
presentation of promising preliminary work.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The
support requested in this proposal will make possible the participation of
students who would otherwise be unable to attend. Particular attention will be
paid to directing support towards under-represented minorities including women,
African-Americans, Hispanics, Native Americans, and Native Pacific Islanders.
The support will provide students who attend&lt;br/&gt;with the opportunity to
interact with mentors and peers of varying sex, ethnicity and background.