* 0940863
* International Conference on Advances in Scientific Computing; December 2009; Providence, RI
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2010
* Chi-Wang Shu, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 09/30/2010
* USD 19,686.00

This purpose of this grant is to support an International Conference
&lt;br/&gt;on Advances in Scientific Computing at Brown University on December
&lt;br/&gt;6-8, 2009, to honor the memory of Professor David Gottlieb and to
&lt;br/&gt;review recent advances and explore exciting new directions in
&lt;br/&gt;scientific computing and related numerical solution of
partial&lt;br/&gt;differential equations and mathematical modeling for time
dependent &lt;br/&gt;problems and their applications. A notable feature of this
&lt;br/&gt;conference will be the emphasis on the crucial role of significant
&lt;br/&gt;mathematics in the design of advanced algorithms applicable to real
&lt;br/&gt;world problems. The conference will include invited speakers
&lt;br/&gt;ranging from numerical analysts with a strong interest in
&lt;br/&gt;applications, to applied and computational mathematicians to
&lt;br/&gt;engineers, physicists and scientists in other fields. The list of
&lt;br/&gt;invited speakers includes both very senior leaders in the
field&lt;br/&gt;and relatively young scientists. Represented in this list are
both &lt;br/&gt;women and minority mathematicians.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed conference will be an effective venue for the exchange &lt;br/&gt;of
ideas among a diversified list of invited speakers and &lt;br/&gt;participants.
It will provide valuable guidance to young &lt;br/&gt;participants to identify
promising problems and application areas. &lt;br/&gt;It is expected that this
conference will push forward the research &lt;br/&gt;in algorithm design and
applications utilizing significant &lt;br/&gt;mathematics to improve efficiency
and effectiveness. These &lt;br/&gt;algorithms have been and will continue to be
widely used in &lt;br/&gt;applications which are of national interest, including
homeland&lt;br/&gt;security (image processing and pattern recognizing),
environment,&lt;br/&gt;aerospace engineering, communications, energy science,
and climate&lt;br/&gt;modeling.