* 0940805
* GENI D&amp;P Control Framework
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Brig 'Chip' Elliott, Raytheon BBN Technologies Corp.
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Lyles
* 09/30/2013
* USD 11,546,106.00

&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment
Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5)." &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;GENI is a unique virtual
laboratory for at-scale network experimentation on future internets. Dynamic and
adaptive, GENI opens up new opportunities for significant socio-economic impact.
GENI will support at-scale experimentation on a suite of shared, heterogeneous,
highly instrumented infrastructure; enable deep programmability throughout the
network, promoting innovations in network science, security, technologies,
services, and applications; and provide collaborative and exploratory
environments for academia, industry and the public to catalyze groundbreaking
discoveries and innovation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spiral development is the core
strategy for providing a concrete focal point for community debate and
engagement moving forward. GENI Spiral 1 launched in October 2008 and is making
rapid progress to create a set of end-to-end GENI prototypes by October 2009
with broad academic and industrial participation and strong competition in the
design and implementation of GENI's control framework. Based on lessons learned
in Spiral 1, the GPO issued a 2nd solicitation in 2008 to fill critical gaps in
GENI's architecture, especially security requirements and architecture,
experiment workflow tools and user interfaces, and prototypes for
instrumentation and measurement. This award funds 33 new projects, which build
upon the achievements of Spiral 1 and move the project into Spiral 2 with
federation and shakedown experiments that will prove critical in guiding
progress in GENI system design. &lt;br/&gt;