* 0940019
* RAPID: Lionfish invasion of the Mesoamerican reef: community invasibility and the evolutionary response of prey avoidance behavior to a novel predator
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2010
* John Bruno, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 07/31/2010
* USD 133,051.00

Invasions by exotic vertebrate predators can have striking effects on native
communities that are typically far greater than those of other exotic taxa. They
also provide unique opportunities to understand several ecological and
evolutionary aspects of predator-prey interactions. For example, if one knew
that an invasion was imminent, planned pre-invasion measurements could be
compared to different post-invasion stages to watch the ecological and
evolutionary impacts of a novel predator unfold in real time. The purpose of
this investigation is to answer two fundamental questions: 1) What
characteristics of native communities influence biotic resistance to
colonization by exotic predators? and 2) What are the evolutionary responses of
prey to novel predators? The investigator willl use the ongoing invasion of
shallow-shelf habitats in the Caribbean basin by lionfish (Pterois volitans) as
a model system. Lionfish, a predator from the central and western Pacific ocean,
were first sighted in 1992 off Florida and have been spreading rapidly
throughout the Caribbean. By consuming young reef fish, lionfish appear to
negatively affect coral reef ecosystems. This research will primarily take place
on the Mesoamerican reef in Belize. To answer question 1 25 sites along the
Belizean reef tract will be surveyed during early summer 2009. At each site the
investigtor will quantify a variety of factors that could potentially influence
invasibility including fish density, juvenile abundance and composition,
structural complexity and benthic community structure. He will then perform
surveys for local presence once lionfish have become established on reefs in
this region. To investigate rapid evolutionary responses of prey to novel
predators, he will perform a series of assays using in situ video monitoring and
gut content analyses to measure prey avoidance behavior and predator efficacy
immediately after lionfish colonize local sites and grow large enough to consume
native fish and crustacean prey. These baseline performance and behavior data
can then be compared to post-invasion assays that will be performed in the
Bahamas and through time in Belize.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The region-wide
invasion by lionfish poses the greatest threat to Caribbean reefs and Atlantic
hard bottom communities since the urchin and coral disease outbreaks of the
1980s. By understanding the factors that influence the ability of lionfish to
invade a new site, this work has direct, applied value. Some of the work will be
focused on mangrove tidal creeks, which are critical nursery habitats for
countless species. Several UNC undergraduate students will participate in this
research and collaboration with NGO partners in Belize and the Bahamas will
promote awareness of the lionfish threat and educate the public on how to safely
catch and consume them.&lt;br/&gt;