* 0940055
* Short Course on "Diffusion in Minerals and Melts"
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2009,06/30/2011
* Youxue Zhang, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2011
* USD 14,650.00

This is an award to partially support the participation of 55 students and other
early-career investigators in a Mineralogical Society of America (MSA) short
course on "Diffusion in Minerals and Melts". It is expected that this short
course will educate and train a large number of graduate students and
practitioners on diffusion in minerals and melts, and the various geological
applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Diffusion is due to random motion of atoms,
ions and molecules in solids, melts, fluids, and gases. Even though the process
is microscopic, the effects can be macroscopic. For example, the initial phase
of a gas-driven eruption is powered by bubble nucleation and growth, which is in
turn controlled by diffusion that brings gas molecules into bubbles. Crystal
growth and dissolution, key processes in magma solidification and evolution, are
partially controlled by diffusion. Homogenization of zoned crystals and
equilibrium between minerals require diffusion. One of the most important
applications of diffusion is the inverse problem, to infer thermal histories
such as closure temperature, apparent equilibrium temperature, and cooling rates
from diffusion properties. Thermochronology and its applications to tectonic and
erosion rates require a thorough understanding of diffusion in minerals.
Furthermore, many geospeedometers for inferring cooling rates of rocks involve
diffusion. In order to help students and practitioners to understand the basics
of diffusion, and more importantly the experimental diffusion data and their
applications to geological problems, the proposers will organize a Short Course
on "Diffusion in Minerals and Melts" as part of the highly successful Short
Course series by the MSA. Associated with the Short Course will be the
publication of a RiMG (Reviews in Mineralogy &amp; Geochemistry) volume.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Course will focus on diffusion at high to moderate
temperatures in minerals and silicate melts. Although theoretical aspects will
be covered, the emphasis will be on fundamental details of diffusion for direct
application to geological problems, including (1) experimental methods, (2)
analytical techniques, (3) a summary and assessment of diffusion data in
minerals and melts (including the data and equations), and (4) various
geological applications. The RiMG volume resulting from the Short Course will be
a useful reference for high temperature diffusion in geology, where readers will
find the necessary theoretical background, detailed discussion about
experimental and analytical methods, and evaluated diffusion data. An online
supplement of all collected data in a unified format will be posted on MSA web
site.