* 0940932
* Operation Reboot: Transforming Unemployed IT Workers into High School Computing Teachers
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Mark Guzdial, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cuny
* 08/31/2012
* USD 2,499,996.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Georgia Institute of Technology
proposes an innovative program - Operation Reboot - that assists both unemployed
IT workers who wish to make a career switch into high school teaching and
existing high school teachers who wish to become more proficient in the computer
science content area. The IT workers and existing teachers will be paired.
Together, they will co-teach at least two computing classes over a year. During
that year (and possibly the next), the IT worker will participate in the Georgia
Teacher Alternative Preparation Program (GaTAPP) which provides teaching
certification to individuals who hold a bachelor's degree but not a teacher
education degree. GaTAPP serves unemployed workers, returning troops, and anyone
else wishing to make a career switch. In Operation Reboot, the IT worker and the
existing teacher will be mentored by an exemplary computing teacher, and they
will participate in a successful Georgia Tech program that provides summer
workshops and year-round professional development for computer science teachers.
Operation Reboot participants will earn a computer science
endorsement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A teacher's motivation, self-efficacy, job
satisfaction, and commitment to teaching are closely linked with their
professional identity. Through co-teaching, the courses needed for GaTAPP,
mentoring, and the teacher workshops at Georgia Tech, this program will
transform the IT worker's identity into that of a computing teacher. Specific
outcomes include (1) the transformation of 30 unemployed IT professionals into
high school computing teachers, (2) improvements to the content knowledge and
pedagogical content knowledge of at least an additional 30 existing high school
computing teachers, (3) an increase in the number and quality of computing
courses offered at the participating schools, and (4) an improvement in the
computing education of thousands of students. Beyond its affect in Georgia, this
program could provide a model for other states working to improve the quality of
education in the face of a severe shortage of teachers with computer science
content knowledge.