* 0940686
* Testing a Metric and Evaluation System for Innovation Benefits
* SBE,SBE
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2011
* Jerald Hage, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Julia I. Lane
* 09/30/2011
* USD 176,307.00

The traditional measures of scientific productivity have been publications and
citations. A major question in the area of science of science and innovation
policy is whether it is possible to expand outcome measures beyond such metrics
and directly measure the amount of technical advance or actual value generated
by a science investment more quickly and descriptively. Another major question
is whether it is possible to measure the incremental advances that characterize
many projects, in addition to the traditional focus on major
findings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research examines the potential contribution
of a metrics system, based on expert coding of current research findings, that
is both fine-grained and broad in scope. The general principles used to
characterize the metrics are differences by treatment area and by stage in the
process, which are the major sources of variations in health research problem.
It assesses whether research findings can be measured in real time and be both
linked back to specific projects and forward to the "pay-off" for society. The
project applies a system of 20 metrics of health outcomes and 16 metrics of
economic benefit that has been developed to all research projects funded in 2007
by the National Institutes of Health. It is used to code technical progress in
six areas of morbidity as stated in research reports after two years of
research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The metrics system is implemented at the project
level in order to permit an examination of whether the degree of diversity and
the amount of inter-organizational involvement in research teams is either
accelerating or decelerating results.Connecting advances in real-time to the
composition of the research team can also help inform the management of "team
science" and advance understanding of its impact on innovation.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The metrics system, if successful, could be used to add to the
scientific basis for the evaluation of projects awarded in 2009 by NIH under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act. The demonstration study also provides a
benchmark for what can be reasonably expected in that short time period, given
differences by treatment area and by stage in the process. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The approach could potentially be applied to other major policy
objectives, such as alternative energies. Connecting advances in real-time to
the composition of the research team also contributes findings about the
management of ?team research? and its impact on innovation.