* 0940499
* Utah State EPSCoR Planning Grant
* O/D,EPS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Ronald Pugmire, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Denise Barnes
* 08/31/2012
* USD 266,987.00

Lead Institution: University of Utah&lt;br/&gt;Project Director: Ronald J.
Pugmire &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: Utah State EPSCoR Planning
Grant&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Description &lt;br/&gt;This multi-
disciplinary, intra/inter-institutional planning project will improve and
enhance research and research-based education within the State of Utah by
strengthening the science and engineering research facilities and infrastructure
to attract and retain highly qualified research personnel to the state;
enhancing education and training of students of all backgrounds in science and
engineering fields with special emphasis on engaging underrepresented groups in
the research enterprise; and improving and promoting the transfer of technology
from institutions of higher learning to the commercial sector. An expected
outcome of the planning process is the development and submission of a Research
Infrastructure Improvement (RII) proposal to NSF
EPSCoR.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;Through a coordinated
planning effort, it is expected that collaboration will increase between and
among academic institutions in the State of Utah. The two public research
institutions, University of Utah and Utah State University, and one private
university, Brigham Young University will catalyze the multi-disciplinary inter-
institutional effort to improve the state?s overall research and research based
education infrastructure. The management team has directed major federally
funded programs as well as industrially funded projects. The planning committee
represents major institutions across Utah and this committee will provide the
leadership needed to successfully execute the elements outlined for this
project. Significant pre-planning activities have occurred, and all of the
participating organizations will provide additional resources to assure the
success of this planning process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;By establishing closer relationships between Utah?s community
colleges, the primarily undergraduate schools, and the three research
universities, this project will increase collaboration between universities in
Utah, improve the educational experience of science and technology students at
all levels, and increase the educational opportunities of under-represented
groups by establishing closer relationships between the community colleges, the
primarily undergraduate schools, and the research universities. Investment in
Utah will be carefully targeted to achieve the EPSCoR goal of sustainable
science and technology infrastructure improvements at the state and
institutional levels. The results of these efforts are expected to significantly
increase the capabilities of Utah researchers to succe