* 0940168
* Conference:  2010 Dynamics Days Conference; Chicago, Illinois; January 7-10, 2010
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Adilson Motter, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 12/31/2010
* USD 26,333.00

This conference support award is for the Annual International Conference on
Chaos and Nonlinear Dynamics "Dynamics Days" to be held in Evanston, Illinois,
on January 4-7, 2010. The conference will bring together a diverse group of
experts in complementary areas of nonlinear phenomena, including chaos, complex
networks, granular materials, time series analysis, non-equilibrium statistical
physics, pattern formation, self-organization, and fluid dynamics. The
conference participants will be comprised of experts in theory and applications
as well as students and postdoctoral researchers. There will be substantial
emphasis on topics that cut across disciplinary boundaries, such as dynamical
processes in complex systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dynamics Days is an annual
conference organized with the specific purpose of providing an interface for
researchers from diverse scientific disciplines but with common interests in
chaos and nonlinear dynamics. This meeting has become internationally known as a
very effective venue for researchers to share their most recent results in
understanding, modeling, and controlling nonlinear dynamical systems.
&lt;br/&gt;The proposed conference will follow this tradition and create an
interdisciplinary environment that will facilitate interactions between
researchers from related but different fields. This is expected to generate new
insights and lead to potentially transformative interdisciplinary research. The
inclusion of students and early-career researchers, including those from
underrepresented groups, is a central part of the conference. This will promote
the transfer of expertise to the next generation of engineers, physicists, and
mathematicians.