* 0940146
* BPC-DP: Accessible Robotic Programming for Students with Disabilities (ARoPability)
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2014
* Ayanna Howard, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Janice Cuny
* 01/31/2014
* USD 520,521.00

The Georgia Institute of Technology proposes a project - called Accessible
Robotic Programming for Students with Disabilities (ARoPability) - to
investigate the use of alternative interface modalities in engaging middle and
high school students with disabilities in robotics-based programming activities.
ARoPability will leverage support from the Center for the Visually Impaired, the
National Federation of the Blind of Georgia, Children's Healthcare of Atlanta,
WizKidz Science and Technology Center, and the Georgia Institute of Technology.
It will (1) create alternative programming tools and use them in developing
accessible modules for students with visual or physical impairments, (2) run
Robotic Institutes at the Center for the Visually Impaired and with the National
Federation of the Blind to evaluate the modules' ability to engage students with
visual impairments, (3) run Robotic Institutes in conjunction with Children's
Healthcare of Atlanta to evaluate the modules ability to engage students with
physical impairments, and (4) provide teacher training kits and documentation
for classroom use. The work will focus on questions such as: What
characteristics of robotics-based activities need to be transformed to engage
students with visual impairments? What technologies can be adapted to enable
achievement of robotics-based programming activities for students with physical
impairments? Are there existing teaching modalities already employed by
educators that can be used to train these new computing professionals? What
methods can be exploited to broaden participation in computing for students with
visual or physical impairments? The techniques developed by ARoPability will
advance the state-of-the-art in engaging students with disabilities in computing
activities.