* 0940521
* Collaborative Research: BPC-DP: Building an Educational Infrastructure for Students at K-12 Schools for the Blind to Broaden Participation in Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2014
* Andreas Stefik, Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cuny
* 02/28/2014
* USD 447,053.00

Southern Illinois University-Edwardsville and Washington State University
propose to develop a new educational K-12 infrastructure aimed at increasing the
participation of blind individuals in secondary schools, and ultimately in
undergraduate computing programs and the software engineering profession. When
it comes to computer programming, blind and visually impaired individuals are at
a significant disadvantage compared to their sighted counterparts. Computer
programming is a highly visual task, and modern programming tools are designed
almost exclusively for sighted users. Moreover, computing curricula at schools
for the blind are nearly non-existent; those rare blind individuals who are able
to enter the computing profession are largely self-taught. This is an
unfortunate state of affairs, as computer programming offers the blind
population both a rich world to explore -- one that is potentially accessible
through carefully designed auditory cues -- and a lucrative career path. The
proposed project, in collaboration with five K-12 schools for the blind and a
mentorship board of successful blind programmers, will develop and empirically
evaluate a new educational infrastructure for the blind. It has three key
components. The first is a novel auditory programming environment tailored to
the special needs of the blind. The second is a new studio-based computing
curriculum that engages students in the construction, customization, and sharing
of auditory virtual worlds with the goals of teaching computer programming
skills and inspiring students to consider computing as a career. The third is a
blind-accessible, web-based community portal designed to facilitate peer
mentoring and support, and to provide opportunities for students to interact
with role models who have overcome their visual impairment and succeeded in the
computing profession. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will address
two significant research questions: How can the highly-visual, cognitively
complex task of computer programming be made both accessible and engaging to
middle and high school blind students through computing education infrastructure
consisting of an audio-based programming environment, specialized curriculum,
and web-based community portal? And how can a such a computing education
infrastructure be best designed so as both to facilitate their wide-scale
adoption by K-12 schools for the blind and to broaden the participation of the
blind population in computing?