* 0940331
* A Study of the Economic Impacts of the 2009 U.S. Stimulus Package and Its Science Policies
* SBE,SBE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Arnold Zellner, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Maryann Feldman
* 06/30/2010
* USD 178,316.00

The finding that information-technology?related increases&lt;br/&gt;in total
factor productivity (i.e., innovation)explained more than three-quarters of the
post1995 increase in U.S. productivity growth is based on an enhanced production
function framework. This research expands that framework and a related
theoretical and empirical model (a disaggregated Marshallian Macroeconomic
Model) to include science, health and education sectors in addition to the ten
industrial and government sectors. The approach combines principles of both
price theory and macroeconomic theory to examine the behavior of the overall
economy. An important modification is the inclusion of firm entry and exit.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research also investigates the effects of varying the
composition of the package on measures of short run, intermediate run and long
run performance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: There is little
theoretical basis upon which to build analyses of the effects of the stimulus
package on science, health and education. This project combines price theory and
macroeconomic theory to provide an urgently needed theoretical and empirical
framework within which to examine the effect of science investments. The novel
approach is that the research explicitly include a science sector that produces
output information and other products with not only the usual inputs of labor,
capital and money services but also input information.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This research expands past evidence that a
disaggregated model of the U. S. economy works better in explanation and
prediction than aggregated models that are in widespread use. Clearly, if models
do not explain and predict very well, they are less useful in making monetary,
fiscal and other policies. The work will consider the impact of various policy
packages to demonstrate how the policies affect not only the entire economy but
also specific sectors in both the short run and the long run. The results of
these analyses, together with their computed "margins of error", are likely to
be of great use to policy-makers.