* 0940371
* International Symposium on Fluid Turbulence; Beijing, China
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2010
* Charles Meneveau, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 09/30/2010
* USD 25,000.00

Turbulence, "the last unsolved problem in classical physics" (Feynman), has been
with us for over 100 years since Reynolds identified the laminar-turbulence
transition in 1883. The correct description of fluid turbulence will impact such
diverse fields as atmospheric pollution dispersion, weather, commercial chemical
processes and aircraft design. Recent advances on information technology,
turbulence modeling and experimental techniques have shown a great promise to
overcome the fundamental difficulty in studying fluid turbulence. In addition,
modern database technology has made exploration of Terabyte datasets possible,
which becomes a key component in understanding fluid turbulence.

The proposed International Symposium on Fluid Turbulence will be held at Peking
University, Beijing, People?s Republic of China on Sept. 21-25, 2009. This
Symposium aims to provide a forum to bring together scientists from all over the
world to present their latest research results on fluid turbulence and to
enhance academic exchanges. The participants will discuss and share developments
and innovations in theoretical, numerical and experimental studies of fluid
turbulence, covering all of its aspects. The focus will be given to physical and
mathematical aspects of fluid turbulence and their connections to engineering
modeling and applications.

Improved understanding of fluid turbulence will benefit diverse areas of science
and technology, from engineering energy-efficient machinery, to predicting
transport of pollutants in the atmosphere, and to long-term forecasting of
Earth's climate. The purpose of this Symposium is to bring together the world
leading experimental, theoretical and numerical experts with a key interest in
recent advances in fluid turbulence, in particular Lagrangian and Eulerian
Turbulence, non-ideal flows, statistical tools, sub-grid modelisation and data
analysis. This would help stimulate an intense and fruitful interaction between
these communities, with the idea of encouraging collaborations. China is among
the world fastest economical growth regions. It is expected that this Symposium
will provide a direct platform for US participants to exchange ideas on fluid
turbulence with scientists from over the world and to foster collaborations with
Chinese scholars. This Symposium will also serve as a window to allow Chinese
graduate students to know US turbulence research better. The requested financial
support is intended to support 28 US invited speakers attending this Symposium.