* 0940080
* WORKSHOP:  Computer Supported Cooperative Work Doctoral Research Colloquium 2010
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Gillian Hayes, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Crowston
* 12/31/2010
* USD 25,018.00

This award supports a Doctoral Colloquium (DC) at the 2010 ACM Conference on
Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW) to be held February 6-10, 2010 in
Savannah, GA. The CSCW conference brings together researchers from the fields of
organizational behavior, information systems, social informatics, information
sciences, and human-computer interaction (HCI). As such the conference is a
critical link between the research communities supported by IIS and the broader
social, behavioral, and management sciences. The primary intellectual
contributions of this project lies in bringing together a diverse set of
advanced PhD students from across the range of research represented in CSCW.
This workshop enables both close mentoring and the development of a group of
future intellectual leaders within the CSCW community. Furthermore, bringing
together these students in close contact with key CSCW researchers, both during
the workshop itself and during conference poster presentations, will support the
development of interdisciplinary dialogs, creating an environment for exchange
and conversation that will further enable progress on the projects in the DC.
There are short and long-term benefits from this work. In the short term, we
will provide significant feedback to the specific students participating in the
DC and more general feedback that can spread amongst other student attendees of
the conference. In the long-term, we expect that students who have participated
in the DC will then give back to the community by engaging as mentors to
undergraduate students, and in the future to doctoral students. Furthermore, we
expect these exceptional students to be the future leaders of the CSCW
community.