* 0940578
* BPC-A: Planning a Broadening Participation in Computing Alliance for the Pacific Islands
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2010,09/30/2012
* Thomas Wesselkamper, Chaminade University of Honolulu
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cuny
* 09/30/2012
* USD 74,333.00

Chaminade University of Honolulu proposes a collaboration with the University of
Hawai'i campuses at Hilo and Manoa for the purpose of planning and developing
the infrastructure for a BPC Pacific Alliance. That Alliance would serve higher
education institutions with significant Native Hawaiian and Pacific Island
student populations in the Pacific region. These students are a largely untapped
resource, but they will be difficult to reach: they attend 20 undergraduate
institutions located on ten islands, and they are a diverse population,
scattered across thousands of miles in the Pacific Ocean, encompassing four
distinct cultural traditions and speaking a dozen different Pacific Island
languages. Existing programs aimed at improving STEM educational opportunities
in the region have not had the resources needed to make a significant impact on
students in the computing disciplines. This project takes the first steps in
building a program specifically designed to meet the needs of students pursuing
computing degrees. The Pacific BPC alliance will be built in stages starting
with the three founding institutions. It will be modeled on two other Alliances:
the Islands of Opportunity Alliance (IOA-LSAMP) will provide the foundation and
basic structure, while the Computing Alliance of Hispanic-Serving Institutions
(CAHSI) will provide best practices and successful interventions. Planning
activities will center around preparations for a full proposal in the spring of
2011.