* 0940830
* RAPID:   Investigating a rapidly emerging epidemic of babesiosis in upstate New York
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2011
* Richard Ostfeld, Bard College
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 12/31/2011
* USD 200,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Babesiosis is a rapidly emerging disease in the U.S., Europe, and Asia that is
caused by infection with a protozoan parasite. The parasite, Babesia microti, is
closely related to the causative agent of malaria and is transmitted through the
bite of ixodid ticks. Symptoms of babesiosis include malaria-like fevers,
shaking chills, and acute anemia; severe cases can be fatal. In the past few
years, the annual number of human cases of babesiosis in Dutchess County, NY has
increased from zero to sixty and shows no signs of abating.

In the eastern U.S., B. microti is transmitted by the same ticks that transmit
the bacteria that cause Lyme disease and human granulocytic anaplasmosis.
Indeed, a single tick bite can result in coinfection with all three pathogens.
Unfortunately, little is known about the ecology of babesiosis.

The investigators will determine the wildlife species responsible for infecting
ticks with Babesia microti. They will then incorporate this information into
large-scale field experiments to test the causes and consequences of
environmental variation in human risk of exposure to tick-borne pathogens. This
research will transform scientific understanding of what determines risk of
exposure to this serious disease in the midst of its rapid and alarming
emergence. In addition, the project will support a postdoctoral scientist, a
laboratory technician, and three field assistants, as well as two undergraduates
who will conduct independent research projects at Bard College.