* 0940287
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Examining Formative Craft Economies in the Northern Lake Titicaca Basin, Peru
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2011
* Abigail Levine, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/2011
* USD 8,473.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Charles S. Stanish, Abigail R. Levine will conduct
petrographic analysis and geochemical characterization of three specific types
of finely made ceramics recovered during recent archaeological excavations at
the site of Taraco. Taraco, located in northern Lake Titicaca Basin of Peru,
flourished during the late Middle (1300-500 BC) and early Upper (500 BC-AD 400)
Formative Periods. Taraco was a very important regional center, and was a likely
predecessor to the Pukara polity. Analysis of excavated materials has indicated
that Taraco participated in long-distance exchange and ceremonial activities
throughout the Formative Period, but that the nature of these activities varied
over time. This laboratory research will further investigate these patterns in
order to examine the exchange of high-status craft goods over time on a regional
scale. The information obtained through this research will help to explain how
Taraco became larger and more complex than any of its immediate neighbors during
the Middle Formative Period. This work will help to better define the emergence
of multi-community polities in the Titicaca area and will contribute to the body
of knowledge of increasing complexity worldwide.

The craft economy, which consists of the manufacture, distribution, and
consumption of crafted goods, is often cited as a fundamental aspect of
increasing social complexity, and has been closely linked to the development of
regional centers. Both the acquisition and accumulation of such objects
represent an important source of prestige for aspiring elites, and their
exchange plays an important role in the elaboration of social hierarchies. As an
early center, Taraco is an excellent case for examining the Formative craft
economy. Specifically, this research will obtain mineralogical and elemental
data for three classes of non-domestic ceramics recovered from Taraco's high-
status residences. These results will be compared with analogous materials from
contemporaneous sites in the region order to monitor the production and
circulation of these goods over time on a regional scale. Understanding the
organization of the craft economy, and how it changed over time, is a critical
first step towards understanding how economic and political power became
centralized among a few communities in the northern Titicaca region.

This project will have a series of impacts beyond its interest to the
anthropological community. Throughout the duration of her research at Taraco,
Levine has worked closely with both Peruvian scholars as well as local community
members. Continued collaboration with the Taraco site museum will help to
enhance public awareness of recent research and of the region's rich cultural
history. A web-based archive will be created so that local and international
scholars may access data from all stages of the research program. Synthetic
publications in scholarly journals will communicate results to the scientific
community. Levine and her undergraduate assistants will also gain valuable
training in various geological characterization techniques, which will be used
to obtain compositional data for the sample of ceramics described above.