* 0940323
* Collaborative Research: Use of Novel True Triaxial Tests and Shear Band Theory to Determine Failure Properties of Compactive Porous Sandstones
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2010,04/30/2014
* Bezalel Haimson, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 04/30/2014
* USD 284,885.00

A research team from the University of Wisconsin-Madison and Northwestern
University is combining experimental observations and shear band analysis in
order to investigate the failure properties of high porosity rock. Shear band
analysis is a mathematical description of the observed behavior of materials
such as rocks by which their failure under applied stresses is concentrated in a
narrow band rather than being uniformly distributed. True triaxial tests, in
which test samples are subjected to three independent and typically unequal
principal stresses simulating realistic field conditions, are being conducted on
high-porosity compactive sandstones. The tests employ novel loading paths for
each of the principal stresses. These paths, unprecedented in laboratory
experiments, are designed to facilitate formulation of constitutive relations
and comparison with the theoretical predictions of shear band analysis. The
results of this research will provide the first systematic test of the
applicability of shear band theory for the full range of stress conditions.

A better understanding of rock mechanical behavior and its relation to failure
of compactive porous sandstones is essential for interpreting field observations
and as input for numerical simulations of complex geomechanical and geophysical
problems. These include earthquake mechanics, design of underground storage
facilities, energy recovery and sequestration of carbon dioxide. Failure in
these materials tends to occur in narrow bands and therefore can drastically
alter the ability of the rock formation to trap or transmit fluids. These narrow
zones of failure may reduce flow across them and interfere with fluid
circulation in applications involving fluid injection (e.g. for carbon dioxide
sequestration or liquid waste isolation) and fluid extraction (e.g. for oil
field operations). These failure zones can also provide conduits for enhanced
flow along them. Such flow can disrupt rock formations intended to trap fluids
and prevent them from reaching the surface or interacting with shallow
groundwater.