* 0940249
* Collaborative Research: Mathematics and Climate Change Research Network
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2016
* Kenneth Golden, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 09/30/2016
* USD 527,727.00

Jones, DMS-0940363&lt;br/&gt;Camp, DMS-0940267&lt;br/&gt;Danforth,
DMS-0940271&lt;br/&gt;Fung, DMS-0940272&lt;br/&gt;Golden,
DMS-0940249&lt;br/&gt;Holland, DMS-0940241&lt;br/&gt;Kostelich,
DMS-0940314&lt;br/&gt;McGehee, DMS-0940366&lt;br/&gt;Pierrehumbert,
DMS-0940261&lt;br/&gt;Silber, DMS-0940262&lt;br/&gt;Tung,
DMS-0940342&lt;br/&gt;Zeeman, DMS-0940243&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The
investigators form a "Mathematics and Climate Research&lt;br/&gt;Network." This
is a framework for an intensive effort aimed at&lt;br/&gt;bringing to bear the
full power of modern applied mathematics and&lt;br/&gt;statistics on the
prediction and understanding of the Earth's&lt;br/&gt;climate. The investigators
focus on three key themes: (1)&lt;br/&gt;Dynamics of Climate, (2) Climate
Process Modeling, and (3) Data&lt;br/&gt;Analysis and Data Assimilation.
Dynamics of Climate addresses&lt;br/&gt;critical climate processes and their
interactions. Climate&lt;br/&gt;Process Modeling undertakes the modeling of
climate components&lt;br/&gt;that have been underrepresented in extant climate
models, such as&lt;br/&gt;the multi-scale material structure of sea ice. Data
Analysis and&lt;br/&gt;Data Assimilation develops mathematical tools for
analyzing&lt;br/&gt;climate data and assimilating them in current climate
models. &lt;br/&gt;The Research Network aims to be a national resource,
with&lt;br/&gt;participants at thirteen U.S. universities. The
investigators&lt;br/&gt;work together as a virtual community that holds regular
weekly&lt;br/&gt;"webinars" and working meetings over the Internet.
This&lt;br/&gt;multi-year effort is expected to help in defining a research
area&lt;br/&gt;of "climate mathematics" and in educating a new generation
of&lt;br/&gt;mathematical researchers to meet the scientific
challenges&lt;br/&gt;associated with a changing climate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
This project is driven by the need to better understand the&lt;br/&gt;Earth's
climate system. Climate is the result of many&lt;br/&gt;geophysical and chemical
processes in the Earth's atmosphere,&lt;br/&gt;oceans and biosphere. These
processes evolve in time over many&lt;br/&gt;scales, ranging from minutes to
centuries, and interact in&lt;br/&gt;multiple ways, most often nonlinearly.
Feedback mechanisms, many&lt;br/&gt;of which are poorly understood, further
complicate the picture. &lt;br/&gt;Because there is only one Earth, climate
cannot be studied by&lt;br/&gt;systematic experimentation; the only approach
available to&lt;br/&gt;climate researchers is through computational experiments.
These&lt;br/&gt;experiments are based on mathematical models, which must
be&lt;br/&gt;simple enough not to exceed the capabilities of today's
advanced&lt;br/&gt;computer architectures, while still incorporating the
physical&lt;br/&gt;and chemical processes that are essential for realistic
climate&lt;br/&gt;outcomes. The expertise of mathematical scientists in
designing,&lt;br/&gt;assessing and interpreting these models is critical.
This&lt;br/&gt;"Mathematics and Climate Research Network" helps engage
the&lt;br/&gt;mathematical sciences community to address the mathematical
and&lt;br/&gt;statistical issues of our changing climate. The Research
Network&lt;br/&gt;takes full advantage of current information
technology;&lt;br/&gt;communication and collaboration among the participants
takes&lt;br/&gt;place mostly remotely over the Internet.