* 0940134
* Collaborative Research:  CDI-Type II--Integrated Weather and Wildfire Simulation and Optimization for Wildfire Management
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Lewis Ntaimo, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Bradley F. Smull
* 09/30/2013
* USD 220,825.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wildfires cause great destruction
including the loss of life and damage to property, infrastructure and the
environment. The complexity of wildfire management arises from the uncertain
dynamic interactions and dependencies among multiple system components. These
include highly dynamic and nonlinear wildfire behaviors, weather conditions, and
firefighting resource management. In previous research, these components have
been largely treated in isolation in their own fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
achieve effective wildfire management, decision-making support tools that
integrate all these components as a whole are needed. The objective of this
project is to develop new models and computation methods that integrate weather
prediction, wildfire simulation, data assimilation and stochastic optimization
for effective wildfire response management. In doing so, the project will make
two key paradigm-shifting advances in wildfire modeling and management: 1)
coupled weather and wildfire modeling and data assimilation for two-way
interactive dynamic weather-wildfire prediction, and 2) Integrated wildfire
simulation and stochastic optimization for wildfire containment. The project
focuses on computational thinking for understanding the complexity in the
natural systems of weather and wildfire behavior, and in the man-made system of
firefighting resources management. Due to the stochastic and multiscale nature
of the problem data associated with these systems, the project also involves
data assimilation and parallel/distributed computational methods for robust
weather and wildfire behavior predictions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of
this project will aid in wildfire management to alleviate losses caused by
wildfires through robust firefighting resource management decisions. The
collaboration with the Texas Forest Service will enable validation and transfer
of the resulting knowledge, systems and tools to real wildfire management. The
results of the research will also benefit other emergency response applications
such as those in homeland security. The project will provide interdisciplinary
training to both undergraduate and graduate students and will develop a web-
based education and training simulation environment. The project will also
strengthen and complement existing K-12 outreach programs at Georgia State
University (GSU), University of Oklahoma (OU), and Texas A&amp;M University
(TAMU) for minority students, and will make a concerted effort to broaden the
participation of underrepresented students in research and education. Results of
the research will be presented at conferences and published in refereed
journals.