* 0940183
* Paleoclimatic Reconstruction and Archaeological Investigation  at Xcoch, Puuc Region of Yucatan, Mexico:  Exploratory Research into Arctic Climate Change and  Maya Culture Process
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Ezra B. Zubrow, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 09/30/2013
* USD 300,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).



This research project investigates climatic change from a global perspective
through archaeological excavation and survey in the Puuc region of Yucatan,
Mexico and at the Maya center of Xcoch. Climate change in the Arctic is not just
a contemporary phenomenon, such change had social and cultural consequences for
many past human societies far from northern Polar Regions, including the Maya
lowlands. Changing climate facilitated Norse colonization of the North Atlantic
Islands during the Medieval Warm Period (AD 800-1300). At about the same time,
the Maya of Yucatan, Mexico, were experiencing disruptions to rainfall patterns
leading to sustained periods of drought. How Arctic climate change affected
processes of cultural development and decline in the North Atlantic and Maya
Lowlands has the potential to inform us today regarding the far reaching and
serious cultural-environmental impact of global climate change.

Climate data from places like the Puuc region, characterized as a semi-arid
tropical climate and dry forest vegetation that suffers from a long precarious
dry season, has the potential to inform us about the complex effects that Arctic
climate change had and has on the global climate system. Climate change has long
been seen as a major factor in the decline of ancient Maya civilization. Cycles
of drought affecting agriculture and available drinking water in particular are
believed to have being critical in the phenomenon known as the Classic Maya
collapse beginning around the 9th century AD. The site of Xcoch is uniquely
suited for climatic change research because it had a long occupation but
experienced significant depopulations by the 9th century, contains a deep cave
to a permanent water source, and there are many ponding features (aguadas); all
these factors give Xcoch the potential to provide long-term paleoclimatic
information. The nearby centers of Uxmal, Muluch Tzekel, and Xuch also contain
aguadas and there are several other deep caves in the region that will be
tested. This work is largely based upon new, untested ideas and has never been
tried in the Yucatan but involves new approaches, requires diverse expertise,
and engages interdisciplinary perspectives.

Survey and excavation at Xcoch will resume in 2009 when multidisciplinary
climate change data will be collected, analyzed, and compared with northern
data. This research engages the Arctic community because it is becoming
increasingly apparent that Arctic climate changes have global culture-
environmental impacts. In order to fully understand what those impacts are,
interdisciplinary and cross regional investigations, such as the proposed
project, need to take place both in the north and in the south engaging the
scientific community in a global discussion. The data that the PI expects to
uncover at Xcoch will be added to this ongoing discussion with northern
scientists. This research is viewed as potentially transformational, connecting
what up to this point have been primarily regionalized archaeological research
on the affects of climate change on local social and cultural systems, the Xcoch
project will attempt globalize this research by connecting the north with the
south.

