* 0940825
* EAGER: Micromachined Thermophones with Engineered Thermo-acoustic Response
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Babak Ziaie, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Massood Tabib-Azar
* 07/31/2012
* USD 150,000.00

EAGER: Micromachined Thermophones with Engineered Thermo-acoustic Response



The objective of this research is to design, fabricate, and characterize a group
of novel air-operated ultrasonic transducers that can significantly push the
limits of acoustic ranging and detection systems. The approach to achieve the
above goal is to use thermo-acoustic generation of ultrasound by integrating
wideband speakers and microphones on the same substrate. The substrate thermo-
acoustic properties are engineered using micro and nano fabrication technologies
in order to optimize the performance. The intellectual merits of the proposed
research lies in the design and fabrication of highly-optimized thermo-acoustic
transducers. These include tailoring substrate micro and nano architecture,
development of fabrication processes to so, integration of optimally designed
heaters on the substrates, fabrication and full characterization of such
transducers. The broader impacts of the proposed research are advances in
applications that require long range and high resolution ultrasonic ranging and
imaging such as robotics, surveillance, and smart guidance systems. For example,
navigation systems used for visually impaired individuals can benefit immensely
from such high resolution ultrasonic transducers. In the education and outreach
area, under-represented and minority undergraduate students will be included
throughout the course of the proposed research project. In addition, the PI will
develop an educational exhibition/booth to be located at the Purdue University
Birck Nanotechnology Center lobby area for hands-on activity and demonstrations
for local high-school students. The exhibition/booth will incorporate
educational items related to ultrasonic transducers, its operating principle,
and their applications in technology and natural world (e.g., bat sonar).



