* 0940501
* BPC-DP: Partnering Middle School Teachers with Undergraduate Computer Science Teams to Bring Computing to Underrepresented Youth
* CSE,CNS
* 11/15/2009,10/31/2014
* Lori Pollock, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cuny
* 10/31/2014
* USD 586,395.00

The University of Delaware (UD) proposes to partner middle school teachers with
undergraduate computer science students to bring computing to underrepresented
youth. The UD students will work with teachers from the Chester Community
Charter School (CCCS), helping them to more effectively use XO laptops in their
classrooms. To be able to use technology effectively across the curriculum,
schools need sustainable strategies to help teachers become knowledgeable enough
and confident enough to run computing-based activities. This project, Computing-
Teams-4-Youth, builds on previous work with CCCS. It uses undergraduates in
service learning opportunities to suppport teachers' integration of computing
and computational thinking into middle school math, science, language arts, and
social studies. Computing-Teams-4-Youth will (1) develop computational thinking
activities and increased collaborative and differentiated learning activities
for computing-based learning in middle school, (2) provide a service learning
course for UD CS majors, with collaborative development teams matched with CCCS
teachers and led by peer leaders to develop XO learning activities and apply
good software engineering practice with feedback from a real client, and (3)
build continuous software and professional development customized to teachers?
student learning goals, with biannual teacher-focused workshops for training and
collaborating. The undergraduates, working in carefully mentored software
development teams, will gain from collaborative learning, software engineering
practice with a real client, peer leader experiences, and an opportunity to
experience first-hand the potential impact of their computing expertise in
helping others. The teachers will get much needed support, and the middle school
students will benefit from increased exposure to computers and computational
thinking, increasing their interest in computing.