* 0940768
* CDI-Type I: Complex Catalyst Enabled via Computational Thinking
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2009,11/30/2013
* Dionisios Vlachos, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 11/30/2013
* USD 648,894.00

0940768&lt;br/&gt;Vlachos &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CDI Themes: Understanding
Complexity and From Data to Knowledge&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs propose a
computational framework for rational design of (bimetallic surface alloy)
catalysts that can be used in chemical, petrochemical, environmental, and energy
applications. Catalytic systems are spatially extended, emergent, and multiscale
and demand a different approach for their design. The development of this
framework can guide experimental efforts toward selection and synthesis of
materials with desirable properties and can have an impact on various
disciplines and industries. Despite the importance of catalysis and reaction
engineering in the industrial and environmental sectors and the US economy,
catalyst synthesis has by-and-large been an art rather than a science. The
development of a rational framework for catalyst design has many challenges,
including the combinatorial explosion in choosing multiple elements from the
periodic table and suitable architectures, the multiscale nature of catalytic
reaction systems, the responsiveness of catalysts to their environment (their
structure and thus their performance could vary in response to the environmental
conditions), the inherent complexity and emergent behavior of heteroepitaxial
structures, and the need to meet multiple objectives simultaneously (catalyst
activity, selectivity, and stability).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs proposed computational framework overcomes the
above challenges and has the potential to enable transformative changes in
catalyst design practices by formulating novel catalytic materials via
computational thinking. This framework will be applied to an emerging, complex
family of materials (surface alloy bimetallic catalysts) pioneered by one of the
Co-PIs (Chen). This new framework starts by developing a detailed, multiscale
kinetic model for a reaction at hand, using a recently introduced (by Vlachos'
group) hierarchical multiscale framework, to unravel the complex, multiscale
behavior of catalytic reactions. A systems' approach will be used to arrive at
optimal material properties, along with the corresponding uncertainty, using a
multiscale kinetics model. A large dataset of descriptors will be built via
first principle methods for various materials architectures and elements of the
periodic table. Data mining from this dataset will be coupled with the systems'
approach to look at a small set of suitable materials. New multiscale modeling
tools will be introduced. Finally, the materials will be tested experimentally
to assess and provide feedback to the model predictions. The overall approach
capitalizes on the symbiosis of understanding and modeling the complexity and
emergent behavior of the systems (Theme 1) with data mining (of first principle
models) to knowledge (Theme II) to arrive at candidate catalytic
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work
has the potential to develop a systematic approach for designing new products
and could impact the chemical, petrochemical, environmental, and energy sectors.
The computational framework crosses multiple disciplines, ranging from
catalysis, surface science, reaction engineering, systems' engineering
(optimization), and applied mathematics and computation, to reach out to
industrial practitioners for chemicals and energy production and emissions
reduction of high economic and societal interest. It serves as a prototype for
product engineering of complex, emergent, multidimensional systems. The PIs plan
to leverage the industrial network of their center for catalytic science and
technology (CCST) led by Vlachos and the University of Delaware Energy Institute
(UDEI) led be Chen to reach out via newsletters, annual reports, annual
symposia, publications, and webinars. Ethernet-based dissemination of courses
and seminars will be developed. Multidisciplinary education of students at
various levels and of postdoctoral fellows via various means and involvement of
students from underrepresented groups are also proposed. They will also utilize
existing networks between the college of engineering and local middle and high
schools to demonstrate the importance of mathematics, science, and engineering
in solving societal problems.