* 0940145
* Dynamics, spectral analysis, and renormalization in classical and quantum systems
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2009,06/30/2011
* Thomas Chen, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2011
* USD 85,445.00

This project focuses on analytical problems in mathematical physics, and
consists of three main parts. In the first part, the PI proposes to work on the
development of renormalization group (RG) methods for the spectral analysis of
the weakly disordered Anderson model. As a concrete application, he plans to
study properties of the density of states. Techniques capable of improving the
current knowledge about this problem will almost certainly be important for a
variety of other essential questions concerning the Anderson model. In the
second part, the PI proposes to continue his previous research on the
mathematical foundations of non-relativistic Quantum Electrodynamics (QED). In
various collaborations, he plans to study aspects of infraparticle scattering
theory, and to further develop an isospectral renormalization group method for
the analysis of spectral problems in quantum field theory. In the third part,
the PI plans to investigate stability questions related to the dynamics of high-
dimensional Hamiltonian systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The projects presented in
this proposal address three types of problems in mathematical physics. The
Anderson model is widely used for the study of the quantum dynamics of electrons
in random media, such as semiconductors. Understanding its predictions on
transport properties at small disorders in dimensions 2 or larger poses a major
open problem, and the proposed project intends to focus on certain key
multiscale aspects of it. Non-relativistic QED describes non-relativistic
quantum mechanical matter (electrons, atoms, molecules) interacting with the
relativistic quantized electromagnetic radiation field (photons). It models low-
energy processes in molecular physics and chemistry with excellent accuracy.
Because photons are massless, electrons always bind an infinite number of low
energetic (soft) photons, thus forming a bound state referred to as an
infraparticle. Accommodating the latter into the standard framework of quantum
field theory is extremely difficult, because of the so-called infrared
catastrophe (perturbative computations typically diverge due to the soft photon
cloud). Building on previous work of the PI and his collaborators, the proposed
projects intend to further develop the scattering theory of infraparticles.
Moreover, the PI proposes to investigate aspects of the dynamics and stability
of Hamiltonian systems with a large number of degrees of freedom, which
describe, for instance, the lattice vibrations of a classical
crystal.&lt;br/&gt;