* 0940422
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: Microfluidic assessment of chemotaxis towards different inorganic and organically complexed iron species by marine bacteria and phytoplankton
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2011
* Roman Stocker, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 07/31/2011
* USD 68,416.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

There is increasing evidence that iron is important in regulating bulk
phytoplankton production in large regions of the world oceans and also
influences the speciation of phytoplankton. However, not all iron in the ocean
is biologically 'available', making it difficult to obtain a quantitative
understanding of these linkages. Currently available methods that rely on adding
one or another chemical species of iron to natural seawater cultures are not
ideal because they cannot control for thermo- or photochemical cycling of iron
species within the cultures. Thus, the need exists for new analytical methods to
show which forms of iron are preferentially utilized by different marine
bacteria and phytoplankton species. A scientist from the University of
California, Santa Cruz in collaboration with a research from Massachusetts
Institute of Technology plan to determine whether a new microfluidics technique
successfully used to study dissolved organic matter utilization in marine
bacteria and phytoplankton can be adapted to determine the effect of chemical
speciation on iron acquisition by these species. Specifically, the proponents
plan to demonstrate that the microfluidics chemotaxis experiments can be carried
out under trace metal clean conditions and show that marine bacteria and
phytoplankton display chemotaxis towards a recognizable source of iron. As
regards broader impacts, this research would provide the ocean sciences
community a new technique to document which forms of iron are preferentially
utilized by different marine bacteria and phytoplankton species. One postdoc
from Massachusetts Institute of Technology would be supported and trained as
part of this EAGER award.