* 0940489
* The XXVth International Ornithological Congress: Campos do Jordao, SP, Brazil; 22-28 August 2010
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Stephan Schoech, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Hannah V. Carey
* 12/31/2010
* USD 15,000.00

International Ornithological Congresses (IOC) have been held at regular
intervals since 1884. The XXVth IOC will be held in Campos de Jord√£o, SP,
Brazil, in August, 2010 and is the first IOC to be held in South America. This
Congress will allow US scientists to interact with scientists from around the
world and they will also encounter habitats and people that have been largely
inaccessible. The financial assistance provided to scientists by the National
Science Foundation will make it possible for some to attend who might not
otherwise have been able to afford travel to Brazil. A committee of five
ornithologists will evaluate applications for funds from scientists who are
participating in the Congress. Committee members are committed to assuring that
diversity will be enhanced at the IOC by selecting a diverse group of scientists
with respect to gender, career stage, and membership in groups underrepresented
in science and engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the Congress information
will be exchanged in plenary lectures, symposia, contributed oral presentations,
poster sessions, round table discussions, and innumerable informal conversations
and it is anticipated that many cooperative, international projects will be
initiated. Examples of topics to be represented in the above mentioned forums
are: population biology, social behavior, communication (aural and visual),
reproductive biology, avian evolution, pedagogy, physiology, avian conservation
biology, promotion of ornithology in developing countries, public policy, avian
diseases, systematics, palenotology, migration, genomics, and flight
biology.&lt;br/&gt;