* 0940549
* BPC-LSA: The Indiana Stars Alliance - Reaching Out, Connecting and Enhancing Diversity
* CSE,CNS
* 11/01/2009,10/31/2011
* Dennis Groth, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cuny
* 10/31/2011
* USD 78,025.00

IndianaUniversity proposes a planning project for the creation of the Indiana
Stars (IN-STARS) Alliance, which will leverage the already existing STARS
Alliance model. The alliance will include research intensive universities,
Indiana's community college system, residential campuses, commuter campuses,
urban locations, as well as more rural locations. The alliance includes
Techpoint, Indiana's statewide information technology consortium. Each
educational member of the alliance brings different strengths and student
populations, with a wide range of degrees, including computer science, computer
information systems, information technology, and informatics. IN-STARS will
provide enhanced opportunities for traditionally under-represented students in
computing by creating strong local networks of students within each of the
alliance institutions, and strengthening the support mechanism for this critical
population of students by creating online social networks, and statewide
conferences to bridge the local networks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of
alliance planning activities will be to design programs that will create
increased awareness of opportunities to be gained by majoring in computing. Over
the course of the planning project, the PIs will design specific outreach
programs for the IN-Stars Leadership Corps students and design a combination of
approaches aimed at taking advantage of each alliance members? strengths.
Outreach activities envisioned in this alliance include precollegiate summer
programs, a statewide conference for the students participating as Stars
leaders, a statewide conference for high school students, programs specifically
geared for exploratory students already attending a particular college or
university, all supported by development of social networks to link students,
and co-curricular programs. A major component of the planning process is to
establish detailed assessment programs, which will be designed to be coordinated
with the existing STARS Alliance data collection efforts to provide enhanced
understanding of the impacts of this approach locally and nationally. The PIs
will disseminate the detailed plan to the computing community, to support and
enhance other organizations and programs seeking to broaden participation in
computing via the BPC-LSA approach.