* 0940558
* Observing Snow and Wind: Using the Environment to Engage Students in Science and Engineering
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2012
* Charles Whiteman, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Peter Lea
* 06/30/2012
* USD 135,000.00

Atmospheric Sciences (41)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is enhancing
experiential learning opportunities for students enrolled in an introductory
atmospheric science course by constructing an environmental instrumentation
laboratory that is integrating advanced equipment and preparing students for
research, creating instrument-based experiential learning, and expanding
understanding of how faculty adopt innovative instructional approaches. The
project is increasing student proficiency related to the underlying principles
and sources of uncertainty associated with environmental instrumentation, and
enhancing student confidence to use technologies to observe the environment and
solve real-world problems. Experienced faculty in the Departments of Atmospheric
Sciences, Biology, and Mechanical Engineering , and staff from the Center for
Teaching and Learning Excellence, are working together to redesign an
introductory course focusing on snow and wind. The course is attracting students
interested in winter snow activities, and is providing them with active learning
opportunities that rely on state-of-the-art real-time access to weather
information. The course is also addressing wind energy, and environmental
science and engineering students are benefiting from improved experiences with
various instrument technologies that are pertinent to the wind energy industry.
A wide range of non-majors, STEM majors, and atmospheric sciences majors are
using the sustainable laboratory facility that is being developed by the
project. Commitment of equipment and training from a major environmental
instrumentation company is facilitating the development of and is helping to
sustain the laboratory facility. The project is integrating fundamental
collaborative and active learning principles that are engaging students
individually, in small teams, and via peer-to-peer instruction thus enabling
them to transition seamlessly from lecture-based and laboratory-based
instruction to independent inquiry outdoors. The project is part of a complete
redesign of the undergraduate curriculum in the Department of Atmospheric
Sciences that has the potential to be transformative on a national scale. The
project is determining whether an improved curriculum incorporating an
integrated instrumentation facility for experiential projects is improving
student learning outcomes, improving the perception of science and scientific
research by majors and non-majors, and improving enrollment in atmospheric
science courses. Educational modules developed by the project are being
disseminated to other colleges and universities through on-line resources,
webinars, and participation in educational and scientific conferences.