* 0940851
* CDI-Type II: Collaborative Research: Groupscope: Instrumenting Research on Interaction Networks in Complex Social Contexts
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2014
* Noshir Contractor, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 08/31/2014
* USD 252,518.00

Many of the most important functions in society are undertaken by large groups
or teams. Emergency response, product development, health care, education, and
economic activity are pursued in the context of large, dynamic, interacting
networks of groups. Theory and research on such networks of groups is much less
developed than research on isolated small groups or formal organizations. A
major challenge for research on networks of groups is the difficulties that
accompany the collection and analysis of the huge bodies of high resolution,
high volume, observational data necessary to study these large, dynamic networks
of groups. The goal of this project is to address this challenge by applying
advanced computing applications to capture, manage, annotate and analyze these
massive observational sets of video, audio, and other data. The resulting data
analysis system, GroupScope, will enable breakthrough research into social
interaction in large, dynamic groups to be conducted much more quickly and with
much higher reliability than was previously possible. It will do this by
automating as many functions as possible to the highest degree possible,
including managing huge volumes of video, audio, and sensor data, transcription,
parsing audio for critical discourse events, annotation and indexing of video
streams, and coding interaction. These first pass analyses can then be
supplemented by human analysts (and their analyses in turn will feed into
machine learning that will improve the computerized analysis).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;GroupScope will be developed with the collaboration of
social scientists studying emergency response teams, children's playground
behavior, distributed teams, and product development teams. When developed,
GroupScope will be deployed in a cyberenvironment, a Web 2.0 based
cyberinfrastructure that enables a community of researchers to collaborate on
common problems. The cyberenvironment will enable multiple researchers to
analyze and code the same group data for both small groups and large dynamic
groups and networks. Multiple analyses and codings working from diverse
perspectives will enable discovery of previously unsuspected relationships among
different levels and layers of human interaction. They can also be linked to
survey responses from participants, enabling linkage to the realm of perceptions
and traits. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many of the most fundamental advances in
science have come through the development of new instruments, such as more
powerful telescopes or microscopes that can allow scientists to view molecules.
In the same way GroupScope will shed light on the workings of critical functions
performed by real world groups such as emergency response units, health care
teams, stock exchanges, and military units. GroupScope will also have
applications in the training of those working in multi-team systems, such as
first responders to disasters. It can be used to record and "grade" training
sessions, giving participants feedback on both strengths and weaknesses of their
approaches.