* 0940564
* BPC-DP: A Multi-tiered Mentoring Model (M3) for Increasing Minority and Women Participation in Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2014
* J. Michael Wyss, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Continuing Grant
* Janice Cuny
* 04/30/2014
* USD 499,705.00

The University of Alabama proposes a multi-tiered mentoring model (M3) that
partners a diverse university campus with a large urban school system. The
project will provide high-level instruction in computational thinking across
three different age groups using a "Learn to Teach, Teach to Learn" approach.
The participants will include: (1) middle and high school students from minority
backgrounds, (2) their teachers, (3) minority and majority college students with
secondary science education or computer science majors, (4) University educators
from four interdisciplinary units (Computer Science, and the schools of
Education, Engineering, and Medicine); and (5) a learning design firm dedicated
to enhancing computing education through media and technology.

The Specific Aims of M3 are: (1) to recruit a cadre of minority and women middle
and high school students into the computing pipeline by presenting engaging
mentored technology experiences, (2) to expose pre-service secondary education
students to pedagogical and technical aspects of computing education, through
interdisciplinary peer mentorship, (3) to extend computational expertise among
high school teachers in predominantly minority schools to encourage them to
actively learn and teach computer science courses in their schools, (4) to
increase the retention of minority students in undergraduate computer science
programs by providing them opportunities to create innovative tools for
computing education, (5) to engage K-12 administrators and parents of
participants through workshops that highlight the benefits of careers in
computing and (6) to evaluate the effects of M3 on student and teacher
performance in computing education, their aptitude and interest for this area of
research and tracking of career choices among participants.