* 0940893
* Collaborative Research: HumIT: Student IT Services to Support Open Source Software for Humanity
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2012
* Heidi Ellis, Western New England University
* Standard Grant
* Don Millard
* 12/31/2012
* USD 13,841.00

Software Engineering (34)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;HumIT is exploring ways that
students can provide information technology (IT) infrastructure services for
humanitarian open source software (OSS). HumIT is giving students rich and
engaging educational experiences while increasing the social benefit of
humanitarian OSS. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Open source software is developed
collaboratively and provided free to anyone who wants it. Humanitarian OSS
applies IT to humanitarian needs in areas such as health care, economic
development, and education. But the potential of OSS is limited by the need for
IT support. Given that the developers of humanitarian OSS are often volunteers,
providing good support is a difficult problem. Students in computing degree
programs are an untapped resource that can help address this problem while also
advancing the students' own education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;HumIT is creating a
new type of practicum in IT education. This approach can improve student
learning by directly engaging students with IT issues of large-scale application
systems. In addition, HumIT is giving students a first-hand experience in using
computing to have a positive impact on society, which may broaden the appeal of
IT careers to women. The HumIT approach can be extended across many institutions
due to the distributed nature of open source projects and the scope of
humanitarian IT needs. Finally, HumIT is creating direct benefit to society by
advancing humanitarian OSS while producing more professionally-capable computing
graduates.