* 0941382
* CDI-Type I: Collaborative Research: A Bio-Inspired Approach to Recognition of Human Movements and their Styles
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2012
* Ruzena Bajcsy, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Zhi Tian
* 12/31/2012
* USD 246,666.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The objective of this research is to develop bio-inspired algorithms for
recognizing human movements and movement styles in videos of human activities.
The approach is based on a new representation of static three-dimensional (3D)
shape structure in the ventral visual pathway consisting of configurations of 3D
structural fragments. This project uses neural experiments to validate an
analogous four-dimensional (4D) representation of moving 3D shapes based on 4D
(space and time) structure-in-motion (SiM) fragments. These SiM fragment models
are used to develop algorithms for automatically extracting SiM fragments from
videos of human activities. Hybrid system identification and clustering
techniques are used to learn a dictionary of human movements used for
recognition. This dictionary, in turn, influences the design of the neural
experiments. The algorithms are evaluated using a real-time tele-immersion
system.

The intellectual merit of this project is to substantially reduce the gap
between human and machine perception of human movements through the interaction
between computational and experimental analyses from neuroscience, computer
vision, machine learning, and dynamical systems. This project also has the
potential to generate advances in machine learning and dynamical systems, by
extending classification, clustering and system identification methods to time-
series data generated by collections of hybrid dynamical models.

Potential broader impacts include applications in surveillance, security,
assisted home living, infant care, tele-immersion, and athlete motion analysis.
The project also sponsors a competition where small robots are constructed by
middle and high-school students from Baltimore, and the EL Alliance program for
retaining underrepresented minorities at graduate schools.