* 0941809
* CCLI: Advanced Energy Storage Systems: Preparing for Sustainable Energy Development
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2013
* Gene Liao, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Amy Chan Hilton
* 06/30/2013
* USD 249,918.00

The goal of the project is to develop an industry-based learning environment to
prepare students to become skilled energy storage engineers and technicians in
both the stationary and transportation sectors. The project is a partnership
involving a four-year engineering technology program, two community colleges,
and industrial partners from major battery manufacturers, solar energy
developers, automobile manufacturers and suppliers. The investigators are
creating an advanced energy storage curriculum; setting up an industrial-based
energy storage laboratory; developing and delivering a short course for on-site
training of engineers, technologists, and community college instructors working
in the alternative energy field; and developing and delivering a series of
workshops and seminars for K-12 science teachers, corporate partners, and energy
and automotive professionals. The evaluation effort, under the direction of an
expert from another university, is using pre- and post-tests instruments to
measure knowledge and skills, student satisfactory surveys, and instructor
observational checklists to monitor progress and final outcomes. They are
disseminating their material and ideas through website postings, conference
presentations, and journal article submissions. The broader impacts include the
dissemination of the material, the outreach to K-12, the training program for
current workers in the field, and a trained workforce in an important emerging
area.