* 0941717
* CDI-Type-II: Computational Challenges in the Discovery and Understanding of  Complex Boiological Structures through Multimodal Imaging
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Ambuj Singh, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Thomas F. Russell
* 09/30/2013
* USD 1,950,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent advances in imaging have enabled
multimodal/multiscale observations of complex natural systems. Annotating,
harvesting, extracting, and correlating the information contained in these vast
image volumes is critically dependent on new information-processing tools as
well as robust workflow implementation of well-established tools. In cases such
as bioimaging, image data comes from different physical samples from different
specimens and needs to be statistically harmonized. Though piecewise
computational workflows in data collection are often highly automated, little
progress has been made in effective and efficient knowledge discovery. The lack
of processing and discovery tools to navigate data of such complexity and
magnitude is a critical bottleneck.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's
computational efforts focus on a biological system that represents a unique
combination of high complexity and accessibility for imaging: the vertebrate
retina. The retina has a very complex yet highly structured architecture
consisting of an unknown number of repeated neural circuits. Though it has been
a focus of intense anatomical and physiological studies for over a century, no
complete retinal map exists today. In fact, contrary to common misunderstanding,
not even all of the retinal cell types have been discovered, much less mapped
into functional circuitry. A retinal map is the critical anatomical ground truth
that is needed in building realistic models of the earliest stage in visual
processing. Building such a cell map requires advances in several areas,
including imaging and molecular marker technologies, statistical pattern
recognition, and databases. However, the critical barrier at this time is in
analyzing the vast amount of images that will be generated from such a project,
from samples coming from different retinal cross sections of different animals,
and the need to integrate this information in a statistically robust manner to
build a retinal map. It is expected that this project will advance not only the
image-based information processing technologies but will also have a significant
impact on neuroscience research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is
interdisciplinary and brings together researchers at the University of Utah and
UCSB. Students on the project will get a broad training in retinal neurobiology,
computer science and electrical engineering. This project will integrate
research and education by introducing the results of the research into courses
taught by the PIs on image processing, databases, bioinformatics, and pattern
recognition.