* 0941131
* Integrating Earth and Environmental Science Education into a Business Curriculum Using Technology Enhanced Learning
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2014
* Eric Oches, Bentley University
* Standard Grant
* John Krupczak
* 06/30/2014
* USD 130,347.00

This project will provide an interactive educational experience for business
students that relates their science electives directly to their business
curriculum through technology-enhanced, problem-based learning. The project will
(1) advance the pedagogic integration of Earth and environmental sciences and
related courses into a business curriculum by developing new trans-disciplinary
active-learning course modules through a series of summer workshops for science
and business faculty; (2) create new technology-enhanced class and laboratory
activities by incorporating recent university investment in environmental and
geochemical field and laboratory analytical instrumentation; and (3) assess the
effectiveness of the curriculum enhancements during and following implementation
of the technological innovations, multi-disciplinary course enhancements, and
new active-learning course modules. The learning modules will address
sustainability themes such as water resources, global climate change,
environmental hazards, energy and mineral resources, and agriculture, and thus
will provide a number of opportunities for interdisciplinary problem solving.
Through a series of formative evaluations, the course modules will be refined
and improved. Ultimately, the course modules will be made available to the
larger science and business communities through educational websites. Outcomes
and experiences will be communicated to the broader science and business
education communities at national conferences and through educational
publications. The project will not only enhance science learning and knowledge
retention and improve the scientific literacy among future business leaders, but
it also has the potential to increase the appreciation and understanding of
science and the scientific method among business faculty, as well as to increase
the appreciation of business issues among scientists.