* 0941043
* CDI Type I: Collaborative Research: Integration of relational learning with ab-initio methods for prediction of material properties
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2010,08/31/2013
* Gerbrand Ceder, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* hao ling
* 08/31/2013
* USD 305,382.00

The objective of this collaborative research is to apply computational thinking
to materials science with the goals of revealing hidden rules about materials
structure and properties and providing efficient computational and statistical
tools for modeling large systems with interacting elements. The approach
combines materials science with statistical learning. The research is driven by
two key problems in materials development, crystal structure prediction and the
inverse problem in materials science whereby one postulates the desired
properties and finds the composition and arrangement of atoms that result in
those properties. The investigators seek to design principled Bayesian models
for relational data, coupled with efficient inference methods.

With respect to intellectual merit, the integrative approach is a significant
departure from current methods for materials research. Ab initio computation has
begun to show promise for materials development, but its integration with
statistical learning holds the promise of leading to novel approaches that can
utilize massive amounts of materials data. Further, extracting knowledge from
massive relational data presents opportunities for machine learning research.
The research addresses common challenges in many disciplines and provides new
mathematical frameworks and computational tools.

With respect to broader impacts, the research has the potential to enhance
materials research and, ultimately, lead to the development of better materials.
The application focus on materials for energy is timely and important. The
investigators plan to recruit women and other students from underrepresented
groups into their research teams. Results will be disseminated through education
and a cyber-based platform, exposing computer science students to engineering
applications.