* 0941343
* CDI-Type I: New Information-theoretic Methods for Analysis of Neuronal Ensembles
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Michael Gastpar, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Siegmund
* 08/31/2013
* USD 649,998.00

Information theory has been used as an organizing principle in neuroscience for
several decades. Estimates of the mutual information between signals acquired in
neurophysiological experiments are believed to yield insights into the structure
of the underlying signal processing architectures. The experimental side of the
field has undergone an impressive paradigmatic shift over the last few years,
including simultaneous recordings from neuron populations and brain-machine
interfaces (BMIs). However, on the theoretical side, only minor modifications to
the theory were made. This project aims at transforming the theoretical backdrop
of systems neuroscience in general and neural ensemble electrophysiology in
particular. To this end, it levies three recent and emerging theoretical
advances in the network sciences: (1) the tremendous recent progress concerning
the behavior and information-theoretic performance limits of communication
networks, fueled by the resounding success of wireless communication; (2) we
have recently developed a new information theory of joint
computation/communication, showing that for networks with interference, joint
computation/communication can be executed much more efficiently - an exponential
energy savings as a function of the number of agents involved in the computation
- than separate computation and communication (as is classically done in
communication systems). Our hypothesis is that such a significant gap must have
repercussions in neural systems, and we develop new information measures to look
for places where indeed joint computation/communication could be a crucial
component of the neural signal processing. Finally, (3), we exploit a new
information-theoretic end-to-end perspective on communication systems. All of
these methods are applicable only thanks to new emerging data sets pertaining to
chronic, simultaneous recordings from large populations of neurons across
multiple brain regions. The further acquisition and development of these data
sets is therefore an integral part of this research project.

This project introduces a set of new information measures that are truly
multivariate, and thus a perfect fit for the emerging multi-neuron data sets,
and particularly for BMI. This involves both natural extensions of existing
information and redundancy measures as well as a new computational information
measure that assesses not just the quality of information transfer, but also the
computational potential offered by a population of neurons. The project aims to
develop a new set of theories, techniques, and methods for dealing with and
understanding multi-neuron recordings across spatiotemporal dimensions. If
successful, this will provide ideas for new experiments and sharpen our
understanding of the connections between communication and computation.

