* 0941530
* CDI-Type II:  Database enabled multiscale simulations and analysis of fluid turbulence
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Alexander Szalay, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Massimo Ruzzene
* 08/31/2015
* USD 1,899,469.00

To make significant new progress in the understanding and modeling of multi-
scale, complex fluid flow phenomena such as turbulence, the entire 4-D structure
of the simulated phenomena must be widely, and easily, accessible. To achieve
such goals, the proposed project aims to couple database technology with high
performance computing. Specifically, we will: (i) Develop a storage
infrastructure that provides efficient parallel I/O to archived simulation data
at all scales by adapting and improving techniques from recent visualization,
database organization and storage architecture research. (ii) Construct a data-
driven batch-processing framework that supports many concurrent data-intensive
queries. (iii) Develop tools to find "interesting regions" in the data, extract
various features, and tag those regions with the relevant metadata. (iv) Develop
tools for interactive visualization over the Internet so that data are
accessible at display resolution with queries that may request arbitrary sub-
regions. Several core databases will serve as content for the proposed research:
(i) forced isotropic turbulent flow to address fundamental unsolved questions on
the multi-scale and Lagrangian structure of turbulent flow, (ii) a large
turbulent channel flow, of interest to engineering fluid dynamics, (iii)
simulations of magneto-hydrodynamic (MHD) turbulence of astrophysical relevance,
and (iv) a 24-hr daily cycle of the atmospheric boundary layer including day-
time buoyant conditions and night-time stably stratified conditions, of
relevance to wind energy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By tightly coupling the database
approach to high-performance scientific simulation, the project has the
potential to transform the way research in scientific computing of multi-scale
phenomena is carried out and employed. If our approach proves successful, it
will become routine for state-of-the-art computational datasets to be archived
in databases with easy on-line access, flexible user-friendly analysis tools,
and efficient coupling with further simulations. We will apply the tools to be
developed to study various important fluid flow phenomena, such as turbulent and
chaotic motions in neutral fluids, in plasmas, and in the atmosphere.