* 0941257
* Collaborative Research:  Field-based Projects in Geophysical Methods with Applications to the State of Vermont
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* David Westerman, Norwich University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Lea
* 08/31/2012
* USD 89,486.00

Geology (42) This CCLI Type 1 is a collaborative approach to the acquisition and
sharing of geophysical equipment (ground-penetrating radar, electromagnetic
induction, seismic refraction, and sub-meter Global Positioning Satellite
technology) that is enhancing field-based curricula at the University of Vermont
(UVM) and Norwich University (NU). Intellectual Merit. The geophysical
instruments are increasing curricular and research opportunities for
undergraduate students to participate in geological investigations pertaining to
real-world problems with geological, environmental and archeological
implications. Both universities are partnering with the Vermont Geological
Survey. Because the main field-based courses using this equipment are offered in
alternating years at UVM and NU, the cooperative sharing of key equipment
maximizes its impact and efficient use. Through inquiry-based learning, students
are gaining experience in experiment design and deployment of geophysical
equipment to collect subsurface data that are being integrated with geological
constraints to solve real-world geological and environmental problems deemed as
priorities by the State of Vermont. Additional users of the equipment include
the UVM Department of Anthropology and its Consulting Archaeology Program.
Broader Impacts. This project is improving STEM teaching and learning through
the use of technology at both UVM and NU. New opportunities for undergraduate
students in the form of group projects and individual research are being
created. The results of these new student opportunities are having direct
applications to environmental issues, such as groundwater resources in the State
of Vermont, and are providing a powerful mechanism for STEM-related educational
outreach to the public.