* 0941326
* CDI-Type I: Freeway Corridor Operations Design and Implementation
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2014
* Pravin Varaiya, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Massimo Ruzzene
* 09/30/2014
* USD 600,000.00

Computational Thinking (CT) brought revolutionary productivity increases in many
service sectors, but it has not touched the road transportation service sector
whose productivity has been declining for a long time. The proposed research
will enable a major increase in road transportation productivity through a
dramatic improvement in all major components of traffic operations: data
collection and processing; model calibration and state estimation; and planning,
design and implementation of real-time control. The CDI themes figure in the
three major research tasks of the proposed effort. Understanding complexity A
road network is a large interconnected system of linkssegments of freeways and
urban streetson which vehicles and drivers move and interact to create a
complex, nonlinear, socio-physical dynamical traffic system. Link junctions have
programmable control devices (intersection signals, ramp meters, message signs
announcing speed limits, tolls, traveler information and advice, etc.) that
regulate the evolution of traffic. A major increase in efficiency of the road
network can be achieved by developing and implementing sophisticated feedback
policies for these control devices. The research needed to develop these
policies requires understanding the behavior of the underlying dynamical traffic
system, based on mathematical analysis and simulation. This is the first major
task. Data to models The specification and calibration of nonlinear dynamical
models of the traffic system require large amounts of historical traffic data.
The implementation of feedback algorithms requires estimates of the current
state of the traffic system, based on real-time measurements. The research will
develop procedures for statistical estimation of model parameters, visualization
of archived data and simulations, and model-based processing of real-time
traffic sensor data. This is the second major task. Virtual organization
Transportation authorities must implement the feedback control policies, but
they lack necessary skills and knowledge of computational thinking. Thus
collaboration between academic researchers and transportation personnel is
needed to train the latter in computational thinking and to educate the former
about the institutional and other real-world constraints facing transportation
personnel. Such collaboration requires trust underlying a true partnership, and
assistance with electronic means to facilitate cooperation among physically and
institutionally remote groups. Building this collaboration and implementing the
proposed feedback algorithms is the third major task.