* 0941855
* Instrumentation, Innovation and Collaboration: Improving the Biochemistry Curriculum through Hands-On and Virtual Laboratory Experiences
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/2010,08/31/2016
* Joseph Skrivanek, SUNY College at Purchase
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 08/31/2016
* USD 247,669.00

Chemistry (12)&lt;br/&gt;SUNY College at Purchase is partnering with six local
community colleges, Dutchess Community College, Nassau Community College, Orange
County Community College, Rockland Community College, Sullivan County Community
College, and Westchester Community College, to develop hands-on and virtual
biochemistry laboratory experiences to prepare undergraduate students for
further study or employment in STEM fields. With the acquisition of
spectrophotometers at the community colleges and at Purchase College, and the
additional acquisition of a fluorimeter and a high-performance liquid
chromatography (HPLC) instrument at Purchase College, faculty at these
institutions are integrating state-of-the-art instrumentation into coursework,
with the aim of providing students with direct experience in the techniques and
applications of instrumentation commonly used in biochemical and pharmaceutical
industries. Purchase College faculty are adapting two kinetics experiments for
biochemistry students to utilize these instruments and also use greener
processes, and they are developing a laboratory experiment for students in
organic chemistry to study E2 elimination via UV-vis spectroscopy. The
experiments are being used in laboratory courses at Purchase College and also at
the community college partners. The three experiments developed through this
project are being disseminated through presentations at conferences and
publication in peer-reviewed chemical education journals. Faculty at Purchase
College and Dutchess Community College are also working with the Teaching,
Learning and Technology Center at Purchase College to develop interactive multi-
media teaching modules to introduce this instrumentation to students at the six
partner community colleges, in order to increase their exposure to biochemical
instrumentation methods. Twelve faculty from the partner community colleges are
receiving training on all of the instruments through a summer workshop, and the
project team is setting up instrumentation with them on their campuses and
providing follow-up support to the community college faculty during the academic
year in using the instruments in their courses. Students from the six community
colleges are also engaging in summer research experiences at Purchase College.
The project evaluation is monitoring how many students are impacted, and is
examining the extent to which the new laboratory exercises promote student
understanding of the use of modern biochemistry instrumentation and the
analytical methods they make possible, the extent to which the investigative
curriculum promotes student engagement with and understanding of core
biochemistry concepts, and the extent to which new curriculum modifications
promote improved outcomes for independent student research projects. The
evaluation is also studying the impact of the summer training on the community
college faculty, the impact of the summer research experiences on the community
college students, and the effectiveness of the multimedia simulations in
promoting student engagement and learning outcomes and providing an
investigative experience for students when they do not have direct access to the
instruments.