* 0941470
* CDI-Type I Collaborative Research: Multi-Scale Modeling of Protein-Modulated DNA Large-Scale Dynamics by Free Energy Surface Matching
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Noel Perkins, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Siegmund
* 08/31/2013
* USD 356,587.00

Protein-DNA interactions govern essentially all major genetic transactions
within the cell including, for example, DNA replication, repair, transcription
and recombination. These actions, which begin locally at the nm-sized site of
protein-DNA binding, often generate very large, ?√ùm-scale DNA conformational
changes. The enormously broad length and time scales invoked in these complex
dynamical systems create formidable challenges for computational modeling. This
project addresses this challenge by proposing a transformative, multi-scale
computational method that captures the time-evolution of large protein-DNA
complexes on biologically relevant length/time scales (e.g., micron/millisecond
and longer). Our method begins with (one-time) massively parallel MD
computations and umbrella sampling of the protein domain to establish an
unperturbed free energy surface in the presence of a short (atomically-detailed)
fragment of the DNA duplex. Next, we couple a rod model of the long DNA duplex
to the protein (by geometric protein boundary conditions) and form a reduced-
order dynamical system (Fokker-Planck probability) model of the entire protein-
DNA complex for the dominant degrees of freedom. The resulting Fokker-Plank
model captures the complete (two-way) dynamic coupling of the rod/DNA and
protein domains and enables integration over the desired long length/time
scales. We illustrate our method on two large and challenging systems; namely 1)
the relaxation of DNA supercoils by human topoisomerase I, and 2) the packing
and ejection of dsDNA from viral capsids in
bacteriophages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims at long standing
challenges in predicting the dynamical behavior of large biomolecular systems on
long length and time scales. These predictions are essential for understanding
fundamental cellular processes (including DNA transcription, replication, and
repair) and interpreting exciting results from single molecule experiments. More
broadly, our method provides a systematic means to couple atomistic to continuum
level (e.g. micron-scale) descriptions of matter in a wide range of fields.
Other fields may include DNA/RNA complexes that form large scale nucleic acid
(origami) structures for scaffolding, computing, or nanopropelling; carbon
nanotubes interacting with organic and inorganic nanoparticles; nanowires and
their use for bio-molecular detection; and the structural dynamics of flagella,
collagen fibers and cellular cytoskeleton elements (e.g., actin, neurofilaments,
microtubules), among others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;