* 0941666
* CDI-Type I: A science and engineering programming and inverse modeling environment for massively parallel heterogeneous computing systems
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2014
* Martin Saar, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 09/30/2014
* USD 604,060.00

The goal of this project is to provide scientists and engineers with a
generalized, hardware-independent programming and runtime environment that takes
advantage of the wide range of scalable, high-performance, highly heterogeneous
hardware systems available, while masking the details of each from the
programmer. This environment will further provide an integrated inverse modeling
tool to perform guided parameter space and uncertainty analysis as well as model
optimization. Such inverse modeling is critical to identify general patterns in
order to develop new scientific theories that characterize complexity and thus
capture the essence of complex natural and engineered systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to improving our understanding of complexity
in natural and built systems (primary CDI theme), the proposed environment will
aid in visualizing and extracting knowledge from data (secondary CDI theme) for
which inverse methods (e.g., deconvolutions, regressions, parameter
space/uncertainty analysis, model optimization) are indispensable. Reaching
these goals is only possible, however, when combining the highest-performing
heterogeneous hardware solutions that can execute many thousands of simulations
with a high-level programming and inverse modeling environment that effectively
hides the heterogeneous hardware complexities. Several general computing classes
are identified, with example applications from science and engineering, that are
likely to benefit from such heterogeneous hardware implementations. Such
implementations would then open up new, transformational opportunities in
scientific and engineering computing, increasing the likelihood of discovery of
new theories regarding multi-scale interactions, emergent behavior, pattern
formation, and self-organization in complex, feedback-prone systems.Several
fundamental scientific and engineering computing categories with example
applications from seismology, volcanology, hydrodynamics, and rock magnetics
have been identified as targets of opportunity for this type of heterogeneous
computing.