* 0941538
* CDI-Type I: Geometric Algorithms for Staged Nanomanufacturing
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Diane Souvaine, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 09/30/2013
* USD 355,556.00

This proposal will be awarded using funds made available by the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5), and meets the
requirements established in Section 2 of the White House Memorandum entitled,
Ensuring Responsible Spending of Recovery Act Funds, dated March 20, 2009. I
also affirm, as the cognizant Program Officer, that the proposal does not
support projects described in Section 1604 of Division A of the Recovery
Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cyber-Enabled Discovery and Innovation
(CDI)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Numbers: 0941538 / 0941312&lt;br/&gt;PIs:
Hyunmin Yi / Erik Demaine&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Tufts University /
Massachusetts Institute of Technology&lt;br/&gt;Title: CDI Type I: Geometric
Algorithms for Staged Nanomanufacturing?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Efficient
nanomanufacturing of arbitrary structures is a major scientific challenge and a
mjor technological opportunity. This concept of this proposal is that
computational thinking will bootstrap any technology for constructing basic
building blocks and glues into a general methodology for manufacturing arbitrary
structures. A host of such results has the potential to revolutionize the field
of nanomanufacturing and bring the societal benefits much closer to feasibility.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project approach is to understand the extent to which
high-level algorithmic control, combined with nano self-assembly as the low-
level machine, can be used to manufacture arbitrary two- and three-dimensional
structures with desired interfaces using very few types of glues and basic
units. The theoretical approach is to begin with mathematical models of the
assembly process from basic units, small rigid units (rods, squares, cubes,
etc.) with glues (binding sites) of different types at specific locations,
proceeding to view the sequence of steps by which these units are created, mixed
in a solution, and filtered as a geometric algorithm in a novel computational
model. The modeling component will develop novel models for viewing
nanomanufacturing as a sequential or parallel computation system, where
computational steps are either precisely controlled physical manipulations or
self-assembly procedures. The primary computational novelty is to consider both
of these aspects in one cohesive model, while the chemical innovation is the
control and manipulation of viral nanobuilding blocks for higher-order
architecture construction. For comparison, complex, large-scale architectures
will be assembled by DNA hybridization using building blocks of tobacco mosaic
virus, analogous to the theoretical approach. The unique combination of
nanobiofabrication and two computational models - sequential and parallel
algorithms with self-assembly manufacturing is intended to enable more efficient
solutions to general nanomanufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In additional to
the technological benefits, the project will also train graduate and
undergraduate students to take practical challenges outside computer science and
develop mathematical and computational perspectives into the problems, a
cornerstone for the success of computational thinking. The proposed research
will also be widely disseminated through course and lecture exchanges, visual
art projects, and outreach activities.