* 0941321
* US - Cameroon Advanced Study Institute: Hands on Research on Complex Systems, University of Buea, Cameroon, July 2010
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2011
* Rajarshi Roy, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Carleen Maitland
* 12/31/2011
* USD 98,120.00

Professor Rajarshi Roy of the University of Maryland, with Co-PIs Kenneth
Showalter of the University of West Virginia and Harry Swinney of the University
of Texas ? Austin, will conduct an Advanced Studies Institute on ?Hands-on
Research in Complex Systems? at the University of Buea, Buea Cameroon, for two
weeks in July-August 2010.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The ten
faculty will be eminent scientists from the U.S. who have conducted frontier
research using tabletop instrumentation and who have published their results in
journals such as Nature, Science, and Physical Review Letters along with their
partners from Cameroon and other African countries. They will be assisted by ten
U.S. advanced graduate students and postdoctoral associates. The unique focus of
the ASI will be on hands-on laboratory experiments using inexpensive
instrumentation leading to frontier scientific advances in understanding complex
systems. The laboratory sessions will be complemented by associated mathematical
modeling using the software Scilab (which is similar to Matlab), which is
available for download, free of charge. The primary goal of the ASI is to
develop collaborations for scientific research with African nations. The ASI
participants will be advanced graduate students and young scientists and
engineers from developing countries in Africa (and a few participants from
developing countries elsewhere). The U.S. faculty will benefit by making lasting
contacts with scientists from developing countries. The ASI is sponsored partly
by the International Centre for Theoretical Physics (ICTP) in Trieste, Italy;
ICTP will provide travel funding for participants from developing nations and
administrative support for advertising the school and selecting the
participants. The ASI will be co-sponsored by the Ministry of Higher Education
of Cameroon, and will be held at the University of Buea which will provide
laboratories and lecture rooms for Hands-On Research sessions as well as lodging
and meals for all participants from Africa and participating
countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Participants from the U.S. and
developing countries will work closely together conducting experiments and
developing mathematical models. The senior faculty and their assistants (whose
participation will be made possible by the support of this grant) will lead the
hands-on sessions that are the centerpiece of the ASI. These interactions will
naturally lead to long term collaborations and exchanges of personnel. The
junior faculty (U.S. graduate students and postdoctoral associates) will benefit
not only from the interactions with peers who will become leaders in science and
technology in developing nations, but also the school will provide the junior
faculty with a unique opportunity to hone their own teaching and leadership
skills in a unique multi-cultural environment. The senior faculty will present
lectures and tutorials on the experiments and numerical modeling. Table-top
experiments are particularly well suited for scientific research in developing
countries where resources are limited. The interactive sessions will provide a
learning experience for faculty as well as the participants, as we all work
together to observe phenomena, explore concepts, and raise questions that
warrant further study. Our experience as directors of a Hands-On Research on
Complex Systems meeting, held in India in January 2008, was that many
participants have reported that their participation was a life-changing
experience. Building on our experience in India and responding to the
suggestions and criticisms of the participants there, we expect that the Hands-
On Research on Complex Systems ASI in Cameroon to have lasting impact on the
scientific careers of the faculty as well as the school participants.&lt;br/&gt;