* 0941381
* Improving the Computer Science Curriculum with Mobile Technology
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2010,04/30/2013
* George Sellman, Adams State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 04/30/2013
* USD 57,450.00

Computing-Others (35) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is improving the
computer science curriculum by developing new approaches to engage and interest
a wider base of students. Mobile technology is being used to illustrate computer
concepts. This project strengthens students' interest, retention, and learning
by capitalizing on the pervasive use of hand held devices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Group activities centered on using mobile computing, in
particular PDAs and Mobile-T G3 smart phones, are being added to the curriculum
to teach Computer Literacy, CS1 &amp; CS2. The mobile technology is enabling
access to Web 2.0 applications on the internet and uses the Java development
environment. For example, students in the traditional first year programming
course CS1/CS2 are using Google's Android software to program cell phone
applications. Working with the Android software provides practical experience
with embedded programming. The increased interest in computer science is
supported by students being able to see their applications running in real time.
This provides a sense of accomplishment and relevance. The incorporation of
mobile technology is being implemented throughout the curriculum in order to
allow for continuity, provide relevant, modern, and meaningful content.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Across the country, large computer literacy classes are
becoming more common as colleges and universities face budget restrictions.
Activities being developed in this project serve as a good model to other
computer science teachers attempting to engage and interest students in large
introductory computer science classes. Furthermore, the project modernizes the
computer science educational infrastructure and produces materials useful to
other educators on effective ways of incorporation of mobile technologies in the
classroom.