* 0941217
* Genome-Wide Screen for Candidate Genes Underlying Phenotypic Divergence and Hybrid Dysfunction in Drosophila Pseudoobscura and Its Close Relatives
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Carlos Machado, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2011
* USD 91,761.00

Understanding how new species are formed is a major question in Biology. When
new species evolve from an ancestral one, their hybrids usually have several
developmental or physiological problems, like infertility or lower vigor. Those
problems are the result of incompatible genetic changes that have occurred in
each one of the species during and after speciation. Trying to pinpoint what are
those genetic changes has been difficult using traditional genetic methods.
However, recently developed molecular methods that allow investigators obtain a
snapshot of gene activity in all genes from an organism at any given time
("microarrays") provide an alternative, or complement, to traditional genetic
methods to uncover the genetic changes underlying hybrid incompatibilities. We
will use microarrays to explore this question in a classic group of fruit fly
species: Drosophila pseudoobscura and its close relatives D. persimilis and D.
pseudoobscura bogotana. We will investigate gene activity in hybrid sterile
males from those species to first determine what genes have unusual levels of
activity and will follow up only genes with unusual activity that are involved
in reproduction. We will then establish whether a subset of those genes is
indeed involved in hybrid sterility using traditional genetic methods (i.e. a
series of genetic crosses). Finally, we will determine whether genetic changes
that have occurred at those genes or at other genes that affect their activity
are indeed responsible for the hybrid incompatibilities. This approach is likely
to provide major insights into the identity of genes responsible for hybrid
incompatibilities in these and other group of species. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
results of the proposed research will be of general interest to biologists and
will allow us training students in functional genomics and evolutionary
genetics. We are fully committed to integrate individuals from underrepresented
groups in our research program. Finally, the identification of putative hybrid
male sterility genes in Drosophila could lead to the discovery of similar genes
also involved in human male infertility, and thus the health implications of the
proposed research may be large. &lt;br/&gt;