* 0941228
* CDI Type II: Collaborative Research: Understanding Complex Biological Networks: A Process Viewpoint
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Chen Zeng, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Massimo Ruzzene
* 08/31/2014
* USD 1,199,927.00

This project focuses on one of the most popular models of complex networks,
Boolean models, and proposes a new approach based on a process-viewpoint. In
contrast to the standard attractor-basin portrait of a discrete dynamical
system, the process-viewpoint starts with a single sequence of states and
addresses the types of networks that might produce that sequence. The sequence
of states, a process, corresponds to a time-course in biological terms and is
often the only dynamical data available for real systems. The types of research
questions include: what networks produce a given biological process? How do
those networks differ and what do they have in common? This project will also
consider the space of processes and the types of questions that arise from
characterizing the space: Are some processes harder to build networks for? Do
some processes need different network properties than others? The approach used
is based on mathematical logic and results in a single expression characterizing
the space of networks for a given process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The importance
of this research project is threefold. First, the research has the potential of
increasing our understanding of complex biological networks, whose functioning
is the basis of living systems. Second, the approach might result in a practical
algorithm for inferring network structure from the types of data available
today; this is significant because the underlying network structure is very
difficult to infer with current technologies. The precise network structure and
dynamics is essential to understanding how particular reactions within the cell
work. Finally, the project will help increase our understanding of complex
systems in general. Biocomplexity is merely one type of complexity; to the
extent we make headway in building computational tools to help understanding
this type of complexity, similar tools are likely to help with other types of
complexity. Certainly, this has proved to be the case for other complexity-tools
such as small-world networks, scale-free graphs and phase
transitions.&lt;br/&gt;