* 0941272
* US-France Planning Visit:  Study of Granular Material Crushing through Imaging and Discrete Element Modeling Simulation
* O/D,OISE
* 02/15/2010,01/31/2011
* Beena Sukumaran, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Francis J. Wodarczyk
* 01/31/2011
* USD 15,297.00

In this planning visit supported by the Europe and Eurasia Program of the Office
of International Science and Engineering, Profs. Beena Sukumaran and Shreekanth
Mandayam together with a graduate student will visit Prof. Ali Daouadji in the
Civil Engineering Department at Université Paul Verlaine in Metz, France, to a
joint experimental, numerical and theoretical study of the crushing of granular
geologic materials. The proposed research will involve a combination of x-ray
computed tomography imaging, discrete element modeling, and a theoretical model
that can reproduce the stress-strain behavior of granular materials. This
planned multidisciplinary investigation would involve US and French
investigators with complementary expertise.

The technical impact of this investigation is likely to benefit geotechnical
engineering research as well as other fields that depend on an understanding of
granular mechanics. The research effort would also enhance scientific
collaboration between French and U.S. scientists and provide students with an
international research experience in an important activity. Rowan University is
a primarily undergraduate institution with considerable success in training
women and underrepresented minorities in STEM fields.

