* 0941035
* Integrated Approach for Mechatronics Education Using Industrial Motion Control Technology and Active Learning
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2014
* Hakan Gurocak, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* John Krupczak
* 08/31/2014
* USD 141,691.00

Engineering - Mechanical (56) This CCLI Type 1 project is developing a sequence
of ten lecture and eight laboratory modules to incorporate industrial motion
control into a senior level mechanical engineering course in automation. Motion
control is defined as a subfield of automation in which the position and/or
velocity of multiple axes in a machine are controlled in a synchronized fashion.
The motivation for this effort comes from the extensive use of motion control in
the packaging, assembly, textile, paper, printing, food processing and
semiconductor manufacturing industries that employ many mechanical engineering
graduates. The ten modules are path generation, transmission elements, feedback
devices and motors, motion controllers, basic and advanced feedback control,
tuning, motion controller programming, programmable logic controllers, and
applications of motion control, and the last eight modules have corresponding
laboratory modules. The materials development plan is being informed and
reviewed by an industrial advisory board. The lecture modules are being
developed using advanced pedagogies including collaborative learning and just-
in-time teaching. The modular format of the materials enables other institutions
to adopt only materials appropriate for their curriculum. The project is also
developing a "Where is Math?" outreach workshop for middle and high school
students and teachers that is designed to illustrate the importance of
mathematics in everyday life and to stimulate interest in STEM education. The
project includes formative and summative evaluation plans for all aspects of the
project coordinated by an independent evaluator.