* 0941455
* CDI-Type I: Translation as a Collaborative Process
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Benjamin Bederson, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Tran
* 09/30/2013
* USD 630,000.00

Natural language translation remains a crucial problem that is expensive, slow
to develop solutions for, and difficult to scale. While automated approaches
often result in understanding the gist, fully automated high quality translation
remains far out of reach for the vast majority of the world's languages. A
variety of projects are now emerging that tap into the Web-based community of
people willing to help translate, but bilingual expertise is quite rare compared
to the total availability of volunteers. This project will investigate whether a
combination of machine translation and human participants that speak only a
single language (i.e., monolingual speakers) can result in high quality
translation. The research is organized around development of an iterative
protocol that combines elements of machine translation, human and semi-automated
language annotation, and human correction, motivated by concepts in information
theory and discourse analysis. This research framework will support both
synchronous and asynchronous pairwise interaction among human participants as
well as a "bag of tasks" approach that permits truly distributed human
computation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With respect to broader impacts, this project
is among the first to investigate the potential of hybrid human/machine
translation involving non-bilingual human participants, combining practical
implementation with empirically driven experimentation. If successful, this
project will lower the bar for translation of natural languages, resulting in a
widely available approach offering high quality translation for an
unprecedentedly wide range of language pairs while reducing requirements and
costs for bilingual expertise. The technology to be developed will be evaluated
on a real-world problem: translation of books within the (previously NSF-funded)
International Children's Digital Library project (www.childrenslibrary.org). The
ICDL currently contains 4,000 books in 60 languages and has an active user
population including 1,000 volunteers with differing language skills who are
interested in helping with translation. Participants in Mexico, Romania,
Mongolia, and the U.S. will act as early adopters in K-12 educational settings,
supporting the ICDL's goal of enabling greater shared cultural understanding
through this existing and growing resource.