* 0941576
* CDI-Type II: Dimensionality-Reduction and Reconstruction Tools for Atom Probe Tomography
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Krishna Rajan, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2013
* USD 952,884.00

This award supports a project to establish a new computational paradigm and
infrastructure that will enhance three-dimensional (3-D) atomic reconstruction
for an emerging new instrumentation technology; atom probe tomography (APT). The
project will significantly advance research in parallel computing, computational
geometry and graph-theoretic applications of extremely large and noisy data
sets. APT is a powerful microscopy tool that enables spatial resolution of
hundreds of millions of atoms at the sub-nanoscale. The APT is the only
instrument capable of mapping the 3-D composition of a metal, semiconductor, or
an insulator with atomic resolution. The 3-D reconstruction of this direct space
information provides unprecedented capabilities for characterizing materials at
the atomic level. The quantitative analysis of APT images could provide the
ability to directly observe and interpret atomistic scale solid state phenomena
that until now, have only been visualized via modeling and computer simulation.
The unique APT images, transformed as cloud data points, provide an ideal
template for developing graphtheoretic and differential geometric techniques
that allow (1) assimilation of dynamic, noisy and/or incomplete data during
reconstruction, (2) development of parallel algorithms for 3D reconstruction,
and (3) extraction of multi-scale geometric features and statistics from the 3D
data. This research will yield new computational tools and algorithms that can
effectively utilize computing platforms for noise insensitive reconstruction,
which can significantly improve our abilities to quantitatively analyze APT
data. These advancements will be possible due to developments in uncertainty
quantification, model reduction of complex systems, and scalable algorithms.
Data-driven model reduction strategies that dynamically account for the noisy
data during the 3D reconstruction and efficiently extract atomic coordination
and radial distribution functions will be developed to directly link atomic-
scale structure and chemical data with materials properties and behavior.

A virtual organization (VO) will be established, targeting the rapidly growing
global community of APT users and the computational sciences community that is
involved in modeling and applications of very large data sets. The VO will be
initially hosted at Iowa State University (ISU) and later linked to the NSF
TeraGrid to ensure a sustainable and accessible cyberinfrastructure. Educational
and outreach activities will include (1) interdepartmental graduate courses on
computational nanosciences, (2) summer research programs on data mining and
parallel computing for undergraduate students , (3) development of novel
teaching materials for high school and first-year courses that demonstrate the
connections between data mining and materials science --- this will be class
tested through ISU's Science Bound program, which actively engages students from
underrepresented groups; (4) workshops on quantitative APT that will be linked
to ISU's NSF-ADVANCE program to promote participation by women faculty and other
under-represented groups; and (5) leverage international collaborations based on
our NSF International Materials Institute.