* 0941310
* Improving Governance of Next-generation ICT Infrastructure
* SBE,SBE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Erik Goodman, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Tran
* 08/31/2013
* USD 698,030.00

Information and communication technologies (ICT) have become an integral part of
work and social relations. They enhance the quality of life and are
prerequisites for continued economic growth and international competitiveness.
Next-generation ICT infrastructure (e.g., fiber optical networks, broadband
wireless) will support further innovative applications and services in health
care, education, and commerce and expand the opportunities for civic
participation in public affairs. Successful deployment of next-generation
networks and services requires the collaboration of an increasing number of
specialized firms. Their working is therefore contingent upon many technical,
legal, regulatory, and business agreements. Some of these governance
arrangements will emerge from private, decentralized negotiations but others
will have to be developed jointly by users, suppliers, and government. Past
experience and existing tools used by managers and policy makers are deficient
for addressing the upcoming challenges. Most importantly, they do not take into
account the multiple interdependencies and feedbacks that characterize modern
ICT. This project sets out to develop new conceptual foundations and practical
modeling tools that are appropriate for state-of-the-art ICT. These tools will
help improve governance arrangements (including voluntary industry agreements,
government regulation, and legislation). To this end, the research team will
develop simulations of the U.S. ICT infrastructure that capture the key
technological, economic, and policy aspects of the ICT infrastructure. Combining
genetic programming and agent-based modeling techniques will allow first finding
a reasonable representation of this complex adaptive system. This framework will
then guide systematic exploration of the effects of different governance choices
on ICT infrastructure performance. Alternative governance choices modify
behavior of individuals or groups of stakeholders which will be captured in the
rules followed by the agents in the simulation. The computational approach
allows the systematic exploration of how such governance choices affect the
performance of the ICT system after relevant feedbacks and indirect effects are
taken into account.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the next decade, the U.S. will
have to make important ICT governance decisions that may influence the course of
ICT development for a long time with substantial economic and social
implications. The project will develop a modeling framework in which, for the
first time in the field of ICT, the performance consequences of alternative
management and public policy choices can be explored in virtual space rather
than by potentially costly trial-and-error. It will contribute to the formation
of new theories of the interaction between governance and the performance of
complex adaptive systems but also spawn practical tools that can be used to
improve such decisions. Experts in industry, government, and research will be
briefed and consulted throughout the whole project to improve the relevance of
the research and share preliminary findings with practitioners. Moreover, the
project will generate new modules that can be used in teaching. As ICT
infrastructure is one example of a class of complex adaptive systems, the
project will also develop groundwork for similar approaches in other areas.