* 0941374
* CDI-Type I- Bringing a Bayesian perspective to the study of large earthquakes and their impacts on the built environment
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2013
* James Beck, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 12/31/2013
* USD 700,000.00

This proposal focuses on application of full Bayesian analysis techniques to
large ill-posed inverse problems in earthquake physics and earthquake
engineering specifically the kinematics and dynamics of large earthquakes, and
monitoring the structural health of the built environment. Both geophysics and
earthquake engineering are experiencing an explosion of observations. Using this
wealth of data typically involves solving large ill-conditioned inverse problems
requiring large numbers of uncertain parameters necessary for realistic forward
models. The core of this project centers on the necessary algorithmic and
software developments required for application of Bayesian approaches to
problems much larger than are currently tractable. In particular, the project
targets problems involving very fast forward models but with many hundreds of
free parameters as well as problems with fewer parameters but more expensive
forward models. The researchers will develop and apply efficient, general, and
robust techniques for sampling posterior distributions of model parameters that
are suited for large parallel computing architectures. While this project is
motivated by specific disciplinary goals. The geophysical and engineering
applications will act as test beds designed to ensure modularity, flexibility,
and broad applicability of newly developed algorithms and associated software
implementations. The approach over the three years of this proposal will be
multi-pronged with several important objectives for the development of
computational tools for Bayesian statistical inversions. These objectives
include (1) developing new methods for exploring high-dimensional model
parameter spaces, (2) developing new methods for adaptive and optimal refinement
of model parameter spaces, (3) exploring the role of inducing sparseness in
posterior distributions over parameter spaces, and (4) producing modular,
portable software for the next generation of parallel platforms. Intellectual
Merit: This proposal brings together geophysicists and engineers to construct
the next wave of Bayesian analysis environments to treat high-dimensional ill-
conditioned inverse problems based on large amounts of data. This effort will
result in (1) a new generation of physically reasonable models of earthquake
dynamics that integrate all relevant observations and (2) revolutionary
approaches to inferring structural health of the built environment.