* 0941034
* Using the Context of Nuclear and Particle Physics for the Integration of Modern Research Techniques into the Undergraduate Physics Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 08/15/2010,07/31/2013
* Mel Sabella, Chicago State University
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 07/31/2013
* USD 132,567.00

Physics (13)

At the core of a strong undergraduate program in the STEM disciplines is the
ability to offer students the opportunity to practice scientific inquiry
throughout their academic experience. In this project, the use of modern
technology and captivating concepts of current areas of research are being
interwoven in the undergraduate curriculum. In a traditional curriculum design,
lab experiments in modern physics topics are often reserved for advanced
students in the physics major. Also relying solely on independent research with
faculty is often neither feasible nor effective in helping undergraduate
students develop the types of skills needed for graduate school and industry.

This project centers on incorporating a themed laboratory component in nuclear
and particle physics into the curriculum at CSU, affecting high school and
college students pursuing physics, engineering, and chemistry degrees. The
project will take a multi-staged approach to improving the laboratory experience
for our students by using modern research in recruitment and outreach programs,
in introductory courses and in advanced teaching labs. Through the thoughtful
choice of experimental teaching laboratory modules, this project will provide
students with comprehensive guided-inquiry experiences: foster their interest in
science, train them in the use of technology, introduce them to the methodology
of current experimental techniques, and prepare them for successful
collaboration in the research areas of the faculty members in our department. In
this stage of the project, we are focusing on detector techniques for particle
and nuclear physics experiments.