* 0941820
* Integrated Science through Foundational Big Ideas: Learning Modules for Pre-service Elementary Teachers
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2014
* Mary Jane Rice, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 08/31/2014
* USD 159,734.00

Interdisciplinary (99) This project is tracing future teachers understanding of
foundational big ideas (those that span all science disciplines) as the teachers
engage in the phenomena and practice of science within the context of specific
topics in life, earth, and physical science in the K-8 science curriculum. Based
on the analysis of students learning progressions, three on-line learning
modules are being developed for use in a range of pre-service courses. The
foundational big ideas are conservation of matter and energy and the causative
role of energy in changing matter. The modules focus on specific topics in life
science (photosynthesis), earth science (weathering), and physical science
(combustion) that are essential to an elementary teachers understanding and
provide an opportunity to apply the big ideas within and across disciplines.

Each learning module includes three components. An introductory knowledge
component includes a sequenced framework of disciplinary big ideas tied to the
foundational big ideas along with common misconceptions. The second component is
a system of assessments that allows for eliciting misconceptions and gaps in
understanding at multiple time points in students learning progressions. A third
component consists of a set of evidence-based teaching strategies developed from
assessment data, misconceptions, and big ideas. These teaching strategies
provide faculty with a range of responses at specific points in students
learning progressions. The learning modules are based on following the learning
progressions of 450 pre-service elementary teachers and using that assessment
data to develop evidence-based teaching strategies and learning materials.
Continual assessment is being used to track individuals learning progressions
toward understanding the big ideas in a broad range of disciplinary phenomena.
Clinical interviews and focus groups are being used to provide a deeper
exploration of student understanding and of the teaching strategies and learning
materials that promote understanding in individual students. An iterative
process of assessment and analysis of student understanding is being used to
inform subsequent design and implementation of teaching strategies. This design-
based approach ultimately will lead to the development of the learning modules
for use by other institutions.