* 0941360
* Petascale simulations of Complex Biological Behavior in Fluctuating Environments
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2014
* Ilias Tagkopoulos, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Irene Qualters
* 09/30/2014
* USD 45,000.00

This award is for a provisional allocation of time on the Blue Waters computer
system, due to become operational in 2011, and for travel funds to support
technical coordination by various collaborators with the Blue Waters project
team and vendor technical team.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project involves
studies in bacterial ecology, gene regulatory networks and intracellular
biochemical networks with a view to understanding the way in which populations
of unicellular organisms evolve and adapt as their environment changes. This
involves multi-scale biological systems where processes ranging from gene
expression and intracellular biochemistry to ecosystem dynamics are in play. A
key aim is to understand how, by considering the genetic and biochemical
processes within a cell, unicellular organisms evolve to develop adaptive
responses to recurring changes in their environments. The study will look at the
influence of parameters such as nutrient concentrations and mutation on
adaptation, compare the efficacy of different strategies for survival in static
and fluctuating environments, and examine how unicellular organisms internalize
the correlation structure of their environment by modifying their internal
networks to facilitate such changes. The role of genetic and molecular
information transfer processes will also be studied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
modeling approach has been developed and previously used for scientific research
using an implementation on contemporary computing systems. It is inherently
multi-scale, including representations of molecular processes within cells and
scaling up to ecosystems of unicellular organisms. In prior work, the
limitations of computer power have necessitated a number of simplifying
assumptions. It is anticipated that the use of Blue Waters will allow some of
these to be relaxed, so that more biological processes can be included in the
simulations. Results will be tested against the outcomes of in vivo experiments
in the UC Davis Genome Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator
is a recent Ph.D. Progress in this research area could find application in
bioengineering and biotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;