* 0941143
* CDI-Type II:  MS-Omics Hub for Cyber-enabled Acceleration of Mass Spectrometry-based Metabolomics and Proteomics
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Benjamin Garcia, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 08/31/2014
* USD 1,303,234.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cyber-Enabled Discovery and
Innovation (CDI)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 0941143&lt;br/&gt;P/I:
Christodoulos Floudas&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Princeton
University&lt;br/&gt;Title: CDI-Type II: MS-Omics Hub for Cyber-enabled
Acceleration of Mass Spectrometry-based Metabolomics and
Proteomics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope of Project and Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mass spectrometry technology has the potential to
revolutionize the biological sciences by enabling quantitative and comprehensive
assessment of proteins (proteomics) and metabolites (metabolomics). A major
challenge, however, is converting raw mass spectrometry data into information
useful to biologists. This project represents an effort to transform proteomics
and metabolomics by providing an open-source platform for analysis of mass
spectrometry-based metabolomics and proteomics data which capitalizes on
cyberinfrastructure to accelerate biological discovery. Specifically, the
project will develop a unified platform for identification and quantitation of
metabolites, peptides, and proteins (the MS-Omics Hub) that (1) allows the user
to enter mass spectrometry data from diverse instrumentation and returns to the
user identities and quantities of assignable metabolite, peptide, and protein
peaks, (2) highlights novel, biologically significant species whose importance
emerged through cyber-enabled integration of data from diverse users, and (3)
provides enhanced computational algorithms for identification of covalently-
modified proteins. These algorithms will revolve around an integer linear
optimization framework that the PIs have recently shown can substantially
improve proteomic data analysis. The utility of the MS-Omics Hub will be
demonstrated through its application to a broad spectrum of data, generated both
by the grant team and by a diversity of scientists nationwide.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This effort tackles a barrier
preventing proteomics and metabolomics from broadly impacting biological
research: the difficulty of extracting compound identities and quantities from
raw data. It furthermore addresses the intellectually challenging aspect of
proteomic data analysis: computational identification of peaks arising from
covalently modified proteins. Finally, it applies cyber-infrastructure to
accelerate the identification of peaks arising from novel, biologically-
significant metabolites and protein covalent modification sites. The diversity
of intellectual challenges involved is mirrored by the multidisciplinary nature
of the research team: Floudas, Garcia, and Rabinowitz come from three different
departments at Princeton University (Chemical Engineering, Molecular Biology,
and Chemistry, respectively), and bring expertise spanning global optimization,
scientific computing, mathematical modeling, proteomics, metabolomics, and
analytical chemistry. They are unified by their interest in comprehensive,
quantitative, computationally-enabled analysis of biochemical systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has
the potential to transform the biological sciences, by accelerating progress in
proteomics and metabolomics and by rendering the power of these emerging fields
accessible to a broad spectrum of scientists nationwide. Impact on Society: By
enabling a larger research community to conduct state-of-the-art metabolomic and
proteomic data analysis, the MS-Omics Hub will expedite global research efforts.
By providing an archive of biologically significant peaks, it will accelerate
discovery of novel metabolites and protein covalent modification sites. These
will likely include novel biomarkers and bioactive compounds. Areas in which
improved metabolomic and proteomic capabilities will be applied include
medicine, drug discovery, agriculture, bioenergy, and environmental science.
Integration of Research and Education: This effort will integrate participation
of undergraduate and graduate students in all aspects of the research program,
include underrepresented minorities and visiting students from small colleges.
The students will receive training in mass spectrometry, computational biology,
systems biology, and scientific computation. In addition, as an open-source
platform, the MS-Omics Hub will be available as an educational tool to scholars
nationwide. The PIs also plan to host an annual ?users? conference to interact
with and train the outside MS-Omics Hub users, and to recruit new users to the
Hub. Broaden Representation of Underrepresented Groups: Each of the PIs will
actively recruit minority students for summer research. Dissemination: In
addition to dissemination through standard channels (journals, refereed
proceedings, conferences), the MS-Omics Hub will be introduced to the community
through a network of mass spectrometry experts, biological beta-testers, and the
summer conference. The MS-Omics Hub itself will be open-source (code available
on web) and freely accessible to scientists worldwide.