* 0941537
* CDI-Type I: Computer Aided Design of Nanostructured Optical Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Fernando Reitich, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 09/30/2013
* USD 672,577.00

&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award is made on a proposal
submitted to the Cyberenabled Discovery and Innovation initiative. This award
supports research to develop computational tools to study the interaction of
light with nanostructured optical materials, also known as photonic crystals.
These tools will be part of a computer aided design system that can be used to
create new individual photonic crystals and new surface coatings that contain
photonic crystals. Development will be guided by the needs of the community that
designs and fabricates nanostructured materials. The system will be evaluated by
using it to create a photonic crystal with specific optical properties. The
investigation of how light interacts with nanostructured optical materials will
lead to an understanding of complexity in a built system. The periodic layout
and minute size of the constituent building blocks makes a photonic crystal
geometrically complex. This geometric complexity leads to optical complexity
because the full wave model of light must be taken into account, and diffraction
effects must be considered. Finally, three distinctly different physical scales
must be carefully modeled, from the structure of an individual photonic crystal,
to the composition of a small volume of surface coating, to the scale of a small
object covered with the surface coating. Computational thinking will be used to
determine the structure of the system and to design individual modules within
the system. A finite difference time domain technique will be used to solve
physical optics problems for an individual photonic crystal, a ray tracing
approach will be employed to perform geometric optics calculations for a surface
coating that contains photonic crystals, and computer graphics rendering
techniques will be utilized to depict the color appearance of the surface
coating when applied to a three dimensional object. The powerful graphics
processors available today on PC graphics cards will be employed to accelerate
the finite difference time domain, ray tracing, and rendering algorithms. Novel
numerical solution techniques will be explored to improve the performance of
both the physical optics and geometric optics
simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will create a metallic photonic
crystal that will improve the efficiency of incandescent light bulbs. Other
novel thermophotovoltaic and plasmonic photonic crystals may be developed. As
new surface coatings that reflect light in interesting new ways become
available, the PIs plan to extend a variety of possible industrial and
architectural designs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This
award is made on a proposal submitted to the Cyberenabled Discovery and
Innovation initiative. This project addresses fundamental research issues in a
topical area of electronic and photonic materials science having technological
relevance. An interdisciplinary research team that includes a computer
scientist, a materials researcher, and a mathematician will develop
computational tools to design nanostructured optical materials, or photonic
crystals. The computational tools will enable accurate calculations of how light
interacts with photonic crystals which are materials that are structured to have
a periodicity that interacts with light to lead to specific optical properties,
such as particular frequencies of light which are not transmitted though the
crystal. The computational tools that the PIs will develop will enable computer
assisted design of photonic crystals with specific properties.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a test of the computational tools, the PIs plan to
create a metallic photonic crystal that will improve the efficiency of
incandescent light bulbs. The PIs will also develop novel instructional
materials to make the principles of photonic crystals accessible to the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;