* 0941653
* Enabling Science at the Petascale: From Binary Systems and Stellar Core Collapse To Gamma-Ray Bursts
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Gabrielle Allen, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Irene Qualters
* 08/31/2013
* USD 35,896.00

ABSTRACT/0941653&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides travel funds to
support technical coordination between the Blue Waters project team and a team
of astrophysical researchers to explore the readiness of an astrophysics code
for use on the Blue Waters system. If successful, it is anticipated that the
code will be used to continue the research programs of the collaborators who are
using codes in the Cactus framework to study (a) the dynamics of the collapse of
a massive star and (b) the mergers of a pair of neutron stars and of a neutron
star and black hole. The proposal hypothesizes that the former is a possible
explanation of long-wave gamma-ray bursts and the latter may give rise to short-
wave gamma-ray bursts. Planned work preparing the numerical simulation tool
involves work on improving the physics of the astrophysics code and includes
adding neutrino transport and interactions, radiation transport, the capability
to handle ultra-relativistic flows, gamma-ray emission from relativistic
plasmas, and afterglow photon emission.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team
contains a number of relatively recent Ph.D.s. It plans to make the codes
developed publicly available. One post-doctoral researcher will be involved in
the interaction between the project team and the Blue Waters team. At least one
member of the project team is from an under-represented
group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;