* 0941690
* CDI Type II: Cyber-Engineering Functional Nanoparticles for Targeted Drug Delivery
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Roland Faller, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Siegmund
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,512,150.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Engineering versatile drug delivery vehicles that enable simultaneous delivery
of several agents is a key challenge in medicine. Liposomes would gain
significant stability and functional capacity from having a solid core, tethered
to the bilayer by strong linkers. Nevertheless, designing and constructing such
complex nanoparticles remains an open question. To achieve this goal, we present
a multidisciplinary multi-site strategy that transforms conventional laboratory-
centered synthesis into cyber-based nano-design. Its three key components are:
(1) a multiscale modeling hierarchy bridging the divide between molecules and
physical meso-structure; (2) novel design- and parameter-optimization algorithms
that exploit autonomous data exchange and learning over a distributed grid; and
(3) a feedback system, in which simulations guide syntheses of improved
nanoconstructs, while in vitro characterizations validate and improve their
corresponding in silico representations. We are establishing a virtual
organization that links four institutions (UC Davis, Colorado School of Mines,
Carnegie Mellon, and Virginia Tech) to maximally exploit our joint expertise
across a broad spectrum of disciplines. This cyber-infrastructure enables our
transformative approach to the rational computer-aided design of functional
nanoconstructs. All partners will regularly exchange group members to both share
knowledge and acquire training outside their disciplines. We will hold frequent
virtual meetings and annual team conferences with a final conference including
outside partners.

This research will develop novel nanoparticles as more efficient drug delivery
carriers. At the same time, the cyber framework being developing will serve as a
model for developing a real-time, virtual network that links computational and
experimental science. For instance, this research shows how software can
facilitate new computing infrastructures and how the synergy of a fresh, diverse
team can be harnessed to span the divide between computational and experimental
research in engineering and science. A web-based data repository will serve as a
communication hub among the partners to allow instant access to all tools and
findings. After validation, these methods will be made available to the
scientific community at large by using the same hub. Incorporating this research
into our courses taught at our local universities will inform future
computational scientists and experimentalists how a highly interactive
collaboration accelerates discovery and innovation.