* 0941969
* Dissemination of ThinkSpace: an online delivery tool of authentic, complex problems to increase students' problem-solving skills
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2013
* John Jackman, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 09/30/2013
* USD 199,999.00

Interdisciplinary (99)&lt;br/&gt;Progress in our technological society depends
on people with strong quantitative, diagnostic, and problem-solving skills; yet
our current methods for teaching problem-solving are inadequate. Most students
are unable to deal with complex real-world problems because the problem-solving
tasks typically encountered in school require use of limited strategies like
identifying and applying the correct formulae or strategies from the textbook.
Building on earlier successes in helping students develop more effective problem
solving skills, the project is building a community of faculty engaged in
problem solving education and disseminating a new online case delivery tool
(called "ThinkSpace") to that community so that complex real-world problems can
be incorporated into existing courses. Recognizing that instructional practice
is highly resistant to change, the strategy employed in this project to achieve
systemic change is to build core groups of faculty at participating universities
who are committed to problem-solving education. ThinkSpace can be used in a
broad variety of disciplines and maintained by sharing the load in an open
source software environment. Making ThinkSpace open source leads to continuous
improvement as its use in the classroom stimulates suggestions for improvements.
The team assembled for this dissemination task has expertise in faculty
development and dissemination of teaching innovations, as well as extensive
experience in using online tools to introduce authentic, complex, problems in
their courses. The scalability of this approach means that it is quite possible
to support future expansion of the community in higher education as well as
K-12. This could produce a transformative change in STEM fields, because the
widespread use of authentic, complex problems will help a large number of
students develop stronger problem-solving skills.