* 0941777
* Integration of Near-surface Geophysical Imaging Technology into a Geoenvironmental Science Undergraduate Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2010,06/30/2014
* Joseph Zume, Shippensburg University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Amy Chan Hilton
* 06/30/2014
* USD 196,902.00

&lt;br/&gt;Earth Systems Science (40)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
integrates shallow geophysical data collection, analysis, and interpretation
into the Geoenvironmental Studies curricula. The approach differs from models
implemented at other institutions by focusing on undergraduate education and by
incorporating geophysical technology in multiple geography and geology courses
and in individual student research experiences. The project builds on past
programs that developed field learning opportunities in surface watershed
processes, and is integrating investigations made possible through Ground
Penetrating Radar, Electrical Resistivity, and Electromagnetic Imaging in
multiple courses via construction of a "curriculum bridge". The project design
incorporates studies of local geology, including investigations of karst
terrains (sinkhole development, losing streams, caves, springs), complex
hydrogeologic settings (surface water-groundwater interaction in variable
geologic materials), structural controls (faults, variations in lithology, etc.)
of hydrology, and management issues (wellhead protection, site development,
landfill leachate monitoring). This project provides opportunities for hundreds
of students (over several years) to acquire advanced technical and quantitative
skills for conceptualizing and addressing complex environmental problems, builds
critical skills related to problem conceptualization, analysis, and solution,
exposes students to the temporal and spatial context of field data collection,
and provides opportunities to understand the theoretical basis as well as the
practical capabilities and limitations of the various geophysical field methods
used. The project incorporates formative and summative evaluations to measure
the success of the "curriculum bridge" approach it utilizes. Project outcomes,
including curricular/instructional materials, results of student research
projects, and the evaluation results are being disseminated via the Science
Education Resource Center (SERC) website, a special session on geophysics in
undergraduate education at a Geological Society of America (GSA) meeting, a
series of regional community workshops, and by presentations and publications by
undergraduates and faculty members in appropriate venues.