* 0941713
* Engaging STEM Students from the Beginning: An Interdependent Approach to Introductory Chemistry and Cellular Biology
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2012
* Leonard Ginsberg, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* William Grisham
* 12/31/2012
* USD 199,856.00

(Biological Sciences 61)&lt;br/&gt;This highly interdisciplinary project
involves design and pilot testing of complementary food-based interdisciplinary
laboratory modules in both introductory biology and chemistry courses in order
to: (1) engage students with common, real-world materials and situations
relevant to key biological and chemical concepts; (2) demonstrate the
interdependence of biology and chemistry disciplines; and (3) promote active
learning in an investigative environment. The project includes professional
development for faculty and teaching assistants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. This project is giving undergraduate
science majors a unique first year experience in two science courses and is
helping develop a strong interdisciplinary team of biology, chemistry and
science education faculty. Project evaluation is investigating the effect of
providing coordinated connections between biology and chemistry concepts and
relating these concepts to the student's world on student understanding of the
relevance of science in today's world. In addition the professional development
feature of the project is helping instructors develop effective pedagogical
strategies and abilities in lesson preparation, implementation, and reflection
for continued improvement. The project team uses student feedback and evaluation
to reform the laboratory content and to increase its relevance and appeal to
undergraduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. The results of
this project are serving as a model for other similar universities and are
laying the foundation for further large-scale collaborative reformation of
undergraduate STEM courses. &lt;br/&gt;