* 0941318
* CDI-Type I: Bridging the Gap Between Next-Generation High Performance Hybrid Computers and Physics Based Computational Models for Quantitative Description of Molecular Recognition
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Michela Taufer, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 09/30/2013
* USD 538,740.00

TECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is made on a proposal
submitted to the Cyberenabled Discovery and Innovation initiative and in
partnership with the Office of Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research. This project projects on the From Data to Knowledge, and Virtual
Organizations CDI themes. This award supports computational research and
education to develop new polarizable force fields with an aim for application to
the discovery of new drugs. The tools developed may also impact the discovery of
new biomaterials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Molecular simulations play an integral
role in the development of novel pharmaceuticals. Complementing experiment,
computations strive to expedite the discovery process by screening for small-
molecules with high binding affinity, specificity, and pharmacological
properties. The fundamental quantity of interest is the binding affinity, and
this is rigorously related to the free energy change associated with a binding
reaction. Current methods employ empirical potential energy functions, or force
fields, representing the physical interactions between the constituent
atomic/molecular species. The electrostatic component of the interaction is
treated in a mean field manner, with partial charges on given sites of the
molecular construct taken to be fixed throughout the binding process; there is
no explicit accounting for the differing nature of charge distribution for
different ligand and protein conformations as physically dictated by quantum
mechanics, whose inclusion has been demonstrated to be vital for accurate
predictions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will address this weakness in drug
design by proposing transformative approaches to developing next-generation
classical polarizable force fields to overcome current limitations. The
challenge is the need for computing power to solve the non-linear problem of
parameterizing a polarizable force field while simultaneously incorporating
results of biologically relevant scale protein-ligand binding affinity
simulations. &lt;br/&gt;With the emergence and integration of multicore
architectures into commodity desktops, general-purpose graphics processing units
(GPU), and special purpose field programmable gate arrays (FPGA), the concept of
hybrid computing has entered the HPC arena. Cloud computing systems take
advantage of these hybrid resources to generate larger data sets, without the
users needing to have knowledge of, expertise in, or control over the technology
infrastructure in the ?cloud.? Emerging cloud frameworks are far from
transparently accommodating hybrid resources. &lt;br/&gt;The PIs will transform
an open-source cloud computing framework such as Eucalyptus to transparently use
hybrid resources for protein-ligand docking simulations, driven by intelligent
scheduling policies based on game theory strategies. Knowledge deduction and use
have to be built in and used among application tasks, each influencing the
other?s next step. Feedback is also needed to adaptively drive new job
generations from the application tasks. In the computational environment
envisioned in this project, both knowledge and feedback require transforming
human knowledge and discernment into cloud computing services that drive the
parameter search. Intellectual merit: From the research point of view the work
outlined in this proposal will provide automatic methods and tools for the
parameterization of polarizable force field models for pharmaceutical molecules
(Aim 1) and the protein-ligand binding affinity of large protein-ligand
databases using polarizable force fields (Aim 2). A cross-campus cloud computing
system that transparently and intelligently uses hybrid resources, i.e., multi-
core and GPUs, in a unified, dynamically adaptable workspace, will support the
simulations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports educational and outreach
activities to advance students? discovery and understanding of interdisciplinary
research. Broader scientific and social impacts: There is great potential in
terms of impact on the general scientific, and specifically the modeling
communities. Research into more efficient and accurate approaches will
significantly boost drug discovery and potentially the discovery of new
biomaterials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award is
made on a proposal submitted to the Cyberenabled Discovery and Innovation
initiative and in partnership with the Office of Experimental Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research. This project projects on the From Data to
Knowledge, and Virtual Organizations CDI themes. This award supports
computational research and education to develop new computer simulation tools to
enable the modeling of molecules and their interactions with potential
application to the discovery of new drugs and the discovery of new biomaterials.
The research involves intense computation to create models for the forces that
exist between molecules and for their thermodynamic properties. The PIs will
develop a method to harness and utilize different computing resources that are
available through the internet using a technique called ?cloud computing.?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports educational and outreach activities to
advance students? discovery and understanding of interdisciplinary research.
Broader scientific and social impacts: There is great potential in terms of
impact on the general scientific, and specifically the modeling communities.
Research into more efficient and accurate approaches will significantly boost
drug discovery and potentially the discovery of new
biomaterials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;