* 0941978
* Cyber PLTL (cPLTL): Development, Implementation, and Evaluation
* EDU,DUE
* 12/01/2010,11/30/2015
* Pratibha Varma-Nelson, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 11/30/2015
* USD 200,000.00

Enrollment in online courses in the United States has been growing substantially
faster than the overall higher education enrollment. Almost 3.9 million students
were taking at least one online course during the Fall 2007 term. This
represents 21.9% of the total enrollment in Fall 2007, up from 9.9% in Fall
2002. Over 80% of the 3.9 million students are studying at the undergraduate
level. Public institutions and community colleges have seen the highest rate of
increase in online courses including the science disciplines with the exception
of engineering. In order to reach all students taking undergraduate science
courses, efforts need to focus on creating a variety of effective cyberlearning
environments. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This project is producing and
studying the tools and conditions required for enhanced cyberlearning through
Peer-Led Team Learning (PLTL). The project investigates how technology can be
used to enhance an educational strategy that already has proven beneficial in
STEM courses. To accomplish this goal, the project is creating a cyber PLTL
(cPLTL), an online collaborative environment for conducting PLTL Workshops;
studying the effectiveness of a cPLTL environment in duplicating the proven
benefits of the traditional, face-to-face PLTL method; examining the
effectiveness of the existing PLTL materials in cPLTL Workshops; modifying the
existing training course for the peer leaders to be effective facilitators in
the cPLTL model; developing brief technology training for students learning
chemistry in cPLTL workshops; and articulating the critical components vital to
successful implementation of a cPLTL program. An evaluation is gathering data on
the process of development and implementation of cPLTL. The evaluation also
includes a quasi-experimental study of how cPLTL compares to traditional PLTL
sections that are taught at the same time.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: cPLTL has
the potential to increase participation and retention of underrepresented groups
in the STEM fields by providing active learning and leadership opportunities to
a more diverse group of students in a flexible time frame. Also, cPLTL has the
potential to strengthen the ability of community colleges to recruit students,
who typically leave the institution after the sophomore year, to serve as peer
leaders. In addition, if successful, cPLTL implementation will encourage
adoption by other chemistry courses, STEM disciplines, and institutions,
especially those with large non-traditional and commuter student populations.
While research on cPLTL is not within the scope of this project, other
complementary projects are probing a number of research questions. The cPLTL
environment allows data collection on student interactions by capturing chat
sessions, written collaboration, voice recordings, and video. This captured and
saved data allows for research on student interactions in cPLTL, which has not
been possible at this level of detail in face-to-face PLTL Workshops.