* 0941839
* Enhance Computer Network Curriculum using Collaborative Project-based Learning
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2013
* Jianyu Dong, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Susan Finger
* 08/31/2013
* USD 167,469.00

Engineering - Electrical (55)&lt;br/&gt;This project is establishing a remotely
accessible laboratory at California State University, Los Angeles (CSULA) to
improve the computer networking curriculum in both the electrical engineering
and computer science departments. The laboratory is using the OPNET simulation
tool and allows students to perform large scale networking experiments remotely.
A senior level electrical engineering course and a senior level computer
engineering course are being revised to use the new laboratory. The laboratory
is also being integrated into a virtual classroom based on MediaSite streaming
technology to provide remote instruction and support to students. The new
laboratory and revised courses are using the Collaborative Project Based
Learning model (CPBL), developed with previous NSF funding, to improve student
achievement with an emphasis on students from underrepresented groups. The
project includes rigorous formative and summative evaluation plans with both
qualitative and quantitative components coordinated by an independent evaluator.
The evaluation plan is designed to establish the quality of the materials and to
ensure the project goals are met. The projects results are being disseminated
through conferences and journal publications. Further, all of the project's
products, including class notes, video tutorials, lab manuals, and guidelines
for instructors on how to implement CPBL, are being made available for free
download from the project website. The project website has different portals for
students and instructors so they can access different sets of materials and is
being connected to the NSF National Science Digital Library (NSDL).