* 0941170
* Structured Retrieval Practice to Enhance Conceptual Learning
* EHR,DUE
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2013
* Jeffrey Karpicke, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 04/30/2013
* USD 200,000.00

Psychology (73)

The objective of the research and development project, Structured Retrieval
Practice to Enhance Conceptual Learning, is to develop a computer-based
Structured Retrieval Practice program that guides students to practice retrieval
while studying and enhances long-term retention of foundational conceptual
knowledge. The research addresses fundamental questions about human learning and
retrieval processes by testing the hypothesis that elaborative retrieval cues
increase the effectiveness of retrieval practice. The first aim is to develop
and enhance several aspects of the learning program in controlled experiments.
The working hypothesis is that guiding students to practice active
reconstruction of their knowledge will produce potent and robust learning and
long-term retention. The goal is to identify the best ways to structure and
scaffold students' retrieval practice to help them develop enriched mental
models about science concepts. The second aim of this project is to establish
the efficacy and effectiveness of Structured Retrieval Practice in two large
undergraduate introductory psychology courses. The project addresses two gaps in
cognitive science. First, the project is designed to contribute to the current
research on retrieval and memory. Secondly, the project is designed to translate
findings from the basic research conducted in a laboratory setting into
application in the real world setting of the classroom. The set of studies is
designed to inform the undergraduate STEM education community on how students
learn and to apply the findings to the development of instructional strategies
designed to enhance students' learning of foundational conceptual knowledge in
STEM disciplines.