* 0941735
* Enabling Large-Scale, High-Resolution, and Real-Time Earthquake Simulations on Petascale Parallel Computers
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Liqiang Wang, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Irene Qualters
* 09/30/2013
* USD 38,610.00

This award facilitates scientific research using the large, new, computational
resource named Blue Waters being developed by IBM and scheduled to be deployed
at the University of Illinois in 2011. It provides travel funds to support
technical coordination between the principal investigators, the Blue Waters
project team and the vendor technical team.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
involves porting to the Blue Waters system and refining two codes for the
propagation of seismic energy and their use in constrained optimization problems
to determine the geological structure of the Earth from seismic data. The award
will enable the project team to evaluate whether the use of these codes on Blue
Waters is likely to lead to breakthrough science in the following areas: the
deep structure of the Earth, including the topography of the core-mantle
boundary and the structure of the inner Core; a better understanding of the
geological formations in regions with high seismic risks, and predictions of
ground motion that will allow engineers to explore performance-based design of
built structures; and more accurate pictures of geology in mineral-rich areas to
reduce the risk and cost associated with drilling in complex geological
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is led by two new investigators
and the insights gained into developing software for the next generation of
large, parallel computers will be incorporated into new computational science
teaching at the University of Wyoming. If the project is successful, it will
provide a capability for better characterizing mineral resources in mineral-rich
areas of the U.S. such as Wyoming as well as improving scientific understanding
of the deep Earth.&lt;br/&gt;