* 0941496
* U.S.-India Workshop: Forensic Engineering and Curriculum Development, National Institute of Technology at Tiruchirapalli, India, December 2010.
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2009,03/31/2013
* Rajaram Janardhanam, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 03/31/2013
* USD 31,823.00

0941496 This award will support travel for ten U.S. participants to the
U.S.-India Workshop: Forensic Engineering (FE) and Curriculum Development ,
National Institute of Technology at Tiruchirapalli (NIT-T), India, December
2010. The co-organizers of the 5-day activity are Professors Shen-en Chen,
Department of Civil Engineering, University of North Carolina at Charlotte and
C. Natarajan, Head of the Department of Civil Engineering, NIT-T. The objective
of this workshop is to enhance performance and failure analysis of civil
infrastructures and to promote bilateral collaborative research and curriculum
development.

Intellectual Merit U.S. scholars will have the opportunity to work with Indian
counterparts on developing new tools, methodologies, and investigative
techniques for forensic engineering. While this field is not well developed in
India, engineers at Indian institutions of higher learning have extensive
practice performing forensic investigations. There will be a review of US and
Indian forensic engineering practices plus an overview of advanced sensing
techniques used in forensic work. US participants will have the opportunity to
make site visits to Indian universities and to the Structural Engineering
Research Center (SERC) in Chennai with the idea of seeding collaborations with
Indian researchers. Particular attention will be given to developing new
structural failure theories and design approaches leading to improved technical
understanding.

Broader Impacts The proposed effort is aimed at developing a forensic
engineering curriculum as well as collaborative research and education in
forensic engineering. This includes the establishment of a UNC & NIT-T joint
research laboratory and a centralized global data base of failed structures.
Four US graduates and undergraduates will be participants and will have the
opportunity to participate in an international research and culturally rich
experience. The activity is expected to contribute to enhancing FE theory and
practice, instrumentation development, and new methodologies for data synthesis
and interpretation.