* 0941778
* Applied Energy Education at the University of Southern Maine
* EHR,DUE
* 05/01/2010,11/30/2013
* Samantha Langley-Turnbaugh, University of Southern Maine
* Standard Grant
* Herbert H. Richtol
* 11/30/2013
* USD 174,978.00

Interdisciplinary (99) This project focuses on the development of an applied
energy curriculum including field and laboratory training. The curriculum is
comprised of traditional coursework, laboratory work, field study, and advanced
analysis in energy efficiency, production, and life cycle assessment.
Undergraduates use various instruments in the energy courses and in conducting
research projects under the umbrella of existing faculty research programs.
Thus, through the integration into course curricula and use in undergraduate
research, purchased energy equipment offers powerful pedagogical tools for
helping students learn and perform investigations in energy and sustainability.
Environmental scientists, engineers, and technologists graduating in the 21st
century need to be competent in energy efficiency, production and impact. This
project provides the modern equipment and appropriate curricula for students and
working professionals seeking specific training and certification in these
areas. Also, the collective activities of this project help fill a crucial
missing curricular gap for students, including those from underrepresented
groups. For example, this institution serves primarily nontraditional first
generation college students and also actively supports students with
disabilities, including returning veterans, majoring in science, technology,
engineering and mathematics. Many of these students are being trained in the use
of this equipment. In addition, existing faculty affiliations leverage student
exposure to international projects related to sustainability and energy in
Africa. Because the breadth of energy and environmental issues on the continent
are so extreme, these internships provide students with a unique perspective on
energy and environmental issues present for half of the world's population that
still rely on polluting and development crippling biomass fuels like firewood,
charcoal, and dung to meet their needs.