* 0941442
* CDI-Type I: Data Rods: Enabling Time-Series Analysis of Massive Multi-Modality Cryospheric Data
* GEO,OPP
* 11/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Julienne Stroeve, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 09/30/2013
* USD 576,514.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The goal of most climate research is to detect change over
time. Much of the data are in the form of spatiallyarranged remote sensing data
or model output. These data sets are voluminous and tend to be organized as
separate geo-referenced files for a single time, which is a function of how the
data were collected. Subsetting these data files for change detection over
select regions a very common goal of climate data analysis is time consuming.
The goal of this project is to design and prototype a process for addressing
time-series data as pure objects that will enable time-centric change analysis
of massive multi-modality cryospheric data. This project will create ?Data Rods?
as a spatiotemporal data construct in a pure object database. Rather than
storing data at a fixed time and a variable spatial extent, this project will
store the data at fixed spatial extents with a variable time component, thus the
data will be optimized for space-time queries and searches. A Data Rod is a
logical object that integrates all the information that is known about a point
on the earth (the pixel/grid cell) through time. The introduction of time to the
discrete pixel allows changes over time to be represented by items in the
database, as opposed to timestamped spatial grids. The result is a very
efficient storage and representation system. Queries to this database can span
millions of data rods simultaneously across both time and space. This project
will also develop time-series change analysis techniques, which exploit the
spatiotemporal aspects of the Data Rods to efficiently query for features,
patterns and anomalies directly and quickly. The initial focus will be on
gridded data maintained by the National Snow and Ice Data Center (NSIDC), but it
will be extended to other remote sensing and point data. The initial science
focus will be to evaluate the contribution of the Greenland ice sheet to sea
level rise. The approach will be demonstrated by using real data for Greenland
to answer questions such as: At what time interval did the albedo over Greenland
change the fastest? Or, was 2007 an anomalous melt year? What local factors
contributed to this anomaly? These questions involve huge data sets and
statistical queries that are poorly served by existing tools. The Data Rod
construct and new search algorithms will be tested for feasibility, speed and
performance of this technology to solve critical space-time questions. In terms
of broader impacts, the set of technologies developed in this project could
transform how science researchers access and analysis massive volumes of data in
many scientific domains such as life and social science working with
spatiotemporal data. The expected science results and techniques will be
disseminated through journal articles, standards bodies, cyberlearning
resources, curriculum design, and outreach activities to (future) IT and science
professionals including underrepresented groups. Students will be trained in a
cyber-intensive, interdisciplinary setting. CDI themes: ?From Data to
Knowledge?, ?Understanding Complexity.?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;