* 0941417
* CDI-Type I: Collaborative Research: Observational Data as Central Engine of Binary Black Hole Simulations
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Pablo Laguna, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 09/30/2013
* USD 465,000.00

Cyber-Enabled Discovery and Innovation
(CDI)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 0941417 /
0940924&lt;br/&gt;PIs: Pablo Laguna / Lee Finn&lt;br/&gt;Institutions: Georgia
Tech Research Corporation - Georgia Institute of Technology / Pennsylvania State
Univ University Park&lt;br/&gt;Title:CDI-Type I: Collaborative Research:
Observational Data as Central Engine of Binary Black Hole
Simulations&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A gravitational wave astrophysics driven by
observations is just around the corner. Interferometric gravitational-wave
detectors such as LIGO and its partners have reached design sensitivity. The
general consensus is that first detections will take place in the very near
future. Beyond detection, one of the grand challenges in this new astronomy is
the characterization of sources from the information encoded in the signals
buried in the noisy data. The degree of success in this enterprise will
determine the extent to which gravitational wave observations can be used as a
tool of discovery. The proposed project is motivated by the premise that
recognizing and interpreting the data collected through the window of
gravitational wave observations requires a set of skills spanning several
disciplines, thus presenting an opportunity to develop transformative and
multidisciplinary research and to open the door to innovations and advances in
this new astronomy, in which gravitational waves act as messengers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central theme of this project is using numerical-
relativity tools and data-analysis methodologies to solve the inverse problem in
gravitational physics for one of the most important sources of gravitational
radiation, the inspiral and merger of a binary black hole system. The solution
to this problem is essential for harnessing the predictive power of general
relativity and for enhancing the conversation between the data collected by
gravitational wave interferometric detectors and the questions posed by
astrophysics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project approach is development of
efficient numerical algorithms for assimilating observational data, applying
deterministic and stochastic parameter estimation techniques to address the
source characterization problem. Activities supported by this proposal are
intended to produce tools and methodologies that enable the marriage of
numerical simulation, gravitational wave observation and algorithms used in
large inverse problems outside gravitational physics. These tools will enable
acquiring new knowledge through the analysis of large and rich multi-spectral
gravitational observations, multi-scale numerical relativity simulations,
catalyzed by the combination of the still-growing pool of computational
resources and related advances in the understanding of computational Bayesian
inference. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Among its broader impacts, this
multidisciplinary team intends to develop a new paradigm for using numerical
relativity tools and an innovative approach to the inverse problem in
gravitational physics. The tools produced by this collaboration will be made
freely available and will be directly applicable to other disciplines. The
proposed work exploits algorithms and methodology to tackle inverse problems in
areas such as global climate change, weather forecasting, medical imaging and
reservoir simulations. Students will have opportunities to build expertise in
data analysis, numerical algorithms, high-performance computing, optimization,
and inverse problems.