* 0941203
* Design of Electronic Learning Tools to Supplement General Chemistry Experiments
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2014
* Resa Kelly, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 06/30/2014
* USD 200,000.00

Chemistry (12) This project is creating a series of electronic learning tools
(ELTs) for a set of chemistry experiments currently taught in a first semester,
General Chemistry course at San Jose State University. The design of the ELTs
will make them particularly powerful. A systematic development approach is being
used to study how expert chemistry instructors explain concepts to uncover key
features central to their explanations and to break the sequence into a series
of natural segments. Chemistry students' explanations are also being examined to
identify and target their learning needs and common misconceptions. A team of
graphic arts students are working with the researchers to develop the ELTs based
on the research findings. The intellectual merit of this project is that the
ELTs are being designed to contain animations of submicrosopic level chemical
reactions embedded in a framework that makes use of still images and makes
connections to macroscopic concepts and to symbolic levels of thinking. This
type of learning tool provides a scaffold to enhance students' abilities to
reason about the connections between the three levels of chemistry
(submicroscopic, macroscopic and symbolic) on their path to understanding the
nature of reactions. The broader impacts of this project is that the ELTs may
improve students' understanding of chemical reactions, a central topic in
general chemistry courses and often referred to in courses and media that
interface with chemistry. Specifically, the ELTs will help prepare students for
experiments by targeting specific misconceptions revealed through research.