* 0941804
* Gas-Liquid Interfaces:  Turbulence and Scalar Exchange
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2009,08/31/2009
* Sanjoy Banerjee, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Horst Henning Winter
* 08/31/2009
* USD 1.00

PROPOSAL NO.: CTS-0553333 PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: S. BANERJEE INSTITUTION:
UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA - SANTA BARBARA

GAS-LIQUID INTERFACES: TURBULENCE AND SCALAR EXCHANGE

Turbulent transport processes at gas-liquid interfaces remain poorly understood
despite being central to many industrial and environmental processes- for
example, to reliable estimation of greenhouse gas uptake by the oceans. This
poor state of knowledge derives primarily from the difficulty of making
measurements and doing numerical simulations of velocity, temperature and
concentration fields close to moving, deforming and breaking interfaces. As a
result much less is known about turbulence structure and transport processes
near mobile interfaces than near solid boundaries, even though many
purification, reaction and energy transfer processes are conducted across such
interfaces in the chemical and power industries. The objective of this project
is to contribute to improving the state of understanding of such problems using
a combination of experimental and computational approaches based n recent
advances in digital particle imaging velocimetry (DPIV) and direct numerical
simulation (DNS) over complex boundaries. In particular, the structure and
effects of liquid-side, near-interface turbulence, originating from a variety of
sources such as wind shear, wave breaking, thermal convection, wall shear and
combinations, will be studied. The proposed experiments and simulations will
provide high quality data over a wide range of conditions that will be of
lasting value in understanding mechanisms and evaluating modeling approaches.
Also the results will be used to assess broad reaching hypotheses regarding
turbulent transport processes that if proved valid, would constitute a
significant advance in fundamental understanding of the subject. The broad
impact of this project arises from its potential to reduce costs for design and
scale-up of multiphase-processing equipment, such as condensers, evaporators,
gas absorbers, scrubbers and gas-liquid reactors, as well in several
environmental applications. These include exchange of carbon between the
atmosphere and ocean or river systems, fate and transport of volatile toxics
like mercury and PCBs, and the aeration of hypoxic waters. The broad societal
impact by better informing policy regarding matters such as greenhouse gas
emissions would be very significant. Another impact of the proposed work is its
potential to educate researchers in an interdisciplinary area in which both
environmental considerations and engineering approaches are important- a
background of importance in addressing future societal needs.