* 0941741
* CDI-Type 1 Collaborative Research:  Multi-scale Modeling of Protein-Modulated DNA Large-Scale Dynamics by Free Energy Surface Matching
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Ioan Andricioaei, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 08/31/2012
* USD 319,408.00

Multi-Scale Modeling of Protein-Modulated DNA Large-Scale Dynamics&lt;br/&gt;By
Free Energy Surface Matching&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Protein-DNA interactions
govern essentially all major genetic transactions within the cell including, for
example, DNA replication, repair, transcription and recombination. These
actions, which begin locally at the nm-sized site of protein-DNA binding, often
generate very large, &amp;#61549;m-scale DNA conformational changes. The
enormously broad length and time scales invoked in these complex dynamical
systems create formidable challenges for computational modeling. This project
addresses this challenge by proposing a transformative, multi-scale
computational method that captures the time-evolution of large protein-DNA
complexes on biologically relevant length/time scales (e.g., micron/millisecond
and longer). Our method begins with (one-time) massively parallel MD
computations and umbrella sampling of the protein domain to establish an
unperturbed free energy surface in the absence of bound DNA. Next, we couple a
rod model of long DNA to the protein (by geometric protein boundary conditions)
and form a reduced-order dynamical system (Fokker-Planck probability) model of
the entire protein-DNA complex for the dominant degrees of freedom. The
resulting Fokker-Plank model captures the complete (two-way) dynamic coupling of
the rod/DNA and protein domains and enables integration over the desired long
length/time scales. We illustrate our method on two large and challenging
systems; namely 1) the relaxation of DNA supercoils by human topoisomerase I,
and 2) the packing and ejection of dsDNA from viral capsids in
bacteriophages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims at long standing
challenges in predicting the dynamical behavior of large biomolecular systems on
long length and time scales. These predictions are essential for understanding
fundamental cellular processes (including DNA transcription, replication, and
repair) and interpreting exciting results from single molecule experiments. More
broadly, our method provides a systematic means to couple atomistic to continuum
level (e.g. micron-scale) descriptions of matter in a wide range of fields.
Other fields may include DNA/RNA complexes that form large scale nucleic acid
(origami) structures for scaffolding, computing, or nanopropelling; carbon
nanotubes interacting with organic and inorganic nanoparticles; nanowires and
their use for bio-molecular detection; and the structural dynamics of flagella,
collagen fibers and cellular cytoskeleton elements (e.g., actin, neurofilaments,
microtubules), among others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;