* 0941742
* CDI-Type II: Real-time Classification of Massive Time-series Data Streams
* O/D,OIA
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Joshua Bloom, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Thomas F. Russell
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,573,550.00

The collection of new data in any discipline does not, in general, lead to the
creation of new knowledge. With the current data deluge, the human role in
scientific discovery, traditionally so important, must now be partially
fulfilled by powerful algorithms. However, current tools and technology start to
break down when discovery and understanding, by the very nature of the science
at hand, must happen quickly and in near real-time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New
astronomical surveys coming online in the next few years, many observing the
same regions of the sky repeatedly in time, will collect more data in the next
decade than in all of human history so far. Opening up truly new vistas on the
dynamic universe requires both rapid data processing and quick decisions about
what available resources (e.g., telescopes) worldwide must be marshalled to
study newly discovered phenomena. This necessitates an intelligent "real-time"
machine-based decision or "classification" framework that should be able to deal
with incomplete (and in some cases spurious)
information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will produce a framework for
extracting novel science from large amounts of data in an environment where the
computational needs vastly outweigh the available facilities, and intelligent
(as well as dynamic) resource allocation is required. New theory will be
developed that will allow current machine learning paradigms to scale to large
parallel computing environments. The core result is the production, for projects
generating thousands of gigabytes of new data a night (such as the proposed
Large Synoptic Survey Telescope), of probabilistic statements about the physical
nature of astronomical events. Uncovering anomalous events that do not fit
easily into a currently accepted classification taxonomy - events that may lead
to completely new scientific discoveries - will be particularly emphasized in
this work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building these computational tools now with
concrete scientific returns in mind will form the foundation for more rapid
transformative applications in other fields with similar demands and constraints
(high-frequency financial data, robotics, medical signal monitoring, geophysics,
weather, and particle physics). This endeavor will also serve for years as a
training ground for students and researchers across several departments and
disciplines, and will broaden their scope towards a truly interdisciplinary
education. By exposing students in the physical sciences to cutting-edge
computer science and machine learning concepts, this project will provide a
frame-work for computational thinking that will lead to future innovation.