* 0941208
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:   The Archaeology of Local Human Response to a Global Environmental Transformation
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Steven Schmich, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2011
* USD 14,639.00

This project is a case study designed to identify the dynamics of local
subsistence adaptations to the climate-induced environmental transformation of
the Pleistocene-Holocene transition. Set in the Mediterranean region of
southeast Spain, it includes two systematic archaeological surveys and the
geochemical analysis of stone tools collected during the past decade of
archaeological research in the study area. The surveys sample the sources of raw
material, from which stone tools were made, along three natural corridors
connecting major ecological zones from the Mediterranean coast through the
mountains to Spain's interior plain and establish the archaeological presence or
absence of late Pleistocene human groups where the natural corridors intersect
the interior plain. Each survey is the first of its kind in the region. Two
previous pilot projects leading to the current dissertation project have helped
pioneer the use of Proton Induced X-ray Emission (PIXE) analysis to produce
quantifiable geochemical signatures from stone tools and the raw material used
to make them. Geochemical signatures are used here to link archaeological sites
on a chronological scale, to track the movement and land-use patterns of human
groups, and to establish the economic territories of groups with access to
specific raw material sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Pleistocene-Holocene
transition is the only previous global environmental transformation confronted
by modern humans - making it the best available analog for understanding
potential human reactions to future climate change. However, late Pleistocene
archaeological records in most of Europe are dominated by the Last Glacial
Maximum (LGM), which forced major shifts in demography. Human populations
abandoned continental Europe west of the Ural Mountains at the LGM and packed
into defined refugium areas. As the ice receded, and the Pleistocene began its
transition to the Holocene climate regimes in which we now live, refugia
populations dispersed outward and recolonized Europe. Mediterranean Spain was an
exception, where the interval between late Pleistocene and early Holocene
remained a relative continuum. For example, no territory in the study area was
excluded from the subsistence base by glaciation. Changes in land-use can be
considered responses to the ecological aspects of climate transformation and not
simply a response to newly available land. As a result, Mediterranean Spain is a
natural venue for studying the ecodynamics of human adaptation to the
Pleistocene-Holocene transition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Resilience in subsistence
adaptations is a function of access to sufficient resources. Viewed from this
perspective, late Pleistocene and early Holocene hunter-gatherer subsistence
economies balanced a set of variables roughly analogous to those of local
subsistence economies in climate-sensitive developing nations today. Exponential
changes in population density between the Holocene and now redefine what is
sufficient, as differences in technology modify the degree and pathways of
access, but neither alters the fundamental relationships. An archaeological
perspective allows a better understanding of ultimate, rather than proximate,
causes of social and ecological system resilience - and that is the broader
impact of this research. It recognizes global climate transformation as a
challenge that local human groups have previously confronted, and it creates a
conceptual framework within which to examine the decision-making processes and
that allowed them to adapt in a world of unprecedented change.