* 0941205
* RAPID: Muniche Rapid Documention Project
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2010
* Lev Michael, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 06/30/2010
* USD 9,998.00

Muniche Rapid Documentation Project&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
document Muniche, an almost extinct language of Peruvian Amazonia. Due to the
advanced age of the remaining speakers, at best a few years remain to document
this language, motivating this rapid team-based linguistic documentation
project. Muniche is currently considered a linguistic isolate (a language with
no demonstrated connections to any other language), making documentation of this
language especially important, since isolates are generally the consequence of
linguistic differentiation in the deep linguistic past. Working closely with the
last speakers of this language, a research team of five linguists will collect a
database of : 1) 1500 lexical roots covering all core semantic domains, with
associated example sentences; 2) examples of all major grammatical construction
types; and 3) a collection of dialogues exemplifying a range of everyday
communicative interactions. Additionally, audio recordings will be made of all
example sentences and dialogues. The resulting materials will be made available
both to other linguists and to Muniche community members in the form of textual
and audio dictionaries and dialogue collections. The project will also prepare a
pedagogical grammar of the language which will be used in community language
enrichment classes. The research team will subsequently employ these materials
to prepare a technical linguistic description of this language that, in
conjunction with the dictionaries and recordings, will serve as a durable record
of this language for the Muniche people, linguists, anthropologists, and
historians. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our species is currently
experiencing a rapid and drastic loss of linguistic diversity. Documentation of
endangered languages is important both to the communities in which they are
spoken and to linguists. For the communities, documentation of this sort
provides a tie to their history, and often plays an important role in
revalorization of formerly suppressed cultural identities. The Muniche Rapid
Documentation Project will provide extensive pedagogical and reference materials
to the community, which will be used in language enrichment classes being
started in the community. For linguists, documentation of human linguistic
diversity is crucial: 1) in reconstructing linguistic history, which often has
consequences for our understanding of cultural history, 2) as the empirical
basis for forming suitably broad theories about the social and cognitive bases
of the human language faculty. In the Muniche case in particular, the data and
materials that will result from this project will contribute to linguists'
understanding of the linguistic history of South America, including the genetic
relationships between the languages of the region and the ways in which
languages have mutually influenced each other due to prolonged contact. It has
been suggested that Muniche is a member of the continent-spanning Arawak
language family, which if true, would have important consequences for our
understanding of Amazonian prehistory. In particular, the Arawak peoples have
been identified as the domesicators of manioc, one of the major Neotropical
cultigens, and if Muniche is a distant member of this family, the implications
for the Arawak expansion in Amazonia would be significant. The data collected by
this project will allow us to evaluate this hypothesis. In addition, it has been
suggested that Amazonian languages exhibit a considerable degree of basic
grammatical similarity due to prolonged social interaction and multilingualism.
Evaluating this hypothesis requires linguistic data from all major geographical
subregions, and Muniche is one of the few surviving language of the historically
important Huallaga River valley. Documentation of Muniche will thus contribute
to this effort to understand large-scale linguistic patterns in one of the
linguitically least-studied areas on Earth.