* 0941067
* ATE Central: Delivering Greater Cyberlearning Impact through Coordination and Collaboration
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2009,10/31/2014
* Rachael Bower, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 10/31/2014
* USD 2,328,391.00

ATE Central includes a large collection of curricula, learning objects, websites
and media created by projects and centers funded by the Advanced Technological
Education program. The resources are catalogued by librarians using standards
and practices developed and implemented in the digital library field using
cyberlearning knowledge, practices and software created by Internet Scout over
many years. ATE Central is expanded to create an extensive archiving system for
ATE (including providing a web presence for the products of projects that have
ended), tracking impact across projects and amplifying outreach efforts. A
variety of tools are developed to help faculty better utilize the resources and
direct them to new efforts such as a key concept browsing interface, a bulletin
service that alerts them when new material of interest is posted and videos of
real world opportunities through features like ATE Success Stories. The site
documents best practice to help educators build on existing work and advances
the knowledge base about cyberlearning by acting as a test bed and clearinghouse
to better understand the integration of the variety of Web 2.0 technologies and
increase their use in the ATE program. Quantitative measures of success are
measuring the use of the resources via diverse paths and measuring the activity
related to the online presence of products of individual project and centers. A
handbook is developed to guide users through the tools and resources available
on ATE Central. Ongoing feedback and direction is provided by the evaluation and
the use of advisors and focus groups.