* 0941233
* Can Students Use Assessment-based Double-loop Learning to Improve Their Design Skills?
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2014
* Judith Sims-Knight, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 09/30/2014
* USD 198,905.00

Computer Engineering (32)&lt;br/&gt;This is a proof of concept project that is
educating students in the use of "double-loop learning" to improve their self-
regulated learning (SRL) skills and thereby increase their learning capacity and
their design skills. The study builds on earlier work funded by NSF that
developed assessments of students' knowledge and skill in the design process.
The specific objective of this project are: (1) to contribute to the
understanding of how students learn to create open-ended designs and develop
reflective practice, (2) to provide materials and an instructional model that
can applied to other courses, and (3) to develop a validated instrument for
measuring students' design process skill and reflective practice. The study has
three phases. In the first phase the assessment instrument is being given to all
students enrolled in electrical and computer engineering (ECE) to establish
baseline performance levels both across the curriculum and in the computer
engineering design courses. In the second phase, the junior-level computer
engineering design course is being revised so that students use the process
assessments as a basis for continuous improvement. After each third of the
course, students will take the process assessments and use the results to devise
improvement plans. The change in their understanding and use of appropriate
design process, the quality of their design artifacts, and the impact on their
reflective practice skills and attitudes is then being compared to that of
students who took the course the previous year in the traditional format.