* 0941517
* Isothermal Calorimetry  in Physical Chemistry and Biochemistry Laboratories
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Leah O'Brien, Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville
* Standard Grant
* Nicole Bennett
* 09/30/2013
* USD 198,978.00

Chemistry (12) Laboratory experiments are being developed for upper-level
Physical Chemistry and Biochemistry Laboratory courses that utilize isothermal
titration calorimetry (ITC). The exercises include: "Binding Constants of EDTA
with Ca(II) and Mg(II) Ions"; "Michaelis-Menten Enzyme Kinetic Study of the
Hydrolysis of Benzoylarginine Ether Ester (BAEE) by Trypsin"; "Binding of the
N-Acetylglucosamine Trisaccharide ((NAG)3)Ligand to Lysozyme"; and
"Investigation of the Interaction of Calmodulin with Ca2+/Calmodulin Kinase II".
The binding affinity, reaction enthalpy, and stoichiometric ratio for the two
reagents are being obtained directly from the ITC experiments. Additionally, by
combining these reaction parameters, it is also possible to determine the
reaction entropy and the change in Gibb's free energy for the reaction studied.
Program assessment will include the impact of these innovative educational
materials on student learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Isothermal titration
calorimetry is a relatively new technique that is used to determine
thermodynamic parameters for small scale reactions. The interdisciplinary nature
of isothermal calorimetry makes it a powerful tool to demonstrate the link
between discovery and societal benefits such as drug development. Modern,
ultrasensitive ITC has found many applications in Biochemistry and
Pharmaceutical research: protein-protein, protein-drug, protein-DNA, protein-
ligand and metal-ligand interactions are examples of intermolecular interactions
that can be studied. Educational materials resulting from these efforts are
being nationally disseminated at chemistry education conferences and via
manuscripts submitted to professional journals.