* 0941487
* CDI-Type I: Understanding complex, Dynamic, Multi-Relational Networks In a Large-Brained Social Mammal Through Visual Graph Inquiry
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Janet Mann, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Tran
* 09/30/2013
* USD 542,152.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Long-term studies of mammals are
precious resources for scientists and the public, but rarely are such data sets
fully exploited. This is largely because, with volumes of data stored in many
formats (e.g. spreadsheets, text, image files), biological inquiry is often
limited to manual approaches and traditional statistical analyses. To improve
analytical capability, we have developed a data warehouse for the most
comprehensive long-term dolphin dataset collected to date. This warehouse,
containing 25+ years of detailed observational data,, including &gt;14,000
sighting records on &gt;1200 dolphins, focal follows on 214 individuals
(detailed individual behavioral data), genetic, ecological (habitat, prey,
predators), and extensive demographic data. Biologists working with this data
have used traditional statistical and linear (cause-effect) approaches for
analysis. Even with large longitudinal data sets, scientists must choose just a
few variables, and can easily select less-important or even the "wrong" feature.
To promote more interactive data exploration, we propose developing a
comprehensive visual graph inquiry platform that contains a query language for
dynamic graphs, graph mining algorithms, and an intuitive visual mapping for
community and individual animals that will allow biologists to explore broader
data patterns before they commit to a particular set of analyses. While new
research is surfacing in graph databases, graph mining, and graph visualization,
an integrated, holistic approach for querying, exploring, and visualizing
dynamic graphs does not exist. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Such computational tools
offer biologists access to more dynamic multi-dimensional approaches to help
answer biological questions related to (1) spatio-temporal and dynamic
dimensions of network structure; (2) socio-cultural transmission of behavior;
and (3) social, ecological, and demographic factors influencing female
reproduction. By exploiting both biological and computational approaches, our
new tools will help unveil the properties of large, dynamic, heterogeneous data
sets and their underlying social complexity. This project will serve as a
template for observational large scale animal studies in the areas of data
collection, data integration, data management, visual data exploration, and data
analysis. Very few longitudinal datasets on mammals are widely available. Some
of the tools we develop will enable scientists to visually explore patterns
rather than download a set of variables in table form. This will enable
scientists to explore data properties and is expected to yield more insights
than traditional data analysis.