* 0941235
* Collaborative Research:  CDI-Type II--Revolutionary Advances in Modeling Transport Phenomena in Porous Medium Systems
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/2009,09/30/2015
* Jingfang Huang, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 09/30/2015
* USD 1,100,000.00

The nation's water supply, subsurface energy extraction, storage of greenhouse
gases, global climate change, biological tissues, concrete materials, and fuel
cell design are all examples of critical areas involving natural and engineered
porous medium systems. Despite the widespread occurrence and importance of
porous medium processes, the basic approach to modeling them, although well-
established and nearly universally used, is seriously flawed. The flaws have
become more consequential with the need for reliable simulators of increasingly
complex problems. These flaws include: (a) a disconnect between well-understood
microscale physics of multiphase flow and transport and the modeling of these
processes at the macroscale; (b) reliance upon quasi-static assumptions to
describe quantities such as relative permeability and capillary pressure even
for systems where dynamic effects are important; (c) lack of a methodical,
rigorous, theoretical framework within which conservation equations and
thermodynamic relations can be established for general and specialized
applications; and (d) a lack of physical realism in closure schemes for energy
transport, dispersion, and phase interactions. The end result is that the study
of porous medium systems requires transformational research combining theory,
computation, and mathematical analysis to produce the rigorous, multiscale,
physics-based models needed to advance understanding and reliability of
simulations in applications across a broad and important range of scientific
disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will combine theory,
computation, mathematical analysis, and high-resolution experimental observation
to formulate, solve, and validate models that capture the physics of multiphase
flow and transport phenomena in porous media across a range of length scales.
The multi-pronged approach will produce the foundational underpinnings of a new
generation of porous medium models that will apply across a wide range of
scientific fields involving both natural and engineered systems. The general
foundational work will be illustrated by specific study of three important
problems: non-dilute density dependent transport, two-fluidphase flow, and
three-fluid-phase flow. The tools integrated in this work will include high-
resolution imaging of pore structure and fluid distributions, image analysis and
data extraction, continuum mechanics of fluids and solids, classical and
extended thermodynamics, multiscale analysis, high-resolution lattice-Boltzmann
algorithm development and simulation, mathematical analysis of new models, time
and space adaptive numerical methods, and advanced integral methods for solving
systems of nonlinear partial differential algebraic equations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will contribute to education through short
courses, student research, and science outreach. It will enhance the
infrastructure for fundamental porous media research across disciplines through
the production of a monograph and the distribution of tools for modeling and
analysis of porous media. The project will encourage the participation of
underrepresented researchers and has linkages to minority recruitment programs.
It will help improve our to manage natural resources and engineer porous systems
for a variety of applications.