* 0941501
* CDI-Type II Collaborative Research: Understanding social networks, complex systems
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2014
* May Yuan, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Crowston
* 09/30/2014
* USD 471,193.00

This project creates a multidisciplinary research virtual organization (SOCNET)
of historians, geographers, computer scientists, and mathematicians to share
historical social science data and develop geographically integrated frameworks
to address complex, dynamic, nonlinear systems and social
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through multidisciplinary collaboration, SOCNET
will fuse qualitative and quantitative data to connect humans, events, and
environments, and through such connections form historical narratives within and
across geographic spaces. The project's ultimate goal is to better infuse
computational thinking into the historical social sciences through computational
innovation and narrative knowledge creation to revolutionize research outcomes
in these disciplines with a shift to Geographically-Integrated History. SOCNET's
developments in Dynamics GIS (geographic information systems) and related
information technologies will provide the backbone for understanding complex
historical social systems with three components that define the geographically-
integrated history paradigm: (1) the history of any place is shaped in
significant ways by the way the place is connected to other places and by the
changes in these connections over time; (2) historical periods are complex,
dynamic, nonlinear systems that are spatially large, and in more recent
centuries, global in extension, and these systems sometimes become unstable,
leading to a phase transition, bifurcation, and the organization of new systems;
and (3) within such systems, people and places are connected by social networks
in a self-organizing fashion. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Focusing on the first global
age (1400-1800), SOCNET will transform historical research with computational
thinking on (1) new means for the representation of data for organizing,
storing, manipulating, and recovering them for exploration using computational
tools; (2) new spatial-temporal GIS for the visualization and analysis of real
world dynamics; (3) new tools for data harmonization and text mining; (4) new
approaches to the use of information that is vague, uncertain, and incomplete
and of qualitative data within a computational context; (5) new forms of
modeling to represent the inferences of domain experts; and (6) new metaphors
beyond the map and animation-based visualization for temporal GIS. Collaborative
protocols, tools, models, data structures, and algorithms developed in the
project will be shaped and presented in web-based educational materials to
provide interested researchers and their students with easy access.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond the historical social sciences and geographic
information science, SOCNET will promote innovations in computer science,
mathematical modeling and simulation, environmental sciences, medical research,
and transportation studies. Collaborating computer scientists and mathematicians
will develop innovative computational concepts and tools to better capture the
dynamism of overlapping, multi-dimensional social networks within a complex,
nonlinear system. In solving the difficulties associated with using historical
information within a computational environment, SOCNET will further promote the
idea of 'spatial turn' within history and the historical social sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because of the higher percentage of women and minorities
among majors in the historical social sciences, the project will attract such
students into a technologically rich educational and employment environment. The
project will support the development of an existing Master's in geographically-
integrated history, a forthcoming interdisciplinary Ph.D. in Social and
Environmental Dynamics, a future M.S. in Computer Science and Computational
Sciences, and a new interdisciplinary degree program in Geoinformatics,
providing students educational emphases on geographic information science and
technology to seek better understanding of dynamic human and environmental
systems.