* 0941181
* Collaborative Research: Electronic Properties of Strongly Correlated Systems using Petascale Computing
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2011
* Sergey Savrasov, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Irene M. Qualters
* 09/30/2011
* USD 19,895.00

This collaborative award facilitates scientific research using the large new
computational resource named Blue Waters being developed by IBM and scheduled to
be deployed at the University of Illinois in 2011. It provides travel funds to
support technical coordination between the principal investigators, the Blue
Waters project team and vendor technical team and a provisional allocation of
supercomputing time on the system.

The proposed project is an investigation of the behavior of materials containing
strongly correlated electron systems. Such materials often have interesting
properties; for example, high-temperature superconductivity, colossal magneto-
resistance, large optical nonlinearities and large thermoelectric coefficients.
The project includes the adaptation to Blue Waters of a computer code to model
such materials and an investigation of the electronic properties of novel, iron-
based superconductors. The researchers will study the physics of short-range
correlation effects and the itinerancy of the d-electron states. They will
derive and study low-energy Hamiltonians for various pnictides, using them to
study hopping integrals, exchange couplings, electron-phonon and magnon-phonon
interactions, and determining trends in superconducting temperatures. The
project team will also examine the competition between superconductivity and the
Kondo effect.

The proposed work will add a valuable predictive tool for the study of strongly
correlated materials including those with potentially interesting industrial
applications. The techniques developed should be of broad applicability, and the
code and methods developed will be made available to the broader scientific
community. The project will include the teaching of complicated many body
concepts of solid-state physics to students through the use of state-of-the-art
numerical and computational techniques, enhancing the human infrastructure for
materials science. The project team integrates research and education through
the inclusion of students and post-doctoral researchers.