* 0941497
* CDI Type II: Building a Virtual Micro/Nanosystems Design Community
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2015
* Gary Fedder, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2015
* USD 2,016,000.00

This project offers a web gateway designed to educate users about engineering
micro/nanosystems through a freely accessible web-based gateway where user-
generated models, example simulations, and design methodologies are
shared.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Micro and nanosystems (MEMS and NEMS or N/MEMS)
inspire children in the same way as bridges, trains, cars, and radios did in the
past. For example, Nintendo Wii links the physical and digital worlds through a
MEMS accelerometer. The N/MEMS industry exceeds $5B in annual revenue and is
well recognized as a growth business. However, critical gaps between novice and
expert users, prediction and experiment, and length and time scales slow
technological advances. This project team exploits this new-found interest in
technology by building a virtual community which introduces how N/MEMS work and
facilitates new designs by novices and experts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve
the goals of this project, a multidisciplinary team offers a system of
tutorials, guidelines, and a toolbox/simulator that can be used for creating,
testing, and modeling designs for nanosystems. The target audience includes K12
students, undergraduates, graduate students, and scholars. The objective is to
expose novice users to models and structures inherent in nanosystems using a 3-D
interface that can be used directly by users to manipulate model components into
visual representations. This system promises to offer novice users the
opportunity to interrogate and apply complex physics models using an easy to use
and intuitive graphical user interface. The system is expected to be useful to
experts in this domain by enabling them to extend or add new nanosystems models.
This project involves collaboration between computer scientists, mechanical
scientists, and electrical engineers, at Carnegie Mellon University, University
of Illinois, and Purdue University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This novel framework,
implemented online, is expected to be self-sustaining - piloted by its users.
That is, users contribute to the Wiki-driven model and solution libraries, and
to tutorials and templates. The 3D graphical user interface expedites system
design and motivates novices at many educational levels to participate.