* 0941386
* Collaborative Research: CDI-Type II: Scaling Up: Introducing Commoditized Governance into Community Earth Science Modeling
* CSE,OAC
* 02/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Paul Edwards, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Crowston
* 09/30/2013
* USD 824,532.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). Scaling Up is a program of research and development that
will enable virtual organizations in the Earth sciences to scale to massive
interdisciplinary "communities of communities." A key element is commodity
governance, which encodes social and technical aspects of governance in
cyberinfrastructure to create virtual units capable of operating, aggregating,
and coordinating in a decentralized fashion. This is a deeply integrative effort
that synthesizes expertise in the physical sciences, computer science, political
science, social science, and software engineering to propose a strategy for
governing large-scale Earth science modeling collaborations that are
technically, scientifically, and socially complex.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Investigators will conduct a sociotechnical study of three
interlinked modeling projects in climate, weather, and surface dynamics, and
formulate a conceptual framework that addresses the requirements, structures,
and policies of virtual organizations in these and similar modeling domains as a
basis for commodity governance implementation. Commodity governance units will
be implemented on a base of cyberinfrastructure projects that are emerging as a
means for expressing modeling activities as end-to-end workflows, accessible
through science gateways. The units will be disseminated through the base
cyberinfrastructure and demonstrated, to the extent possible, in the target
modeling projects. It will be fully utilized in a pilot project focused on the
intercomparison of atmospheric dynamical cores.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
commoditized governance elements, as their name implies, are expected to be
applicable to many modeling virtual organizations, including disciplines such as
space weather, ecosystem modeling and fusion. Products of the collaboration will
be incorporated into and distributed with the widely used cyberinfrastructure
products generated by the Earth System Grid and Earth System Modeling Framework,
and introduced to the extent possible into several large virtual organizations.
A pilot project that will demonstrate extensive use of tools and concepts
introduced by the collaboration will involve graduate students in exemplary
processes for model development - the careful, exhaustive analysis of specific
components through rigorous collaborative testing. Commodity governance itself
is intended to be a powerful democratizing force in the modeling community, as
it lowers barriers of entry for smaller and marginalized groups by encouraging
accessibility to modeling artifacts and transparent, decentralized decision
making processes. The domain in which the proposed work is focusing - the
interrelationships of climate, weather, and surface processes - is a key to
understanding and addressing critical societal questions about the effects of
climate change.