* 0941565
* CDI-Type II: Open Sourcing the Design of Civil Infrastructure (OSD-CI)
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Ahsan Kareem, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,450,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cyber-Enabled Discovery and Innovation
(CDI)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 0941565&lt;br/&gt;PI: Tracy
Kijewski-Correa&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Notre Dame&lt;br/&gt;Title:
CDI-Type II: Open Sourcing the Design of Civil Infrastructure (OSD-
CI)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, a virtual organization (VO) is
proposed that would allowing all stakeholders engineers, public officials,
researchers, students, and even the public at-large to engage as "Citizen
Engineers" to rehabilitate our nations deteriorating civil infrastructure. To
this end, the award will address four dimensions of collaboration: harnessing
human effort, tapping collective knowledge, pooling communal software and
leveraging distributed computational hardware. Linux and Wikipedia serve as
evidence that loosely organized teams can create and maintain the complex
technical and intellectual infrastructure upon which society increasingly
depends. These projects have succeeded not by accepting participants
indiscriminately, but by creating a meritocracy that rewards expertise
regardless of its source. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OSD-CI is devised as a way that
essential public-works projects could benefit similarly from the full expertise
and latest advances available in the wider engineering community. The VO will
use an archival Design Gallery, a Social Network, and a Tool Repository within
an integrated cyberinfrastructure. The investigators expect that new types of
discovery, education and engineering innovation will emerge to address the
challenges facing civil infrastructure in an unprecedented fashion. Furthermore,
the policies that result from this project are expected to define a new level of
task complexity for problem-solving by crowds, thus providing a platform for new
discoveries, insights and theories on the design and effectiveness of VOs that
require extreme trustworthiness and openness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By addressing
challenges facing civil infrastructure with OSD-CI, there will be direct
benefits to society reliant on this infrastructure. Furthermore, the social
fabric of the OSD-CI Collaboratory provides a new paradigm for engaging the
public at large in the research and design enterprise. It will offering new
means of collaboration and networking among "Citizen Engineers." In addition, it
will also aid education and mentoring of students worldwide, particularly those
in developing areas lacking access to such opportunities locally. Eventually,
OSD-CI is envisioned to become a virtual Town Hall where members of the public
interface with decision makers, engineers, architects and planners to contribute
to processes directly impacting them and their communities. Once the precedent
is set, these open-source communal concepts could be extended to other fields as
a basic framework and model for the effective use of VOs for addressing societal
challenges.