* 0941709
* Integrating genomics and bioinformatics into an ecology and evolution-based undergraduate curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2012
* Robert Gray, University of South Alabama
* Standard Grant
* William Grisham
* 12/31/2012
* USD 199,496.00

(Biological Sciences 61) &lt;br/&gt;Biologists at the University of South
Alabama are integrating cutting-edge scientific research into two undergraduate
courses with the intent to expand this approach into other courses. The specific
objectives of this project are: to integrate modern molecular approaches into
undergraduate laboratory courses by developing two upper-level project-based lab
courses in molecular ecology and bacterial genomics each featuring genomics and
bioinformatics; and to foster students' abilities to comprehend scientific
writing and generate novel scientific hypotheses and inferences through inter-
disciplinary peer-review exercises. For each course the first half of the
semester focuses on techniques and basic theory, while the second half of the
semester is dedicated to collaborative student research. Cross-course
collaboration for student projects is encouraged for students co-enrolled in the
two courses. Specifically designed blogging software provides students with a
comfortable platform on which to discuss relevant literature as well as their
own projects. All efforts are being evaluated to aid in adjustments to future
course offerings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The intellectual
merit of this project lies in the opportunity students are receiving to engage
in on-going research projects using techniques newly introduced into the science
they are studying. It builds on the research expertise of the team of
investigators at the University of Southern Alabama. In addition the novel web-
based approaches being used help students develop their scientific reading and
writing skills. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: These two courses serve
as a model for other mid-sized or smaller institutions, particularly those with
academically diverse faculty. The online materials being developed are being
made available to others interested in this approach to undergraduate education
in the sciences.