* 0941692
* CDI Type-II: Distributed Ocean Monitoring via Integrated  Data Analysis of Coordinated Buoyancy Drogues
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2015
* Ilkay Altintas, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 12/31/2015
* USD 1,368,000.00

An unanswered need in oceanography is to sample the ocean at higher-resolution
spatial and temporal scales than presently possible. Although current systems
have led tomany important discoveries, oceanographers would agree that many
fundamental processes are presently unobservable due to the sparseness of the
sampling geometries. Examples include the estimation of subsurface particle
trajectories for ascertaining sewer effluents, the measurement of horizontal and
vertical diffusivity, and the submesoscale vorticity and vertical excursions of
isopycnals. These examples require versatile, quasi-Lagrangian sensors that
profit fromthe same interactions generated by ocean circulation that the
oceanographic ecosystemrelies on. We propose an original oceanographic
observatory system based on small, inexpensive, buoyancy con- trolled drogues
capable of scientific data analysis and coordinated motion control within the
shear layers of the ocean circulation to monitor flows of nutrients, behaviors
of animals, coastal circulation, and pol- lution
dispersion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's propose to developdistributed,
Lagrangian sensing systems that can both track currents and sense the
environment has never been approached or accomplished. The proposed ocean
sampling mobile sensor network pose exciting research challenges that go well
beyond any particular discipline, as they require the integration of the sensing
and control aspects of the drogues with the data processing and computational
analysis tailored to the specific ocean applications. Deployed over coastal
areas of tens of kilometers, small armies of such drogues will concurrently map
currents and sense the environment. Such vehicle swarms offer the opportunity to
sample oceanic processes on space-time scales that were heretofore unobtainable
while being transported at low Reynolds numbers. Since individual drogues are
not tracked underwater and only relay sensed information when they are at the
surface, our proposed observatory system requires minimal supporting
infrastructure. With the computational tools and algorithms developed under this
project, the drogues would be built at a fraction of the cost of current ocean
sensor technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators propose outreach through high
schools, community workshops, and a science festival. The investigators mention
a focus on diversity. Successful development and deployment of the technology
will have substantial impact of high social relevance, and the connections with
the California Ocean Sciences Trust will help to ensure successful knowledge
transfer. The investigators also propose a suite of other broader impacts
activities, including course development and display at a local festival.