* 0941362
* CDI Type-II: Language Models for Human Dexterity
* O/D,OIA
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Rajesh Kumar, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas F. Russell
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,809,437.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this Cyber-enabled
Discovery and Innovation proposal is to develop new techniques for modeling and
analyzing human manipulative activities from motion and video data. In
particular, this research is based on the hypothesis that manipulative
activities can be analyzed using time-series analysis methods similar to those
that have revolutionized speech and language processing. Three focus areas will
be examined. The first focus area will be a "Language of Surgery" based on a
large and growing data set of surgical recordings acquired using the Intuitive
Surgical da Vinci robot. These recordings provide high-fidelity motion and
stereo video data in both laboratory and real-world surgical settings. The
second focus area will be a "Language of Fine Manipulation" based on motion data
acquired during human manipulation activities. The final focus area will be a
"Language of Body Motion" based on motion and video data of whole-body
manipulations such as lifting and carrying. These investigations will develop
new methods for analyzing time-series motion and video data, new perspectives on
modeling the structure of human motion, and new insights into the relationships
between skill, style, and content in human motion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
notion of modeling and analyzing human motion will have enormous impact for both
basic science and many societally relevant applications. These results will have
immediate implications for teaching and training in medicine, and on areas such
as rehabilitation. They will enable more basic understanding for modeling and
automating human manipulative activities. The project will also invigorate an
area of research that will unite multiple scientific disciplines. The PIs of
this project are also active in many diversity outreach activities, including
REU programs, the Women in Science and Engineering (WISE) program, and summer
camps for K-12 outreach. Participants in these programs will be incorporated
into the proposed research.