* 0941871
* US-Africa Workshop on the Identification and Analysis of Arabic Astronomy Documents Found in Africa
* O/D,OISE
* 11/15/2009,10/31/2012
* Jarita Holbrook, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 10/31/2012
* USD 23,165.00

This award is to support a US-Africa meeting of the African Cultural Astronomy
Network in conjunction with the European Society for Astronomy and Culture
(SEAC) annual meeting in Alexandria, Egypt in October, 2009. The meeting is
being organized by Dr. Jarita Holbrook, University of Arizona, in coordination
with Dr. Juan Antonio Belmonte, President of SEAC. Support for the African
Cultural Astronomy Network meeting will allow American scientists to collaborate
with the world?s top experts in the analysis of historical documents from the
period of 1000 ? 1400 C.E., which is part of the Medieval period as defined in
European history. For the workshop, a group of experts on Islamic Astronomy in
Africa will assemble to create a new collaborative project focused on
identifying and analyzing Arabic documents written during the height of ancient
Islamic culture and containing astronomy
content.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit. There are several repositories
of Arabic documents throughout Africa to be considered by the group. The goals
of the workshop are to design the collaborative project for the scientific study
of the astronomy content of Arabic documents located in Africa; to create a
working draft of a proposal for funding the project; to review the secondary
goals of the African Cultural Astronomy Network; to bring additional SEAC
members into the Network; and to highlight the work of students. The workshop
will bring together scientists and students from the United States and Sub-
Saharan Africa to develop an international collaborative project. The African
Cultural Astronomy Network was founded in 2006 in Ghana. Members of the Network
conduct social, historic, or humanistic research on the astronomy of Africa and
include astronomers, archaeologists, anthropologists, and a philosopher of
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. The workshop includes junior
faculty and students from the USA, which include women and underrepresented
minorities in STEM fields. The workshop will allow members of the African
Cultural Astronomy Network to engage with the larger cultural astronomy
community. &lt;br/&gt;