* 0941951
* Development and Implementation of an Inquiry-Based, Laboratory-Driven, General Chemistry Sequence
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2010,09/30/2014
* Kimberley Frederick, Skidmore College
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 09/30/2014
* USD 198,224.00

Chemistry (12) The Discovery Chemistry (DC) pedagogical approach is being
incorporated into the Honors General Chemistry (107H/207H) sequence at Skidmore
College. CHEM 107H is being revised by implementing all new laboratory
experiences that use inquiry-based protocols and result in large data sets. In a
method that mimics authentic scientific inquiry, the laboratory results form the
basis for classroom instruction. Additionally, the PI is developing a novel,
laboratory-based course in forensic chemistry (CHEM 207H). Laboratory exercises
in this course are challenging students to develop a holistic understanding of
chemical methodology and will culminate in a simulated forensic investigation. A
thorough, multi-pronged assessment plan involving both quantitative and
qualitative methods is being employed. Baseline data on student attitudes,
learning, and engagement before the implementation of DC as well as both
formative and summative data are being collected. Benchmarks for success include
increased numbers of students progressing from CHEM 107H to CHEM 207H; increased
numbers of students progressing from CHEM 207H to further science courses;
improved retention and progression of students from populations typically under-
represented in the sciences, improved student attitudes about science; and
better results on three measures of student learning. The implementation of the
proposed work is having significant impacts for students beyond those enrolled
in the CHEM 107H/207H sequence. A workshop on the implementation and assessment
of DC will encourage region-wide discussions of pedagogical innovation by
inviting chemistry faculty from all of the two-year and four-year institutions
in the greater Albany/Capital District as well as AP Chemistry teachers from six
local high schools.