* 0941658
* Using Mobile Game Development to Improve Student Learning & Satisfaction in Introductory Computer Science Courses
* EHR,DUE
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2013
* Archana Chidanandan, Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 04/30/2013
* USD 65,326.00

Computer Science (31)

This project develops an enhancement to the traditional computing curriculum
that combines traditional introductory courses and an opportunity to work with
exciting new technology. In this approach, the introductory programming sequence
is not disturbed, but courses are introduced that reinforce fundamental concepts
using mobile game development. Mobile game development provides a new and
exciting avenue to recruit and retain the new generation of computer scientists.
The companion courses are designed to reinforce core computer science concepts
introduced in beginning computing courses using mobile game development with
iPod Touch technology.

This project is part of the growing trend of teaching CS1/CS2 type classes using
game development as a class context. The main effort of the project lies in
developing a broad set of eight games-based modules that can be used at several
points in the undergraduate CS curriculum. It is expected that this project has
a positive impact on women in computing and its use in beginning courses could
help to attract and retain women in computing studies.

A number of institutions have indicated an interest in using the materials due
to a good dissemination plan. That plan includes a set of presentations and
conference workshops/tutorials, online forums and discussion groups, and project
Web site to be contributed to NSDL/CITIDEL as well as several other
repositories.