* 0941260
* CDI-Type I: Developing Computational Models to Enable the Experimental Self-Assembly of Modified Carbon Nanotubes  into Biomimetic Synthetic Cellular Vesicles
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Anna Balazs, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 09/30/2013
* USD 850,000.00

PI: Steven R. Little and Anna C. Balazs&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of
Pittsburgh&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 0941260&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title:
Developing Computational Models to Enable the Experimental Self-Assembly of
Modified Carbon Nanotubes into Biomimetic Synthetic Cellular Vesicles.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cell membranes are
indispensible to a vast array of complex biological functions. Notably, they
serve as selectively permeable barriers, capable of regulating the entrance and
exit of a broad array of essential molecules. Recent work in the laboratory of
the principle investigator suggests that a specific form of elemental carbon
that exhibits a cylindrical shape (called a carbon nanotube) could resemble key
proteins channels in the cell membrane responsible for this function. By
modifying the size of the channel and structure of the end-group, these
synthetic channels could be programmed to perform a myriad of complex functions
that resemble those of their biological cousins. The PIs' goal is to develop and
experimentally verify computational models for the self-assembly and function of
cellular-mimetic vesicles built from these synthetic channels. Mathematical
modeling will increase understanding as to how choices made in the "design
space" affect the experimental self-assembly process and the overall performance
of the system. An iterative process of sharing data and findings will contribute
not only to the creation of synthetic "cells", but also to robust computational
approaches that yield structure-property relationships for a large class of
newly classified macromolecules. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Besides providing a platform for new drug delivery
strategies, the findings from this work will scientifically impact a number of
communities by improving the diversity in the next generation of researchers in
the fields of materials science, chemistry, polymer physics, nanotechnology,
biology and bioengineering. These research activities will also provide a unique
educational experience for the students involved in the project, allowing them
to see how computational modeling can provide a powerful tool for scientific
discovery.