* 0941587
* A Novel Quantitative Framework to Study Lack of Social Interactions in Autism
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Dimitris Metaxas, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Tran
* 08/31/2012
* USD 630,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is
estimated to affect approximately 1 out of every 166 children around the world,
with a prevalence rate that makes it the most common developmental disability.
Conservative estimates report that in the US over 400,000 people have some forms
of ASD. The symptoms start to appear early in life and result in a lifelong
disability with no cure at present. However, significant improvements occur with
early intervention and there is some degree of success at returning to normality
upon very early intensive behavioral treatment. Common to all the children with
ASD are deficits in social responsiveness and communication. Notably, none of
these children can properly interact with and function in their world. They can
not engage in imaginative, make-believe play and fail to initiate and sustain
conversations with other children. The causes are unknown but growing evidence
suggests that abnormal brain development influenced by their environment is in
great part responsible for the symptoms. At present there are no non-invasive
techniques to measure their behaviors, eye motions and facial expressions. There
are no objective indexes of performance in the current screening batteries that
can be used for diagnosis, therapy and to longitudinally track their progress.
There are no classifications of ASD individuals into subgroups according to
sensory motor deficits manifested in natural intentional motions of every day
life tasks. This project will provide a set of non-intrusive data-capture
techniques and a theoretical framework to define, simulate and empirically
quantify key aspects of the social interaction problem. The research will use a
geometric characterization of sensory-motor integration to investigate the roles
of reference frames in steering the system to the most adequate source of
sensory input in a given situation. The basic idea underlying the formal
theoretical formulation is that the ASD system is impaired at forming sensory
maps so it cannot intentionally switch perspectives between internally- and
externally- based sources of sensory input; it cannot align sensory maps with
information regarding disparate sensory processing times and generally it cannot
integrate sensory processing delays from different internal-external modalities
with additional sensory motor feedback delays. As a consequence the ASD system
cannot have proper body awareness; lacks the ability to cast the same scenario
from different perspectives; lacks the ability to decouple the physical reality
from the mental representation of it, the ability to abstract; and can mostly
react but not predict or anticipate its own actions, let alone the actions or
the intentions of others. The theory generates a number of concrete testable
predictions that will be addressed in a collaborative effort between Psychology
and Computer Science at Rutgers University. A set of psychophysical experiments
evaluating the different hypotheses will be carried on in children with ASD and
in normally developing peers from the University's Douglass Developmental
Disability Center. The research will assess several objective indexes of
performance during intentional acts embedded in every day life activities and
will manipulate the sources of sensory guidance to assess potential improvements
in performance each day. Since such geometric indexes are independent of the
movement dynamics, and of the degree of novelty or automaticity at performing
the task, it is possible to address natural, unconstrained voluntary behavior
and objectively quantify how the various hypothesized critical ingredients for
normal social interaction break down in ASD. Even if the novel hypotheses fail,
the research will be instrumental in (1) developing and standardizing non-
invasive recording techniques for other Developmental Disabilities researchers
to use; (2) assessing a number of currently unexplored questions and (3)
providing new experimental paradigms to systematically study these problems in
the ASD population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will contribute
to significantly advance our understanding of general brain mechanisms to
control behavior, to interact with and to communicate in social environments.
The project will cross over multiple fields including Clinical and Developmental
Psychology, Special Education, Occupational Therapy, Computer Science and
Applied Mathematics to tackle a problem of epidemic proportions according to the
CDC. The measurements taken in this study will be properly scaled to young
infants in order to create an objective diagnosis tool that will help society
start intensive behavioral treatment before three years of age. This is
important because of the high incidence and prevalence of ASD and the lack of
objective screening measures for early detection and intervention. Furthermore,
this project will cluster ASD children according to the areas of sensory motor
deficits, superior perceptual capabilities and learning capacity within
different school-age groups. This will provide a more complete picture of the
phenomena with new insights into its longitudinal evolution in the developing
human brain.