* 0941877
* A Multivariable Calculus Manual to Accompany 3D Manipulatives
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2013
* Daniel McGee, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Michael Jacobson
* 06/30/2013
* USD 66,683.00

Mathematical Sciences (21): This project, in two phases, is producing and
testing an inexpensive kit, along with accompanying materials for its use, which
allows students to effectively visualize points, vectors, lines, planes, and
surfaces in 3-D. Many students currently visualize only 2D topics in their
natural dimension and then must generalize to n dimensions. Mathematical
software packages such as Mathematica, Maple, MathCAD, and Matlab have provided
enormous aid to students and professors wishing to visualize concepts in three
dimensions. However, there are many concepts where the two dimensional nature of
a computer screen can limit the effectiveness of these packages, particularly if
students have a weak geometrical background. For example, directional
derivatives require the tangent line to a surface in a given direction
associated with the xy plane. In three dimensions, a surface can be placed over
the xy plane, the direction on the xy plane can be indicated, and the concept
can be visualized quite easily. However, visualizing a precise direction and its
associated tangent line on a 2D computer screen is often difficult for students.
Correspondingly, a more effective pedagogical approach for this and many other
concepts is to use physical 3D manipulatives. These allow visualization and
motivation of concepts in a real three dimensional space. Manipulatives often
prove more effective than a projection of three dimensions onto a two
dimensional computer screen, particularly when students are first being
introduced to multivariable functions. With this kit, students can visualize
both 2D and 3D topics in their natural dimension before generalizing to n
dimensions. The initial phase of this project has produced the basic set of
manipulatives and they have been successfully tested. This new phase of the
project is producing the materials which allows both students and teachers to
use the manipulatives effectively.