* 0941922
* Integration of GC-MS in North Carolina A&amp;T State University's Chemistry Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2013
* Claude Lamb, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 12/31/2013
* USD 153,662.00

Chemistry (12) Research-based laboratory courses are being developed and
integrated into the chemistry curriculum at North Carolina A&amp;T State
University (NCAT). The acquisition of a Gas Chromatography-Mass Spectrometer
(GC-MS) instrument is being used by undergraduate students in freshman and
sophomore laboratory courses that utilize realistic problems and situations to
motivate and focus learning through active, student-centered learning methods.
These laboratories are enhancing the undergraduate research that is on-going in
the department by giving the students the background for developing a research
project as well as experience using state-of-the-art equipment. An objective of
these new courses is to change the way students think about and approach
chemistry, having them gain, in the process, the skills they need to continue to
grow intellectually beyond college. The goals of this project are to increase
the underrepresented minority Ph.D. population in the STEM areas and increase
the research experience of undergraduate and graduate chemistry majors at NCAT
as well as invited community college participants. Six supplemental training
workshops are also being developed that focus on the use of instrumentation
including: NMR, HPLC, GC-MS, Infrared, and UV-Vis spectroscopy. The broader
impacts of this project are to increase the students' understanding of how to
complete research projects, increase the students' confidence in laboratory
skills, and train and mentor underrepresented students in the physical sciences
to become future professionals.