* 0941962
* Collaborative Research: CCLI-Responding to manycore:  A strategy for injecting parallel computing education throughout the computer science curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/2010,08/31/2012
* Elizabeth Shoop, Macalester College
* Standard Grant
* Susan Finger
* 08/31/2012
* USD 69,194.00

Computer Science (31)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project between
St. Olaf College and Macalester College is developing a collection of ten
learning modules with supporting software in the area of parallel computing. For
the foreseeable future, the dominant factor in CPU hardware performance will be
the number of cores per CPU package, not speedup within an individual core.
Thus, today's dual- and quad- multicore processors will soon give way to CPUs
with dozens, and eventually thousands, of cores. To prepare today's computer
science students for the manycore world that will be the reality during their
careers, parallel computational concepts and programming must achieve a new
prominence in the computer science curriculum. The modules developed in this
project range in sophistication from the first-year introductory level to the
fourth-year advanced technical elective level. The modules begin with Hadoop and
progress to OpenMP and MPI. The modularity and varying complexity of the modules
allows institutions to adapt them to their curriculum from a single course to a
complete vertical curricular integration. The modules are supported by a
selection of parallel platform packages, including software and documentation,
that enable the modules to be used on a variety of hardware platforms. The
modules are being freely disseminated through an interactive website, the
National Digital Science Library, and through a workshop at the annual meeting
of the ACM Special Interest Group for Computer Science Education. The project
includes a comprehensive assessment and evaluation plan coordinated by an
independent evaluator.&lt;br/&gt;