* 0941166
* Arizona-Israel-Palestine Water Management and Policy Workshop: Economic, Environmental, and Community Implications of Expanding Reuse and Desalination for Future Water Supplies
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2011
* SHARON MEGDAL, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Carleen Maitland
* 06/30/2011
* USD 49,529.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
OISE-0941166&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Sharon
Megdal&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of
Arizona&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Arizona-Israel-Palestine Water Management
and Policy Workshop: Economic, Environmental, and Community Implications of
Expanding Reuse and Desalination for Future Water
Supplies&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Provision and management of water are increasingly
critical issues in arid and semi-arid lands like Arizona, Israel, and Palestine.
Water reuse and desalination comprise significant elements of each region?s
strategy for assuring future water supplies in the face of climate change and
persistent drought. The workshop assembles the broad, interdisciplinary
expertise necessary to meet the complex challenges of water management faced by
each region. It is designed to (1) identify pressing water issues related to
long-term water sustainability, reuse, and desalination through educational
presentations and facilitated dialogue among participants (2) develop a
targeted, international collaborative research program that addresses research
gaps and opportunities. The plenary presentations are an essential prelude as
they provide water professionals and scholars from different regions with a
common understanding of key issues underlying provision of water of sufficient
quality and quantity to meet the multiple, growing demands of semi-arid regions.
This shared understanding establishes the foundation necessary to formulate
strong research proposals for funding. The program convenes water managers,
nongovernmental organization representatives, students, and scholars from a
range of disciplines, including economics, engineering, biology, geography, and
law, to examine improving water treatment, expanding reuse and desalination,
climate change and drought planning, water pricing, environmental water needs,
and management of shared water supplies. The workshop will be held from August
31 to September 2, 2009. In terms of the broader impacts, the outcomes will
generally benefit arid and semi-arid regions struggling with water shortages,
poor water quality, and ineffective governance. Since Palestinians and Israelis
share surface and groundwater supplies, the workshop serves to promote
collaborative efforts in the Middle East. It does so by allowing time for
constructive identification of research needs and development of an
international, collaborative research program. This program?s significance rests
on the paramount importance of water to the prosperity of each region and the
role that peaceful collaboration by invited expertise can play in devising
feasible, long-term solutions for communities in the regions of focus and
beyond. This project was co-funded by the Environmental Engineering program in
the CBET division.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;