* 0941875
* CCLI:  Bringing a Field Station into the Classroom
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/2010,01/31/2014
* Chris Floyd, Rocky Mountain Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Katherine J. Denniston
* 01/31/2014
* USD 249,271.00

Biological Sciences (61). Through development of web-based resources that
facilitate access to its large number of databases, the Rocky Mountain
Biological Laboratory (RMBL) is in essence bringing a field station into
classrooms across the United States. Founded in 1928, the RMBL is a non-profit
research institution that promotes field research; approximately 150 students
and scientists use its facilities each year, leading to over 1300 peer-reviewed
publications. The ecosystem around Gothic, CO is thus one of the best understood
in the world. Although thousands of students have gone through the RMBL and have
had a life-changing experience, because it is in a remote location and is snowed
in for much of the year, many students will never have the opportunity to work
there (or any other field station). In recent years the RMBL archived and
documented a large number of datasets, and actively manages and makes available
through its website, research plans, research data, collections information and
photos, map information, publications, and environmental data. This project is
creating a bridge between these digital data resources and classrooms by
generating web-based resources that facilitate access by students and educators
to long-term datasets. These include natural history pages that describe
different species and web-based modules that provide examples of how data can be
used in the classroom. Another major goal of this project is to help students
explore how the world is changing. The RMBL has one of the largest collections
of long-term research programs in the world, and is establishing a network of
weather stations along an elevational gradient. Consequently, students and
educators using the RMBL's resources have the ability to explore how weather and
climate are changing, and to relate that information to long-term biological
trends. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: By providing students with
tools to work in a data-rich environment, the project seeks to improve their
scientific discovery skills, including their ability to frame interesting
questions, work with data, and access primary literature. Additionally, because
the project entails embedding of data in rich contexts, such as popular articles
and biographies of the scientists, it increases the potential willingness and
ability of students to engage with science beyond the classroom. Finally, this
project is training the next generation of scientists by providing them the
skills they need to effectively use online digital repositories.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: A collaboration with Chaffey Community
College is helping to ensure that the materials being developed are effective in
a 2-year college setting. Additional collaborations with existing projects
(e.g., BioQUEST Curriculum Consortium) are helping to prove the developed
materials through their portals. Consequently, the project is increasing the
number of scientific datasets available to educators for use in the classroom.
Because the materials use open source tools, the platform can be transferred
into other field station contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being
co-funded by funds from the Directorate for Biological Sciences, Emerging
Frontiers Division.