* 0941132
* Math in the City
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2014
* Stephen Hartke, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 08/31/2014
* USD 194,802.00

Mathematical Sciences (21)

This project is developing, implementing, evaluating, and disseminating
materials and practices for an interdisciplinary mathematics course that is run
in collaboration with local industries and government organizations. The course
is built around mathematical problems of current local and national interest. In
the course, small teams of students are learning and applying mathematical
modeling skills through class meetings and close interaction with business
partners. In the course, students are developing a better understanding of how
mathematics is used to understand current major societal issues and to inform
policy decisions, strengthening their oral and written communication skills, and
developing their abilities to work effectively in teams. In addition to
preparing students to be competitive in non-academic work environments, the
project is providing materials and resources to instructors at other
institutions to support the development of similar courses in other
environments. To that end, the principal investigators are developing and
actively disseminating an instructor manual and a student handbook. The
instructor manual includes best practices for running the course, a list of
suggested project topics, content on mathematical modeling, and specific
mathematical background necessary for the suggested topics. The student handbook
includes discussion of the roles and responsibilities of individual students
working as part of a team, tips on time management, and suggestions about
writing for different audiences. The materials will be freely available on the
web and will be distributed at workshops held for instructors who are interested
in developing similar courses.