* 0941302
* CDI-Type II: Cyber-enabled engineering of pharmaceutical products
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2014
* Gintaras Reklaitis, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 09/30/2014
* USD 1,934,751.00

0941302&lt;br/&gt;Reklaitis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long time and high cost of translating a newly
discovered drug to a drug product that will have the desired performance
properties when taken by the patient, are significant factors contributing to
the high price of new drugs. The work requires designing the right combination
and form of ingredients as well as efficient and robust manufacturing processes.
These activities are now carried out largely by trial and error means using
traditional equipment and relying on past experience. It is widely recognized by
the industry and academia that to change the current mode requires new
fundamental science and engineering understanding, new engineering methods and
computer-based predictive tools. Additionally, the industry needs a workforce
that is trained in these new methods and tools to accelerate the desired
transformation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address both of these
needs. It will create a representative set of tools, methods and education
materials and build a hub technology, called pharmaHUB for sharing and growing
the technology through virtual collaboration. The project will implement a
library of predictive models for the design and operation of the most important
tablet manufacturing operations, will develop computer-based models for
predicting how a drug product, such as a tablet, will break apart and dissolve,
and will build virtual patient population models that can be used to predict how
effectively a specific drug is transported within the body. The use of this
methodology will be demonstrated through case studies with five specific drug
products. Based on NSF sponsored HUBzero middleware, pharmaHUB will provide open
access via the web and internet to all of the created and contributed tools,
methods and education content, allowing easy downloading or direct execution of
applications on the server farm. It will also allow researchers in the field to
easily upload and install their developments, lectures and educational materials
in a simple and transparent fashion thus dramatically accelerating community
knowledge growth. The project will draw from the results generated in research
efforts such as the NSF ERC on Structured Organic Particulate Systems as well as
the work of the National Institute for Pharmaceutical Technology and Education,
in which the co-pi's are actively involved. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The tools and associated education materials, openly
accessible on pharmaHUb, will serve as core components of new courses and degree
programs in pharmaceutical engineering suitable for both students and
professionals.