* 0941254
* EAGER: Development and Study of Compact Thermal Desalination Systems Driven by Solar Energy
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* John Georgiadis, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Geoffrey Prentice
* 07/31/2012
* USD 300,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

0941254 Georgiadis

The focus of this project is to perform the basic theoretical and experimental
research for a novel method of water desalination using solar energy. A key
element of the proposed process is to use seawater as the working fluid and to
maintain independence from sources of energy other than solar. A novel aspect of
the process is to employ a high temperature solar collector fluid (~ 1000 Â°C)
and to couple steam and power generation with the thermal desalination
component. Multiple Effect Distillation (MED) will be coupled to a closed power
cycle driven by steam from a direct solar-thermal input, a concept known as
Concentrated Solar Power Desalination of Seawater (CSP-DSW). The prediction of
the performance of thermo-hydraulic devices will be based on numerical
simulations of two-phase flow in channels using Lattice Boltzmann methods for
multiphase flows and employing realistic equations of state. The PIs will focus
on the design of a thermal desalination system, which will initially be used for
the model verification at UIUC before it is transported to Cyprus and integrated
with the solar collection and turbine systems. The thermal desalination test bed
will be designed with the ability to operate both indirect and direct
desalination modes. The work on the direct desalination methods will focus on
exploiting the higher temperatures available from the solar collection component
to prevent fouling by the brine. Although they represent thermodynamically
inefficient and high-risk concepts, such experimental systems constitute
indispensable test beds for the study of new technologies, new materials, and
the validation of the numerical simulation tools. The development of a
relatively compact thermal desalination system affords flexibility and allows
radically different experimental approaches, not possible with large-scale
systems. The PIs have been involved in the Concentrated Solar Power
?Desalination of Seawater (CSP-DSW) project of the Cyprus Institute, sponsored
by the government of Cyprus and the European Union. CSP-DSW is an
interdisciplinary collaboration between the Cyprus Institute, the University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (UIUC), the Electricity Authority of Cyprus, and
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT).

In terms of the broader impacts, this high-risk project has the potential to
guide the design of a solar-based process to produce both electrical energy and
freshwater with little CO2 production. Cyprus currently has two desalination
facilities, and there is interest in developing this technology for use in
regions with high solar flux including the Mediterranean region.

This project is co-funded by the Office of International Science and
Engineering.