* 0941227
* Collaborative Research: Type II:  Flow-induced fragmentation mechanisms in bacterial biofilms by hierarchical modeling of polymeric, interfacial and viscoelastic interactions
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2014
* John Younger, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 09/30/2014
* USD 1,122,164.00

Biofilms are colonies of bacteria in which the organisms are immobile and
embedded in a sticky, viscous, extracellular matrix of carbohydrate polymers.
Bacteria existing in these structures are the most prevalent life form on earth.
Typically surface adherent and structurally non-uniform, biofilms arise in
natural, industrial and health settings. The biomechanics of biofilms are of
fundamental physical science interest because bacterial proliferation from them
is triggered by their mechanical rupture, fracture and fragmentation. This
rupture involves a complex interplay of molecular and physical interactions,
each active on different spatial scales of the biofilm. By integrating modern
computational methodologies and resources for simulating the non-equilibrium
dynamics of polymers and the multiphase flow of polymeric fluids, the mechanisms
for biofilm fragmentation will be identified in this project. The following
specific research questions will be addressed: i) How do the biofilm?s
biochemical composition and composite-like architecture interact to control the
critical stress and strain of fragmentation? ii) How should a physical science
based mathematical model of biofilm fragmentation be formulated such that
molecular scale microbiology and polymer physics as well as continuum scale
variability in mechanical stress and strain all play their necessary roles in
fragmentation predictions? iii) What educational agenda should be implemented
such that microbiologists and physicians can have a working understanding of the
usefulness of first-principles physical science and mathematical modeling
techniques?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Answering these questions requires joint effort
in applied mathematics, non-equilibrium simulation of polymer dynamics,
microbiology, and microscale rheology. Successfully doing so promises to
transform the scientific understanding of bacterial biofilms from one based
solely on molecular biology to one that comprehensively addresses the joint
molecular and physical origins of behavior. In addition to improving
understanding of biofilms, the methods developed will themselves represent an
advance important to many areas including the broad range of soft materials with
non-uniform structure on multiple scales. The broader impact of the work will be
to produce new scientific understanding of bacterial biofilms mechanics in
natural, industrial and human health applications. This understanding will
positively impact applications in these diverse areas and, potentially, new
treatments for the wide range of diseases linked to biofilms. This program will
also yield broader impacts from its computational and modeling plan as well as
its educational plan to introduce physical and mathematical modeling into
medical school curricula.