* 0941118
* Request for Graduate Travel Support to Attend the Nanoelectronic Devices for Defense $ Security (NANO-DDS) Conference 2009. To be Held Sept 28-Oct. 2, 2009 in Ft. Lauderdale FL.
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2011
* Carl Tripp, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Anupama Kaul
* 03/31/2011
* USD 10,000.00

The objective of this proposal is to support graduate student attendance to the
Nanoelectronic Devices for Defense & Security (NANO-DDS) will be held at the
Bahia Mar Beach Resort in Fort Lauderdale, FL during the weeks of September 28
to October 2, 2009. The approach is to recruit students in the science and
engineering areas related to nanoelectronic devices research and development
with the aim that their attendance will broaden the impact of the meeting to the
education experiences and education of future scientists and engineers. There
will be a formal reporting procedure that includes a narrative that explains
their estimation of the benefit in attending the conference that all student
attendees will be required to complete.

Intellectual Merit: The conference has been organized as a formal bi-annual
meeting for the purpose of reviewing research and development (R&D) activities
in the arena of nanoelectronic devices that have direct relevance to critical
capability needs for national Defense & Security in the future. The charter of
this special conference is to unify and focus the very broad array of
nanoelectronic and supporting nanotechnology activities that are currently
engaged in reaching the long expected applications payoffs in core defense and
security related areas such as sensing, data processing, computation and
communications.

Broader Impacts: The scientific and technological information and the resulting
nanoscale devices and systems Roadmap will be widely disseminated throughout
academia/universities, government and industrial institutions and the public at-
large (including the entire international community). The conference has made
diligent effort to recruit student attendees from underrepresented groups from
the nanoscience, nanomaterials, nanofabrication and nanoengineering communities.

