* 0941421
* CDI-Type II: IC-CRIME:  Interdisciplinary Cyber-Enabled Crime Reconstruction through Innovative Methodology and Engagement
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,02/28/2015
* Robert Young, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 02/28/2015
* USD 1,400,000.00

Crime scene investigation (CSI) is a highly visual and quantitative analysis
characterized by a time-sensitive need to gather, organize, analyze, model, and
visualize large, multi-scale, heterogeneous and context-rich data. CSI is also
characterized by a fundamental need for rapid coordination and data translation
across disciplines, agencies and levels of expertise as crime scenes are
processed, reconstructed, solved and ultimately prosecuted over time, often
critically in front of laypeople comprising a jury. The core intellectual
contributions of this research include a shift to 3D virtual crime scene
reconstruction and collaboration protocols for virtual CSI work. Embedded within
the virtual scene will be all of the conventional evidence data, but will also
include advanced data resulting from the development of non-invasive nano-scale
methodologies and databases for advanced surface and cross-sectional materials
chemistry analysis, especially fibers. The new data will lead to development of
revolutionary high statistical significance when comparing similar materials
commonly encountered in CSI. Further, collaboration protocols for dynamic
virtual team assembly and interaction will be developed, assessed and optimized
for contextual knowledge transfer.

The broader impacts of this research and education agenda include critical
benefits to research and education infrastructure, public health and safety, and
the justice system. The resulting system will be used as a novel research tool
to increase the level of scientific rigor and advance the knowledge of forensic
analysis. It provides a platform for integrating research with engaging science
and engineering education opportunities for K-12, undergraduate and graduate
students, including those from underrepresented groups and communities.