* 0941980
* Learning Environment and Academic Research Network (LEARN): A Model for Retention in the STEM Disciplines
* EDU,DUE
* 12/15/2010,11/30/2014
* Alison Morrison-Shetlar, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Herbert H. Richtol
* 11/30/2014
* USD 178,832.00

The United States must retain more students in the Science, Technology,
Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) disciplines to maintain a skilled workforce.
Retention is often lower in the STEM undergraduate majors when compared to other
majors, especially for underrepresented minorities. Research indicates that
living-learning communities (i.e., specialized learning dorms), as well as
mentorship through undergraduate research, increases student retention and
strengthens the overall academic experience. These two models have been combined
to form the Learning Environment and Academic Research Network (LEARN). LEARN
aims to increase retention in STEM disciplines by identifying at-risk, first-
year students and provides the opportunity to join a learning community, in
which they live, take courses, apprentice in research laboratories with faculty
and graduate students, and interact as a group. The LEARN participants become
part of a four-year research network where they find mentorship throughout their
academic experience. The LEARN program is student-learning centered to provide
the skills and confidence to continue their education in STEM disciplines. The
program reaches approximately 120 undergraduate (participants and peer mentors)
and graduate (research mentors) students in three years. Data collected through
program assessment provides details regarding the best practices to increase
student retention in the STEM disciplines. Assessment results are disseminated
widely.