* 0941463
* CDI-Type I: Collaborative Research: A Bio-Inspired Approach to Recognition of Human Movements and Movement Styles
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2012
* Rene Vidal, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Zhi Tian
* 12/31/2012
* USD 493,332.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to
develop bio-inspired algorithms for recognizing human movements and movement
styles in videos of human activities. The approach is based on a new
representation of static three-dimensional (3D) shape structure in the ventral
visual pathway consisting of configurations of 3D structural fragments. This
project uses neural experiments to validate an analogous four-dimensional (4D)
representation of moving 3D shapes based on 4D (space and time) structure-in-
motion (SiM) fragments. These SiM fragment models are used to develop algorithms
for automatically extracting SiM fragments from videos of human activities.
Hybrid system identification and clustering techniques are used to learn a
dictionary of human movements used for recognition. This dictionary, in turn,
influences the design of the neural experiments. The algorithms are evaluated
using a real-time tele-immersion system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of this project is to substantially reduce the gap between human and
machine perception of human movements through the interaction between
computational and experimental analyses from neuroscience, computer vision,
machine learning, and dynamical systems. This project also has the potential to
generate advances in machine learning and dynamical systems, by extending
classification, clustering and system identification methods to time-series data
generated by collections of hybrid dynamical
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential broader impacts include applications in
surveillance, security, assisted home living, infant care, tele-immersion, and
athlete motion analysis. The project also sponsors a competition where small
robots are constructed by middle and high-school students from Baltimore, and
the EL Alliance program for retaining underrepresented minorities at graduate
schools.