* 0941493
* Collaborative Research:CDI-Type II: The Knowledge-Base of Interatomic Models (KIM)
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2015
* Ellad Tadmor, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 09/30/2015
* USD 1,537,692.00

Atomistic simulations in materials science and nanotechnology play a key role in
many scientific and industrial applications. However,the predictive capability
of these approaches hinges on the accuracy of the mathematical models used to
describe atomic interactions. Modern models are optimized (fit) to reproduce
quantum mechanical values for the forces and energies of representative atomic
configurations deemed important for the problem of interest. However, no
standardized approach currently exists for quantifying the range of
applicability of an interatomic model or estimating the accuracy of its
predictions. The result is that the field of atomistic modeling struggles with
the unknown and uncontrolled capacity of its models to predict phenomena outside
the fitting database, keeping this field from fully realizing its scientific and
technological potential. This problem will be addressed by creating the
Knowledge-base of Interatomic Models (KIM): an interactive, self-extending,
database of interatomic models, self-contained simulation codes that test the
predictions of these models, and reference data. This online resource will allow
users to rapidly compare model predictions with reference data, to generate new
predictions by uploading their own tests, and to download models conforming to
community standards developed as part of this project. The critical mass of
models and tests gathered in KIM from diverse scientific disciplines will then
be used to develop a quantitative theoretical framework for evaluating the
accuracy and precision of interatomic models, which together define their
transferability. These transformative advances will provide, for the first time,
rational guidelines for selecting appropriate interatomic models for given
applications and will define a fundamentally new atomistic simulation
methodology that provides error estimates for computed
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to answer the question: When
and to what extent can we believe the results of atomistic simulations of
materials? The project's objectives are of central concern to an unusually large
cross-section of the industrial and scientific communities who are interested in
understanding materials from their basic building blocks; this includes
physicists, materials scientists, chemists, and engineers from academia,
government, and industry. The KIM project should initiate a transformative shift
in the way researchers think about and perform atomistic materials simulations.
The result will be more precise and accurate predictions of materials behavior
that will allow for faster and cheaper discovery, design, and optimization of
new, specialized technologically-useful materials. The creation of the KIM
system will provide unprecedented standardized access to the state-of-the-art in
atomistic modeling and simulation. This access will break down the barrier-to-
entry to this field for traditionally underrepresented groups and institutions
around the world and facilitate the efforts of industry in the U.S. and
internationally to use interatomic models to advance their technological goals.
Furthermore, the development of a rigorous methodology of assessing the
transferability and accuracy of interatomic models will bring about a paradigm
shift in how models are developed, selected, and used. The KIM project will help
to train the next generation of scientists and engineers by providing
educational experience for post-doctoral, graduate, and undergraduate students
at the PIs' home institutions, as well as by conducting educational tutorials
and workshops at popular materials conferences and other venues. Finally, the
KIM project will strive to recruit and engage minority and traditionally
underrepresented scientists and engineers.&lt;br/&gt;