* 0941392
* Understanding Tornadoes and Their Parent Supercells Through Ultra-High Resolution Simulation/Analysis
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Robert Wilhelmson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Irene Qualters
* 09/30/2012
* USD 40,000.00

This proposal is for a provisional allocation of time on the Blue Waters
computer system, due to become operational in 2011, and for travel funds to
support technical coordination by various collaborators with the Blue Waters
project team and vendor technical team.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
involves a study of the conditions that support tornado development and
longevity. The approach is to simulate numerically the interaction between a
supercell and an evolving tornado using a sophisticated model of atmospheric
dynamics and thermodynamics. These simulations will resolve small-scale,
dynamically active features that influence the evolution of the tornado,
including the shallow inflow into the tornado and the thin bands of
precipitation that form. The numerical model used will be a development of a
parallel, storm-scale, atmospheric model named CM1. The work will produce a
better understanding of the influence of different environmental conditions
within and around the supercell on the genesis and dynamics of tornadoes. The
rationale for requiring a resource of the scale of Blue Waters is that, without
it, it will not be possible to resolve thin curtains of precipitation, tens of
meters thick, which potentially transfer large amounts of angular momentum from
cloud-base to ground, the tornado inflow layer, also tens of meters thick, and
the influence of low-lying pools of cold air. Being able to diagnose and
understand the interplay between microphysics, buoyancy and vorticity dynamics
within the supercell, during and after tornado-genesis, requires higher
resolution than is possible on existing computing
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The insights gained from this project should be
helpful in improving tornado forecasting capability which has the potential to
increase safety through early and more accurate warnings. More general, data
generated by this study may be used to improve sub-grid parameterizations for
synoptic scale models, improving their ability to forecast severe weather.