* 0941759
* US-Australia Workshop:  Interdisciplinary Solutions to Evolutionary Challenges in Food, Health and the Environment
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2013
* Andrew Sih, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* R.  Clive Woods
* 06/30/2013
* USD 31,790.00

0941759&lt;br/&gt;Sih&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: U.S.-Australia Workshop:
Interdisciplinary Solutions to Evolutionary Challenges in Food, Health and the
Environment&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the participation of
American researchers, postdocs, and graduate students in a U.S.-Australia
workshop on interdisciplinary solutions to evolutionary challenges in food,
health and the environment to be held in Australia in early 2010. The co-
organizers are Professors Andrew Sih and Scott Carroll at the University of
California, Davis, Dr. Gary Fitt at the Australian Commonwealth Scientific and
Industrial Research Organization in Canberra and Professor Scott O?Neill at the
University of Queensland in Brisbane, Australia. The workshop will take place at
the Heron Island Research Station on Australia?s Great Barrier Reef. It brings
basic scientists into collaboration with applied scientists, practitioners and
managers. It will include experts in evolutionary approaches to health and
medicine, sustainable agriculture, commodities production and conservation.
Breakout groups will be discussing 1) climate change and evolving diseases as
challenges to public health management; 2) evolutionary challenges to
implementation and regulation of sustainable genetically-engineered agriculture;
3) climate change, community genetics and phenotype management in designed and
natural biotic communities; and 4) evolving impacts of biotic invasions on
conservation, agriculture and natural resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is
sufficient overlap of interests between the U.S. and Australian participants to
indicate that they can successfully pursue the activities proposed and that the
interaction will benefit both sides. This multidisciplinary exchange of ideas
will likely produce a significant synthesis and development of new approaches to
predict, prevent and manage evolutionary challenges. Evolutionary management
holds the potential to sustain biodiversity, design organisms for medical and
environmental remediation, and build novel communities to reduce pathogenesis
and restore ecosystem functions and services. Results of the workshop will
provide a forum for developing mutual frameworks for evolutionary problem-
solving in the medical, agricultural and environmental sciences. Beneficiaries
of these new approaches are federal, university and industrial scientists and
policy-makers, as well as federal, state and industrial administrators and
managers. The workshop will provide the U.S. postdocs and graduate students an
excellent opportunity to receive a global research experience. It is anticipated
that they will maintain contacts and collaborations with the Australian
researchers and students throughout their careers. Information about the
workshop and its findings will be made available via respective websites and
will include white papers, abstracts, discussions and videos&lt;br/&gt;