* 0941553
* CDI-Type II: Collaborative Research: Integrating Statistical and Computational Approaches to Privacy
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2015
* Sofya Raskhodnikova, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2015
* USD 1,025,626.00

Data privacy is a fundamental problem of the modern information infrastructure.
Increasing volumes of personal and sensitive data are collected and archived by
health networks, government agencies, search engines, social networking
websites, and other organizations. The social benefits of analyzing these
databases are significant. At the same time, the release of information from
sensitive data repositories can be devastating to the privacy of individuals and
organizations. The challenge is to discover and release important
characteristics of these databases without compromising the privacy of those
whose data they contain. The main goal of this project is to design scalable
computational techniques that are statistically sound, yield broadly useful
data, and yet preserve privacy in the face of realistic external information.
The project aims to integrate two essentially different approaches to the
complex problem of data privacy. The reconciliation of these approaches raises a
number of fundamental questions for statistical theory and cryptography, as well
as methodological challenges that must be overcome to enable practical
applications. This research is centered around three themes: (1) Integrating the
computationally-focused, rigorous definitions of privacy emanating from computer
science with notions of utility from statistics. (2) Developing cryptographic
protocols for distributing privacy-preserving algorithms for valid statistical
analysis among a group of servers so as to avoid pooling data in any single
location. (3) Understanding the practical potential of the developed techniques
by applying them to concrete problems in the behavioral and social sciences and
analyzing important data sources from the official statistical community. The
research will be carried out in collaboration with social scientists and
industry researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will increase awareness
of data privacy issues and promote research on statistical disclosure
limitation, cryptography and privacy-preserving data mining. Moreover, this
research will transform the way statistical agencies, social scientists, medical
researchers, and those in industry approach privacy - in particular, how they
collect, share and publish information. The integration of statistical and
cryptographic methods in the form of ex ante provably secure procedures will
provide the essential scientific fundamentals for official statistical agencies
to fulfill their mission of useful data production, which the proliferation of
digital information has endangered. Finally, the new techniques will permit
opening the vault of industrial data, such as search logs and data on social
networks, to statistical analysis - greatly expanding the research domain of the
social and health sciences.