* 0941921
* An Adaptation of a Research-Based Laboratory Model to Life Sciences
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2010,05/31/2013
* Stephanie Gardner, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 05/31/2013
* USD 200,000.00

(Biological Sciences 61) A widely used successful model for incorporating
research into chemistry laboratory courses (from the Center for Authentic
Science Practice in Education, "CASPiE") is being adapted in a first-year
biological science laboratory course at a research university (Purdue
University) and a primarily undergraduate institution (Purdue University North
Central). The overarching goal is to advance students' understanding of the
scientific method, of biological research and of its products. Simultaneously,
the method is improving students' ability to communicate scientific data and
principles at an early stage in their undergraduate education. With the
assistance of personnel at Purdue University that developed the CASPiE model,
three new modules are being developed, each based on the research of one of
three different faculty members, one in bacterial genetics, one in neuro-
anatomy, and one in population biology. Each module is designed so that students
work in teams to analyze preliminary results, use such results to revise the
experimental design for further inquiry, and collectively summarize the
conclusions of the research and present final results in poster format. The
modules can be used in multiple years and shared with other institutions.
Rubrics for course grading are being adapted from those already developed for
the CASPiE model, as are CASPiE instruments for assessment of the educational
outcomes of the new laboratory course.

The intellectual merit of the proposed work is rooted in both science education
and biological science. In terms of education, the work investigates whether:
(1) a successful model for incorporating research into introductory laboratory
courses in Chemistry can be adapted to the Life Sciences; (2) a research-based
learning experience can not only provide basic skills for students, but also
enhance students' scientific understanding and their ability to communicate
science; and, (3) early exposure to research in an undergraduate program will
improve both student retention in science and their willingness to seek out
independent research experiences. In addition the research that students conduct
is contributing to faculty-guided projects investigating bacterial genetics,
neuro-anatomy, and population genetics.

The broader impacts of the work are also varied. It is an example of how to
adapt undergraduate teaching modules across different science fields and within
different institution types. Results from the project are adding, as well, to
our growing body of knowledge about the efficacy of introducing research modules
into introductory courses.