* 0941955
* Development of Laboratory Modules to Enhance Inquiry-guided Learning and Implement Biofuel-related Experiments
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2010,12/31/2015
* Naomi Campbell, Jackson State University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Higgins
* 12/31/2015
* USD 199,386.00

Chemistry (12)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Development of renewable energy resources is
a primary concern for national economic growth, energy security and global
environmental protection. Biofuels produced from plant sources are one of the
most promising renewable fuel options. Development of necessary technologies for
efficient production of biofuels requires a substantial expansion of
infrastructure and vigorous research in related areas of science.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project develops teaching materials for a biochemistry
laboratory course that incorporates current topics in biofuel research. The new
laboratory modules are designed to promote students' independent thinking,
critical thinking and reasoning, and learning important concepts in biochemistry
through guided inquiry and open inquiry experiments. Such modules are able to
encourage active student engagement in their learning by maintaining a focus
throughout the entire course on important issues in science and society,
specifically the energy crisis and environmental protection. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The main intellectual merit of this project is that it integrates a
socio-economically relevant topic, biofuel synthesis, with research-based
laboratory activities to enhance learning of important concepts in biochemistry.
This project has several broader impacts: its goals are to generate interest
among minority undergraduate STEM students in energy-related careers that are in
increasingly high demand, to train undergraduate STEM students to be competent
in various modern laboratory techniques, and to prepare these students for
careers in research. A further goal is to promote the development of the next
generation of scientists and educators who are going to face the challenge of
solving environmental and energy problems.