* 0941920
* Renewable Energy and Sustainable Chemistry Across the Undergraduate Chemistry Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2014
* Nancy Carpenter, University of Minnesota Morris
* Standard Grant
* David Brown
* 06/30/2014
* USD 197,146.00

Chemistry (12)&lt;br/&gt;Issues of energy and sustainability are having a direct
impact on the public and are capturing the interests of many. Therefore, it is
no surprise that science, including the field of chemistry, is becoming more
connected with society. To address this connection, this project integrates
important elements of renewable energy and sustainable chemistry across the
undergraduate chemistry curriculum. The project creates a curriculum that is
more interdisciplinary with respect to both teaching and research and also
introduces topics that are timely and essential in preparing undergraduate
students. The project is completing its objectives through three key areas: (i)
developing new courses in renewable energy and sustainability; (ii) integrating
photovoltaics across the undergraduate curriculum; and (iii) illustrating the
role of biochemistry in renewable energy and sustainability. This project is an
important contribution to science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) educational practices, as issues of energy and sustainability represent
some of the most technologically challenging problems of the 21st century. This
project develops a far-reaching energy and sustainable chemistry curriculum that
complements the traditional curriculum and better prepares our future graduates
for success in addressing global issues. Furthermore, as chemistry is essential
in preparing a broadly educated society, this project serves additional groups
such as environmental science and non-science majors. Finally, the project can
be used as a model for implementation at other institutions, based on the design
of the exercises derived from successful investigations in the science and
educational literature.