* 0941581
* EAGER: Preliminary Investigation of Virtual Tactual Stereognosis
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2011
* Michael Peshkin, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2011
* USD 154,250.00

Imagine reaching into your pocket, locating and grasping your car;'s key fob
amongst a clutter of coins, bills and keys, then finding the unlock button (not
the lock button, not the trunk release, especially not the panic button) and
pressing it. This is an example of Tactual Stereognosis (TS), the ability of
people to identify familiar items using touch alone. It is commonplace and
uneventful. Yet no programmable haptic interface has ever been developed that
would allow people to identify virtual objects using what might be termed
Virtual Tactual Stereognosis (VTS). Creating such an interface is a long-range
goal of the PIs. VTS has long been out of reach because it depends on active
touch, multi-finger interaction, and bare fingertips, which are all difficult to
achieve with existing display technology. The PIs' recent research has led to a
new class of prototype devices (xPaDs), which address each of these limitations.
These devices use friction modulation to control forces between the fingertip
and a flat plate. The basic TPaD (Tactile Pattern Display) can create effects
such as virtual textures, virtual bumps and holes, and more. More advanced
versions such as the ShiverPad and SwirlPad synchronize in-plane vibrations to
friction levels in order to generate active pushing forces on the fingertip. It
is possible to generate many additional effects with these devices, including
virtual edges that can be traced with the fingertip. The xPaD devices thus
appear to be well suited to VTS. They are active touch devices that work with
bare fingertips (in other words, the xPaD is fixed and the finger slides over
it). Moreover, they are very compact, potentially enabling multiple panels to be
arrayed over the surface of an object in order to support a multi-finger
interface. In this study the PIs will begin exploration of a multi-xPaD
interface, by performing experiments on an interface consisting of two opposing
ShiverPads with subjects employing a pinch grip (that is, index finger on one
ShiverPaD, and thumb on the other), in order to demonstrate "binding," the
perceptual fusion of the finger and thumb percepts into an integrated object
representation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Virtual Tactual
Stereognosis is an important goal for many reasons. Graphical displays have
become an important form of interface in venues ranging from the living room, to
the office, to the car, to any place that a person may be. Yet as graphical
displays grow more prevalent, natural touch interactions seemingly grow more
obsolete. VTS aims to achieve the opposite, to empower future interfaces with
sophisticated tactual capabilities that engage perceptual as well as sensory
mechanisms in the hand and brain. Imagine a doctor able to simultaneously look
at and palpate tissue within the body, a pregnant mother able to caress the
ultrasound image of her unborn child, an autistic child able to cooperate with
an animated character in a construction task, or a driver able to reach out,
find and operate touch screen controls without taking his/her eyes off the road.
VTS would be an enabler for new types of electronic displays for the blind. And
it would be a powerful new tool to extend our basic knowledge of haptic
perception as it occurs naturally.