* 0941237
* HRRA: Testing the Southern Dispersal Hypothesis: The Search for Late Pleistocene Hominin Occupation in the Lower Narmada Valley, Western India
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Sheela Athreya, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2012
* USD 18,935.00

With support from an National Science Foundation provided through an Archaeology
and Physical Anthropology Programs "high risk" award, Dr. Sheela Athreya from
Texas A&amp;M University will conduct an archaeological and paleontological
reconnaisance of the Lower Narmada Valley in Western India. Paleoanthropological
data indicates that anatomically modern humans first emerged in Africa over
100,000 years ago and that eventually their descendents expanded out of Africa
to cover the entire inhabited world. They likely replaced prior "hominid"
inhabitants of these regions and most scientists believe that little if any
intermixture occurred between these two groups. While the region of origin for
anatomically modern humans is fairly well established, the route outside Africa
by which their extraordinary expansion occurred is highly debated and the path
which they followed is unknown. Two dispersal patterns have been proposed, on
proceeds North through the Near East and a second follows a coastal route East
into and then around India. Because anatomically modern humans appear in
Australia by ca. 50,000 years ago a coastal migration is not
unreasonable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Athreya believes that such a migration
would cross the Lower Narmada Valley in western coastal India and she therefore
proposes to conduct a survey to search for fossil remains in this region. She
will: determine the density and distribution of archaeological artifacts in the
lower Narmada Valley; locate their likely sources, determining if localities are
relatively undisturbed; locate sites with a likelihood of having good faunal
preservation or evidence of human activity and possible preservation of fossil
material; and finally establish the dates for sites through a series of
geochemical techniques. Five sites will be intensively surveyed over the course
of the project.