* 0941748
* CDI-Type I: Novel machine learning models for predicting species distributions in response to climate change
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Julia Jones, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 09/30/2013
* USD 609,505.00

Earth's ecosystems are changing rapidly in response to human activities,
threatening many species, but the precise effects of climate change, land cover
change, and other factors on species distributions is a complex problem that has
so far defied integrated analysis. Machine learning provides opportunities to
address this ecological problem, and this ecological problem can stimulate
advances in machine learning. In this proposal, a computer scientist, ecologist,
and geoscientist join forces to develop a fundamentally different approach using
computational methods to examine two major ecological problems: 1) Are species
assemblages changing according to climate/land use change? and 2) Are species
geographic ranges changing according to climate/land use change? Potentially
complex relationships among land use, climate, and species inter-relationships
may influence species distributions and changes in distributions. Analyses of
species distribution and change are currently limited by the simplicity of the
models used; most models only analyze the effect of environmental factors on the
distribution of single species. The investigators propose to (1) create a new
approach to species distribution modeling based on structured prediction and
conditional topic models that will simultaneously discover and predict bird
species assemblages (groups of co-occurring bird species); (2) develop novel
contrast mining algorithms to discover geographic locations (?hotspots?)
corresponding to significant changes in species assemblages (i.e., changes in
topics) between time periods and (3) create innovative contrast mining
algorithms to discover sites with significant changes in an individual species'
spatial distribution and identify features which are most associated with these
changes. This project's approach, employing structured prediction, conditional
topic models, and contrast mining will allow testing a hitherto untestable
ecological hypothesis: habitat connectivity facilitates species response to
climate change, while simultaneously testing fundamental questions in ecology
about the degree to which species respond individualistically or
interdependently to climate and land use change. In terms of broader impacts,
this proposal will contribute significant scientific knowledge to environmental
policy about habitat restoration to mitigate climate change. The PIs will also
provide outreach for their research to federal land management agencies through
their involvement in a researchmanagement partnership between the US Forest
Service and the NSF-funded H.J. Andrews Long-term Ecological Research program.