* 0941924
* Motivating Change in Faculty Teaching Practices to Support a Diverse Student Body in Engineering
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2010,09/30/2015
* Cynthia Finelli, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 09/30/2015
* USD 239,353.00

Engineering - Other (59); Assessment/Research (91)&lt;br/&gt;A great deal of
research has shown that specific teaching practices can improve student success
and support a diverse student body in engineering. Translation of this research
to actual teaching practices has been slow at many institutions. This project is
seeking to generate a transformative change in teaching practices. It is
grounded in a strategic model that posits that efforts to encourage instructors
to adopt the most effective teaching practices will have the greatest impact if
they are (1) grounded in research about successful faculty teaching practices,
(2) integrated with local evidence from the College of Engineering, including
the institutional context, engineering student perspectives, and engineering
faculty perspectives (about their own teaching practices, about how those
practices affect student learning, and about factors that influence their
motivation to change), and (3) informed by literature on institutional change
models, faculty development research, and learning theory. &lt;br/&gt;This is a
two year project that will advance knowledge of how to impact faculty change on
a large scale. The project is comprised of four phases: &lt;br/&gt; Phase 1:
Contextualize the problem. It entails synthesizing published literature about
faculty teaching practices that support a diverse student body and situating
that literature in the local context using data from multiple sources. The data
include student demographic and academic data from the registrar, interviews
with academic advisors, and classroom observations of engineering faculty who
teach undergraduate engineering courses. &lt;br/&gt; Phase 2: Understand the
student perspective. It is comprised of interactions with students at all levels
of academic achievement to identify teaching practices perceived by students to
support or hinder their success in engineering. &lt;br/&gt; Phase 3: Understand
the faculty perspective. It begins with a survey all the engineering instructors
and ends with one-on-one interviews with a few in order to: (a) to ascertain
faculty beliefs about their own teaching practices and how these practices
affect student learning and (b) to identify factors that motivate faculty to
change their teaching practices. &lt;br/&gt; Phase 4 (Develop a plan for
institutional change) builds on the first three phases. It will also incorporate
knowledge derived from published literature on institutional change models,
faculty development research, and learning theory. &lt;br/&gt;At the conclusion
of the project, a faculty action team will be positioned to initiate an
evidence-based change model that has the potential to transform the educational
experience for all engineering students. The evidence-based approach to enabling
institutional change may serve as a model for other institutions. The analyses
of student and faculty data will contribute to the national understanding of
issues in engineering education.