* 0941213
* RAPID:  Offshoring in A Global Economic Crisis: Economic and Social Dynamics
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2012
* Kenneth Kraemer, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 06/30/2012
* USD 144,560.00

SES-0937493&lt;br/&gt;Kenneth L. Kraemer&lt;br/&gt;Jason L.
Dedrick&lt;br/&gt;University of California, Irvine&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This
award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public
Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Industry analysts predict that the current
global economic crisis will speed up the offshoring of R&amp;D such as new
product development (NPD) and software development. Firms use development
activities to create and bring new products to market, thereby stimulating
economic growth. However, the modularity of the development process makes it
possible to offshore (and/or outsource) more and more of these activities for
cost and market advantage. Such shifts could be a threat to the success of
current stimulus policies that rely heavily on innovation to drive growth and
generate new jobs. It is important therefore to assess whether there is a sharp
escalation in offshoring of innovation as a result of the economic crisis and,
if so, the scale, scope and implications thereof. This project will replicate a
survey of high-tech firms conducted in the fall of 2008, just before the steep
economic decline of the fourth quarter of that year and well before the passage
of the 2009 economic stimulus plan. The survey will be conducted in the fall of
2009 enabling us to capture offshoring effects as the recession has deepened and
pressure for outsourcing has increased. Comparison of firms over time will
capture the specific effects of the recession if more firms turn to this option
as expected. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the research is
that it will enable better understanding of the dynamics of offshoring under
economic crisis. The current crisis has created a natural experiment wherein
firms may increase their use or change their pattern of offshoring. By going
back to these hi-tech firms, we will be able to identify important shifts
created by the downturn, the factors shaping these shifts, and the implications
for innovative activity. The broader impact of the research stems from the fact
that the high-tech industry is a leading indicator of economic trends, so the
results may signal a change in offshoring in the rest of the economy as well.
Understanding these trends will provide important insights for policymakers and
others concerned with U.S. innovation and economic performance.