* 0941968
* Virtual Ecology: An Inquiry-Based Online Learning Environment
* EHR,DUE
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2012
* Aimee Govett, East Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Jose Herrera
* 03/31/2012
* USD 49,581.00

A team of biology faculty and educators at East Tennessee State University
(ETSU) has developed a wide variety of interactive simulation models that are
designed to help strengthen student understanding of important ecology and
evolutionary biology concepts. The models simulate classic experiments in
ecology and evolutionary biology, in topical areas such as natural selection,
sexual selection, population genetics, heritability, response to selection,
interspecific interactions, population biology, biodiversity measures, and
ecosystem ecology. The modules are designed to allow students to manipulate
experimental variables and observe results in graphs, tables, and in an
animation of the experimental world, and to reinforce fundamental concepts such
as experimental controls and replication as students conduct virtual
experiments. Because the simulation models produce results with biologically
realistic variation, the data generated are well-suited to be used in teaching
the statistical analysis of biological data. The project team has integrated
several of these models into introductory and upper-level biology courses as
virtual laboratories, pre-labs, and homework exercises. A major goal of the
current project is to broaden the impact of these materials developed for use in
a single institution's courses by making the models and material freely
available. The investigators are assessing the efficacy of the models as
educational tools, developing associated curricular materials for the modules,
and developing a state-of-the-art website (that can be used at any institution
with Internet access) to permanently house the project. A central focus of the
project is to conduct an extensive, multifaceted analysis of the effectiveness
of simulation models as learning tools in courses offered at East Tennessee
State University and at three other institutions. The investigators are also
conducting an overall assessment of how well simulation models function as
lecture enhancements in a specific course over six semesters, and creating a
forum to allow feedback and suggestions from instructors using the models at
other institutions.