* 0941191
* Collaborative Research:  A Conference to Promote the Integration of Research on Undergraduate Mathematics, Physics, and Chemistry Education
* EHR,DUE
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2015
* Chris Rasmussen, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 02/28/2015
* USD 132,670.00

Assessment/Research (91) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a collaborative
project conducted by STEM education researchers from Purdue University and the
San Diego State University Foundation. The project seeks to transform the
compartmentalized way in which mathematics and science education research is
conducted and reported by bringing together leading researchers in undergraduate
mathematics, physics, and chemistry education for two four-day intensive
conferences. The conferences are designed to create collaborative research
programs and build capacity for integrative work by involving discipline-based
education researchers and a significant number of graduate students in
mathematics and science education. The theme of the conferences is to connect
researchers across disciplines with complementary interests and expertise to one
another. The conferences will drive forward the integration of education
research in mathematics, physics and chemistry, enabling more rapid advances
than could otherwise be achieved independently. Sharing insights across
disciplines as well as results from cross-disciplinary studies has the potential
to lead to more robust research methodologies suited for use in all three
communities, the development of areas of common interest and connectivity, and
the development of transformative integrated practices. To promote collaboration
among researchers in the math, physics, and chemistry education communities, the
project offers three peer-reviewed mini-grants at each conference. These will
foster the interdisciplinary research needed to address areas of inquiry common
to math, physics, and chemistry education. The project team includes nationally
recognized researchers in undergraduate mathematics, physics, and chemistry
education who have organized national or international conferences in their
fields. The project offers a first-rate opportunity to build community and
connections among researchers in mathematics, physics, and chemistry education
and to extend these to education researchers in biology, engineering, and the
learning sciences. The inclusion of senior level graduate students and post-docs
builds capacity across fields for collaborative research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By sharing emergent findings within and across these
disciplines, the communities can share perspectives to strengthen the outcomes
of research and practices that emerge from these conferences and broaden their
impact. Beyond the research community, the findings from this project can be
used to challenge current classroom practices and to lead to new ideas for
creating educational materials and teaching strategies that have the potential
for directly impacting educational practices in STEM. The project will build
capacity by fully supporting 21 graduate students who show promise of building a
research program that involves collaborations between math and science
education. A team of external evaluators, who are highly regarded for their
contributions to discipline-based education research, will document and assess
the effectiveness of the project through an outcome-based, mixed method design.