* 0941287
* Collaborative Research: CDI-Type II: Extracting Population and Stochastic Effects on Signaling Activity from Transcription Factor Profiles
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Martin Yarmush, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 09/30/2013
* USD 427,643.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 0941313&lt;br/&gt;PI:
Juergen Hahn&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Texas Engineering Experiment
Station&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 0941287&lt;br/&gt;PI: Martin
Yarmush&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Rutgers
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Signal transduction pathways play a
key role in many cellular functions as well as intercellular communication.
However, elucidating the exact mechanisms involved in signal transduction
pathways is non-trivial: crosstalk exists between different pathways, the
response within a population of cells can vary significantly, and only limited
measurement capabilities are available for observing intracellular signals. One
specific example highlighting the importance of signal transduction and how it
is affected by cell population is stem cell differentiation. The resulting cell
type is affected by the cell population and intercellular communication that
activates different signal transduction pathways. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is focused on the development of a new computational framework that
enable the PIs to investigate the role of cell populations on signal
transduction. In order to do so, they will derive techniques that allow them to
distinguish between stochastic components and population effects. Unlike their
past work, which dealt with average properties only, they will focus on
developing techniques that consider information about individual cells within a
population and use this information for investigating population effects on
signal transduction activity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This
work includes the following portions: &lt;br/&gt;(a) Development of problem
formulations and algorithms that can solve inverse problems considering cell
populations, rather than just bulk averages, subject to the high level of
measurement noise commonly found when studying signal transduction pathways.
&lt;br/&gt;(b) Derivation of a new approach for determining the optimal set of
parameters to estimate in a nonlinear signal transduction pathway model given
the available data for a distribution of cells and considering uncertainty in
the model. &lt;br/&gt;(c) Development of a computational technique for large-
scale parameter estimation across populations to determine how intercellular
communication affects signal transduction in individual cells, leading to a
greater understanding of cellular behavior and improved experimental design.
This includes determining the number of cells and their spatial location in
experiments in order to avoid results that are skewed because cell population
effects have not been considered. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In summary,
this work will develop and integrate mathematical, computational, and
experimental approaches to partition stochastic and population effects with the
ultimate goal of developing improved models of signal transduction pathways.
These techniques will be applied to the Jak/STAT and the Erk-C/EBPÃ¢ signaling
pathways which play an important role in many cellular responses, such as stem
cell differentiation and the inflammatory response of the liver.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Synergies can be created by integrating
research and teaching efforts in the area of systems biology as well as by
establishing long-term collaborations between research groups involved in
modeling and in the experimental life sciences. Two of the PIs coteach a senior-
level undergraduate/graduate elective class on systems biology which integrates
theoretical and experimental aspects required for modeling and analysis of bio-
systems. The class aligns with departmental curriculum reform plans and will
include several modules which can also be used in other courses and outreach
activities. Interactive and web-based learning aids will be developed along with
the modules and incorporated throughout the course. Additionally, significant
effort will be devoted to disseminating research results in the form of
software, case studies, undergraduate student education and training, and
outreach programs to underrepresented groups.