* 0941510
* CDI-Type II:   Collaborative Research:  New knowledge from the Global Lake Ecological Observatory Network (GLEON)
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2015
* AnHai Doan, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 09/30/2015
* USD 1,320,100.00

Ecosystems have changed more rapidly in the past 50 years than at any other time
in human history. Lakes are exemplars of change, as a variety of social,
landscape and climate factors drive globally pervasive degradation of lake water
quality and quantity. National and international ecological networks play a
valuable role in monitoring the world?s ecosystems through continuous automated
sensing of key environmental variables. The Global Lake Ecological Observatory
Network (GLEON) has been amassing data from lake-sensor networks around the
world. In this project, GLEON scientists transform ecological sensor networks
from data collectors to knowledge generators through integration of the people,
data, and cyberinfrastructure of lake-sensor networks. Scientists use three-
dimensional lake simulation and advanced signal processing algorithms to exploit
information embedded in sensor network data, as well as data from non-
traditional sources, such as Web sites that log observations of city and state
employees who monitor the lakes. Automated coupling of diverse data sources with
simulation models will provide near-real-time prediction of lake conditions.
With new data and model integration, scientists will gain new understanding into
socially relevant environmental issues, such as the development of harmful algal
blooms and the roles lakes play in the global carbon cycle.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The collaborative efforts of lake ecologists, computer
scientists, and information technologists will yield transformations for the
scientific disciplines and benefits for the broader community. The use of non-
traditional data from the Internet will reveal new pathways for multi-discipline
collaborations that study how ecosystems and societies interact. The rapidly
expanding field of environmental sensor networks will benefit by use of the
data-model integration techniques developed here. The insights into data-model
coupling gained by computer scientists will be of benefit to other disciplines,
such as the social sciences and biological epidemiology, in which diverse data
sources and complex models are applied to complex problems. Finally, the novel
and advanced techniques developed will enable the next generation of scientists
to study lakes in ways not previously possible. Teams of students from multiple
disciplines will participate in the creation of these new technologies,
fostering collaborations that will lead to exchange of ideas and the emergence
of a new way of studying our natural systems.