* 0941660
* Student-Centered Learning Strategies For A Face-To-Face and Online Circuits Course
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2010,07/31/2014
* James Becker, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Yvette Weatherton
* 07/31/2014
* USD 176,394.00

This project is developing a set of active and collaborative learning modules
for an introductory sophomore level electric circuits course that allow students
to explore and utilize the standard concepts and techniques of electrical
circuits in the context of applications to practical circuits. A novel feature
of the project is the use of students who have recently completed the course to
revise and refine the modules. The new course is being offered at Montana State
University in Bozeman and via distance learning to students at Montana State
University in Billings. Additional project objectives include facilitating the
transfer of students in two-year pre-engineering and science programs within the
state of Montana to Montana State University and developing a template for using
advanced pedagogies in online engineering courses. The project includes rigorous
formative and summative evaluation plans with both qualitative and quantitative
components coordinated by an independent evaluator. The evaluation plan is
designed to establish the quality of the materials and to ensure the project
goals are met. The project's results are being disseminated through conferences
and journal publications. The project includes specific efforts to increase the
engagement of women and the Native American community in Montana.