* 0941512
* Collaborative Teaching and Interdisciplinary Discovery-Based Experiments for Understanding Nanoscale Metrology and Manufacturing
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2013
* Sally Solomon, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Don Millard
* 07/31/2013
* USD 200,000.00

The emerging technologies in nanoscale metrology and manufacturing have the
potential for significant contributions to the growth of the nation's economy
over the next several decades. In spite of the rapidly growing need for
qualified nanotechnology technicians, current undergraduate programs of most
engineering schools do not offer nanoscale metrology and manufacturing in their
curricula. In order to produce a properly prepared nanotechnology workforce,
there is a need for educational opportunities in the advanced manufacturing
technology arena. This project will address the absence of nanoscale metrology
and manufacturing education by developing a packaged suite of discovery-based
laboratory modules. Combined with proposed lectures, the laboratory materials
will enable many engineering programs to offer nanoscale metrology and
manufacturing in their curricula, thereby increasing opportunities for
engineering and science students to be exposed to this emerging field early in
the formative years of their career. This project will bring relevant nanoscale
engineering physics and chemistry into the educational experience of
undergraduate engineering students as well as develop and test a set of
collaborative lecture and laboratory modules in nanoscale metrology and
manufacturing.