* 0941763
* Interactive Teaching Materials for Understanding  Ecological Response from Climate Change in Urban Forests
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2013
* Marion Dresner, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 06/30/2013
* USD 174,962.00

Interdisciplinary (99) The impact of climate change and habitat fragmentation on
biodiversity in urban forests is being studied in multidisciplinary sophomore
laboratory exercises and lectures. The inquiry based approach builds students'
research skills progressively over a three course sequence. The theme of the
interactive effects of global climate change and habitat fragmentation on
biological diversity in an urban ecological setting serves as a vehicle for
advancing undergraduate learning and interest in the environmental field. The
conceptual framework aligns with current thinking about human-dominated
ecosystems. The twenty-one laboratory exercises and lecture materials utilize
strategies that embody how students learn most effectively, including student-
active approaches, problem solving activities, exercises that build student
skills in research, and visualization activities to promote greater
understanding of patterns and systems understanding. Qualitative modeling helps
students conceptualize ecological relationships and reflect on their
understanding as well as for assessment of student understanding. Quantitative
modeling is helping students examine potential ecological impacts under
different climate change scenarios, and spatial analysis is being used. The
material provides practical experience evaluating environmental management
options given the range of projected climatic changes.