* 0941686
* Planning for XSEDE: the eXtreme Science and Engineering Discovery Environment
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* John Towns, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Barry I. Schneider
* 08/31/2011
* USD 1,617,000.00

Scientists and engineers stand on the brink of new opportunities to enable and
accelerate scientific discoveries by exploiting access to an unprecedented scale
and diversity of high-end digital resources and services. To better facilitate
the use of such resources for transformational science and engineering
discoveries, the PIs have proposed the design for a world-class, comprehensive
cyberinfrastructure (CI) of advanced digital services: the eXtreme Science and
Engineering Discovery Environment (XSEDE). XSEDE will enable researchers to use
XSEDE resources and services directly, from their personal and campus resources,
from other high-end centers and cyberinfrastructure resources, and via science
gateways and discovery environments. The XSEDE Partnership will be led by NCSA,
TACC, NICS and PSC, and includes partners who complement their strengths with
expertise in CI architecture, systems engineering, and program management.
Driven by a comprehensive set of community science requirements, the team will
design a plan for the full XSEDE architecture of diverse digital services for
enabling end-to-end research. It will also plan a highly coordinated user
support program, including advanced user support and a multi-pronged training,
education and outreach program, offering an array of services from technology
experts to assist all levels of users and to recruit and prepare future users.
XSEDE will be designed to interface with other CI projects and resources, and to
evolve to meet emerging requirements and technology opportunities. The resulting
plan will enable the deployment and operation of XSEDE to transform the conduct
of computational science from use of individual resources for discrete tasks to
enabling end-to-end science in a complete, comprehensive, integrated environment
of extraordinary capability that enables transformative scientific breakthroughs
in the next five years. The XSEDE plan will be shared with science and
technology researchers and educators via workshops and direct communications.
This will enable integration of research and education with leading applications
teams and tool developers by increasing their awareness of current technologies
and best practices through communication and curriculum content, while
stimulating development of needed capabilities and technologies for addressing
science community needs. The XSEDE plan will explore ways to increase and
broaden participation by working with under-represented faculty and students
among the current community of high-end practitioners as well as recruiting and
engaging even larger numbers of under-represented individuals.