* 0941971
* Self-Efficacy and Student Characteristics as Predictors of Success for Supplemental Instruction Programs in Undergraduate Chemistry Education
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2013
* Robert Reardon, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 08/31/2013
* USD 199,976.00

Chemistry (12) Intellectual Merit. Supplemental Instruction (SI) has a long
history of increasing student success rates in courses traditionally considered
some of the most difficult in higher education. Although the success of SI
programs nationwide has been lauded in the literature, the questions that remain
unanswered are: i) whether the improvement in student success is a result of
self-selection rather than the attributes of the SI program itself, ii) whether
SI programs are equally successful for all groups of students, and iii) whether
participation in SI results in increased success in subsequent courses and
retention within STEM majors. Therefore, using an already established SI
Program, the specific objectives of this project are to: 1) Determine whether
the success of SI programs is a result of self-selection by the students, 2)
Evaluate the variables which can be utilized to predict the degree of success of
the SI program for a particular student, and 3) Assess the effect of the SI
program on student success in subsequent courses offered by the Department of
Chemistry and Biochemistry and retention of the students within STEM majors. The
first objective is being addressed by the widespread distribution and results
analysis of both a general self-efficacy survey and a chemistry self-efficacy
survey, which measure a student's perception of his/her ability to achieve a
specific learning outcome. General self-efficacy surveys are currently
available, and a chemistry self-efficacy survey has been created specifically
for use in this investigation. The second objective is being addressed by
evaluating the success of the SI program in each of the courses with respect to
grade point average, the number of students receiving a grade of D, F, or W in
the class (the DFW rate), gender, ethnicity, desired major, mathematics
background, SAT or ACT scores, and status as a first-generation student. The
third objective is being addressed by a longevity study where the success of
each student is tracked through the subsequent chemistry and biochemistry
courses and the retention of the students within STEM majors is monitored.
Broader Impacts. The state of Texas will, over the next few decades, see
tremendous growth in population, and the overall population will be less
educated unless current trends are altered. The "Closing the Gaps" initiative,
designed to increase the participation rate in higher education, has resulted in
large increases in enrollment at Texas State University-San Marcos. Enrollment
in lower-division courses within the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, a
department that already serves a large (~24%) Hispanic population, continues to
increase; however, the DFW rate for first generation students in general, and
minority students in particular, is alarmingly high. An increase in the success
rate of students completing the first two years of the chemistry curriculum will
bolster the university's ability to produce an educated population, particularly
in the STEM programs. Furthermore, Texas State University-San Marcos educates
more K-12 teachers than any other institution in the state of Texas. The future
teachers impacted through this project are expected to enhance the educational
environment of future generations of STEM students. Dissemination of the results
of this research investigation through peer-reviewed publications, presentations
at professional meetings, and distribution of the self-efficacy survey will
provide an opportunity for institutions nationwide to increase the effectiveness
of the use of SI in lower-division chemistry courses.