* 0941610
* CDI-Type II: Zooniverse - Conquering the Data Flood with a Transformative Partnership between Citizen Scientists and Machines
* EHR,DRL
* 01/01/2010,09/30/2013
* John Wallin, Adler Planetarium
* Standard Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 09/30/2013
* USD 1,889,993.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Scientists and researchers from fields as diverse as oceanography and ecology,
astronomy and classical studies face a common challenge. As computer power and
technology improve, the sizes of data sets available to us increase rapidly. The
goal of this project is to develop a new methodology for using citizen science
to unlock the knowledge discovery potential of modern, large data sets. For
example, in a previous project Galaxy Zoo, citizen scientists have already made
major contributions, lending their eyes, their pattern recognition skills and
their brains to address research questions that need human input, and in so
doing, have become part of the computing process. The current Galaxy Zoo project
has recruited more than 200,000 participants who have provided more than 100
million classifications of galaxies from the Sloan Digital Sky Survey. This
project builds upon early successes to develop a mode of citizen science
participation which involves not only simple "clickwork" tasks, but also
involves participants in more advanced modes of scientific thought. As part of
the project, a symbiotic relationship with machine learning tools and algorithms
will be developed, so that results from citizen scientists provide a rich
training set for improving algorithms that in turn inform citizen science modes
of participation. The first phase of the project will be to develop a portfolio
of pilot projects from astrophysics, planetary science, zoology, and classical
studies. The second phase of the project will be to develop a framework - called
the Zooniverse - to facilitate citizen scientists. In particular, research and
machine-learning communities will be engaged to identify suitable projects and
data sets to integrate into Zooniverse.

The ultimate goal with the Zooniverse is to create a sustainable future for
large-scale, internet-based citizen science as part of every researcher?s
toolkit, exemplifying a new paradigm in computational thinking, tapping the
mental resources of a community of lay people in an innovative and complex
manner that promises a profound impact on our ability to generate new knowledge.
The project will engage thousands of citizens in authentic science tasks leading
to a better public understanding of science and also, by the engagement of
students, leading to interest in scientific careers.