* 0941078
* Real-Time Coupling of Gene Networks in Single Cells
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2011
* Animesh Ray, Keck Graduate Institute
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 06/30/2011
* USD 100,000.00

PI: Animesh Ray Real-time coupling of gene networks in single cells SUMMARY The
complex dynamics of gene regulatory networks underlie a host of fundamental
biological questions including the maintenance of normal cellular states,
response of cells to internal and external signals, handling of noise inherent
in biological systems, and the evolutionary trajectory of organisms. Moreover,
cells containing identical gene sets nearly always are heterogeneous in their
epigenetic states, where the effects of stochastic fluctuation of a small number
of key regulators (intrinsic noise) and general fluctuation in biochemical
machinery (extrinsic noise) critically affect network dynamics. Mathematical
methods for tackling these processes are not yet fully developed. In this
proposal advantage is taken of a novel synthetic biology approach coupled with
interaction modeling by stochastic evolutionary game theory. The latter is an
ideal modeling framework for noisy interacting systems where the probability
distribution of component states influence one another. Two synthetic genetic
networks will be designed and implemented within two separate yeast cells that
are otherwise genetically identical (except at the mating type locus). Each of
these two networks takes as input a common metabolite and outputs one of two
fluorescent proteins that will be measured in single cells by real time imaging
techniques. The two networks will be coupled to each other by mating the cells
and the coupled dynamics will be monitored. The networks are designed such that
they have the opportunity to both cooperate and interfere with each other. The
coupling coefficients are tunable. A stochastic evolutionary game theoretic
model will be devised to determine agreement with experimental results. Both the
theory and experiments proposed here are high-risk: 1) Real-time dynamics of
coupling of two synthetic genetic circuits in single cells have never been
studied before; 2) The particular gene networks proposed here have not been
studied, so there is no guarantee that the observed dynamics will reflect
simulated dynamics; 3) Imaging mating cells for single cell gene expression
dynamics has not yet been attempted (to our knowledge); 4) Stochastic
evolutionary game theory is a relatively new area of research in mathematical
sciences and its applicability to gene regulatory network dynamics is uncertain.
Given these uncertainties, and given the potential for advancing a new way of
thinking about biological network dynamics if the project is successful, this
project is deemed suitable for an EAGER submission. Insights learned from these
studies will be valuable for understanding how networks communicate in a noisy
environment and how modally rational entities with stochastic behavior cooperate
or compete in communication networks.