* 0941899
* Collaborative Research: Focusing a General Science Course on Improving Science Literacy
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2010,03/31/2014
* Karen Cummings, Southern Connecticut State University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Buckmire
* 03/31/2014
* USD 87,916.00

Interdisciplinary (99). This collaboration between McDaniel College and Southern
Connecticut State University (SCSU) brings together a private, residential
liberal arts college with a public, comprehensive university to develop a
general education course for non-science majors to improve students' scientific
process skills, their attitudes toward science, and their understanding of the
nature of science. To accomplish this, course materials are designed to
strengthen students' sense of science, expand their ability to understand and
conduct experiments, and cultivate recognition of the relationships between
science and society. Science content from a host of disciplines helps to
motivate and ground students' learning and provide a vehicle for developing
scientific literacy. A suite of seventeen modules, each focusing on a narrow
range of scientific literacy skills is the planned outcome of this project.
Through a combination of hands-on activities, exercises, discussions, and/or
projects, modules focus, for example, on having students be better able to
observe and record natural phenomena; measure physical phenomena; identify
significant links between science and society; or understand the progression and
organization of scientific knowledge. The collaboration between the two
institutions ensures that a broad range of students use the materials. McDaniel
hosts students in a residential liberal arts community, where materials are used
in a small, integrated laboratory-discussion classroom setting. SCSU's students
experience a public, comprehensive university in urban New Haven, where students
experience the materials in a researched-based, activities-centered course
situated in a medium-sized lecture environment. The intellectual merit of the
proposed activity rests on increasing the education community's understanding of
what can be done at the college-level to help improve national science literacy,
particularly with students in traditionally underrepresented groups. For years
there have been repeated calls to raise American students' scientific literacy.
Yet, understanding of specific science content still dominates learning goals
for general education courses. Well-crafted curricular materials fostering
students' own creative, scientific reasoning skills and their attitudes about
and understanding of science will help them see science's relevancy. In turn a
cycle of scientific competency is created through the development of more
informed students entering the roles of elementary and secondary-science
teachers as well as the creation of more informed citizens.