* 0941722
* Collaborative Research: An Innovative Instructional Strategy for Widespread Implementation of Electric Energy Systems Curriculum, as a Model in STEM Education
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2012
* Allison Kipple, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Don Millard
* 12/31/2012
* USD 24,998.00

Engineering - Electrical (55) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project, a collaboration
effort between the University of Minnesota and Northern Arizona University, is
developing a forward-looking easily implemented curriculum in electric energy
systems. To accomplish this, the investigators are developing and assessing a
learner-centered, web-enabled strategy that allows students to learn content
online and work face-to-face with other students and faculty on real-world
energy related problems that foster critical thinking through active engagement.
They also are developing faculty expertise through sustainable online curricular
content and connections with resource faculty to support implementation in
smaller programs with limited faculty resources. The project builds upon prior
work funded by NSF and other agencies that has successfully revised the
curricular content of power engineering courses in nearly 100 schools
nationwide. To sustain and expand this success, the current project is focusing
on innovative pedagogy and the need for faculty development. The evaluation
effort, under the leadership of an experienced evaluator, is using indirect
assessments (e. g., student surveys and faculty interviews), direct assessment
of student products using rubrics, and observation of class activities. The
project team is disseminating their material and pedagogical approach through a
website repository, through regularly scheduled Internet-based video conferences
between new and resource faculty, through a series of on-going faculty workshops
funded by ONR, through a workshop for engineering deans to promote the approach
as a model for other areas, and through papers and presentation. Broader impacts
include extensive faculty development efforts, wide dissemination of their
material and methods, and their effort to promote the approach as a model for
curriculum reform in other areas.