* 0941547
* U.S.-India Workshop: Distributed Development of the Principles and Applications of Digital Fabrication
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2010
* Neil Gershenfeld, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 09/30/2010
* USD 49,979.00

0941547&lt;br/&gt;Gershenfeld&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a joint
US?India workshop, to be held August 2009 in Pune, on distributed development of
the principles and applications of digital fabrication. &lt;br/&gt;Professor
Neil Gershenfeld, Director of the MIT Center for Bits and Atoms is the lead
investigator and co-organizer of the workshop with Indian host, Dr. Debabrata
Goswami, &lt;br/&gt;Department of Chemistry &amp; Centre for Laser Technology,
Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur (IIT-K). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study
of digital fabrication is analogous to the earlier digitization of communication
and computation, bringing the programmability of the digital world to the
physical world through programmed assembly of functional systems. The
intersection of digital computing, communications, and fabrication, in turn
means that large numbers of small labs can collectively tackle research problems
that were once limited to fewer elite institutions. This workshop will seek to
develop research proposals for grand-challenge projects that can be addressed in
this way, possibly offering broader participation, better local integration, and
greater efficiency. Prospective topics include the printing of functional
systems, analytical instrumentation for healthcare and the environment,
community IT infrastructure, assistive medical technologies, energy conversion,
remote sensing, and educational infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
workshop will be held in conjunction with FAB5, the Fifth International Fab Lab
Forum and Symposium on Digital Fabrication, in Pune, India, August 17-21. This
is a global gathering of both research and community participants in the fab lab
network, which grew from an NSF-supported outreach program of MIT's Center for
Bits and Atoms.&lt;br/&gt;