* 0942106
* Formation and Growth of Particles in the Troposphere:  Modeling, Data Analyses, and Comparisons
* GEO,AGS
* 01/15/2010,12/31/2013
* Fangqun Yu, SUNY at Albany
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 12/31/2013
* USD 519,958.00

The aerosol indirect radiative forcing (IRF), largely determined by the
concentrations of cloud condensation nuclei (CCN), is a major source of
uncertainty in assessing climate change. Recent global aerosol modeling studies
show that tropospheric CCN abundance and aerosol IRF are sensitive to the choice
of nucleation mechanism, and emphasized the critical importance of further
improvement of the representation of aerosol nucleation and growth processes in
global models. This project seeks to advance the understanding and reduce
uncertainties of atmospheric particle formation and growth processes via
comprehensive data analyses, detailed case studies, sub-grid nucleation modeling
and parameterizations, global aerosol modeling, and comparisons of model results
with measurements. In order to achieve these project goals, the following
objectives/research tasks have been identified:&lt;br/&gt;(1) In-depth case
studies and analyses of nucleation observations to resolve controversies over
the relative importance of ion-mediated nucleation (IMN) and neutral/homogeneous
nucleation in boreal forests. An IMN model will be further assessed and improved
through extended case studies. (2) Investigate the linear or square dependences
of nucleation rates derived from field measurements on the sulfuric acid vapor
concentrations, and ascertain whether such dependences imply new nucleation
mechanisms. (3) Analyze extensive datasets of particle properties observed
around the globe, and use them to assess global aerosol simulations, with the
primary focus on the ability of different nucleation mechanisms to capture the
spatial and temporal variations of tropospheric particle number concentrations.
(4) Study particle formation and growth in sub-grid anthropogenic SO2 plumes, in
order to improve the representation of the plume-scale processes in global
aerosol models, and to reduce uncertainties in simulated CCN concentrations.(5)
Apply an improved global aerosol model for investigating sources of CCN in
different tropospheric regions and their seasonal variations. Predicted CCN
concentrations will be compared with measurements and possible uncertainties
will be assessed and addressed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide
educational opportunities and research training for two graduate students and a
short-term visiting student or scholar. Two post-graduate researchers will be
given specialized experiences to broaden their knowledge and provide
opportunities for the future employment. This project will also provide research
experience and training for SUNY Albany undergraduate students who are
interested in aerosol and atmospheric research. This project will contribute to
on-going efforts to quantify the impacts of aerosols on the Earth's climate. It
will provide support for updated nucleation rate look-up tables that have been
made available to the scientific community and for the improvement of online
nucleation rate calculators, which can be used for both research and educational
purposes. Parameterizations of sub-grid sulfate particle formation derived
within this project will be made available to other investigators working on
regional and global aerosol modeling.