* 0942942
* Promoting Metacognitive Knowledge and Shared Note-Taking to Learn Electric Circuit Concepts Through Enhanced Guided Notes
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Douglas Holton, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Finger
* 09/30/2013
* USD 199,935.00

Engineering - Electrical (55)&lt;br/&gt;This project is implementing findings
from research on note-taking strategies and metacognition to enhance students'
learning in engineering courses. To this end, the project is developing a set of
enhanced guided notes (EGNs) for a sophomore level electrical engineering for
non-majors course. Enhanced guided notes are instructor-prepared-notes with
spaces available for students to add comments and other annotations during and
after the class. In addition, the EGNs require students to assess their
metacognitive knowledge, create additional electronic notes of their own, and
then share them with their classmates. The project has five goals: (1) to
develop EGNs for classroom instruction on electric circuit concepts; (2) to
implement EGNs in the electrical engineering for non-majors at Utah State
University; (3) to evaluate and compare the learning performance of students who
use the EGNs and those who use standard guided notes; (4) to understand the
students' use of their metacognitive knowledge during engineering classroom
lectures; (5) to understand how students' note-taking skills are improved
through their engagement in collaborative online note-taking activities; and (6)
develop guidelines for the creation and implementation of enhanced guided notes.
The project includes rigorous formative and summative evaluation plans with both
qualitative and quantitative components coordinated by an independent evaluator.
The project's results are being disseminated through conferences and journal
publications and the EGNs and other course materials are being made available
for free download from the project's website.