* 0942489
* Collaborative Proposal: CCB FEST-Community College Biology Faculty Enhancement through Scientific Teaching
* EHR,DUE
* 11/01/2009,02/28/2013
* Kimberly Tanner, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 02/28/2013
* USD 234,490.00

This collaborative project between a comprehensive state institution (San
Francisco State University) and a community college (Foothill-De Anza Community
College) is establishing a multi-pronged faculty enhancement program for
community college biology faculty. It is anticipated that 150 college faculty
and 11 graduate students will benefit directly from this project in terms of
enhancing their teaching approaches, with many more undergraduate students
benefitting from the resultant improved courses. The structure and content of
the program is patterned after the Scientific Teaching Institutes organized by
Jo Handelsman at the University of Wisconsin and has as its objective to enhance
faculty pedagogical expertise, provide faculty with support to iteratively
change their teaching and develop professional learning communities of community
college faculty in the San Francisco Bay area.

The three aspects of this project are: 1. The Scientific Teaching Workshops
Series an introductory series of five three hour workshops for those faculty
with limited time who want to learn what is available in the hopes of
participating in a more intense experience later on (offered during the spring
term on a rotating basis at each of ten community colleges within the San
Francisco Bay area); 2. The Scientific Teaching Summer Institute, a week long
full day activity taking place on the campus of San Francisco State and 3.
Follow up activities to help faculty implement what they have learned and to
develop a teaching community among participants and their colleagues. The
project further benefits from an additional resource, SEPAL (Science Education
Partnership and Assessment Laboratory) developed by Kimberly Tanner, a graduate
student training program at SFSU that includes working with faculty to develop
faculty teaching strengths.

Materials being used at the workshops include: the Scientific Teaching workbook
developed by Jo Handelsman for the long standing Scientific Teaching Institutes
workshops at the University of Wisconsin Madison, designed for faculty at
research intensive universities and those teaching large introductory courses;
the Approaches to Biology Teaching and Learning a publication collection written
by Kimberly Tanner to translate key findings from the educational literature
into practical teaching strategies for the college classroom; and curricular
materials developed for SEPAL.

Intellectual Merit: The merit of this project resides in its use of successful
activities and materials developed for one audience to transform opportunities
available for a different audience.

Broader Impact: Given the large number of students taught by the faculty
involved and the fact that in the bay area many biology majors at four year
schools start their academic careers at community colleges, this project's
potential to effect many students is obvious.