* 0942294
* Learning Modules to Enhance Understanding of Animal Development
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2017
* Susan Keen, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Rupa Iyer
* 12/31/2017
* USD 234,997.00

Biological Sciences (61):&lt;br/&gt;This series of animated learning modules is
designed to make the processes and mechanisms of animal development transparent
to undergraduate students in biology. Module design follows pedagogical best
practices by parsing the complex 3D process of development into accessible
sections where text, voice, animation, and formative assessment are all
combined. Assessment occurs through regular use of multiple choice questions,
matching questions, data sorting and ordering questions, throughout each module.
Targeted feedback is provided immediately after each assessment tool is used.
The modules require students to predict what they expect to see before viewing
animation segments. Users of the modules follow a learning path in which they
define expectations, observe events, assess interpretation, and make new
predictions. There are many elements to the modules including contextual
information, animated visualization, inquiry scripts, a formative feedback loop,
written explanation, a documentation tool, and summative assessment
instruments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the project lies in
the prescriptive nature of the learning modules. They are focused around animal
development, but the learning goals of each module are discipline specific. An
understanding of events and mechanisms of organismal development is central to
many areas within biology (introductory biology, phylogeny, evolutionary
biology, developmental biology, macroevolution, molecular biology, evolutionary
development, and invertebrate/vertebrate zoology), but the way in which
developmental information is used varies greatly. In phylogeny, shared features
indicate shared ancestry whereas in developmental biology, morphological change
is correlated with gene expression. By surrounding state-of-the-art,
biologically accurate animations with different sets of learning challenges,
students are challenged to analyze development in different contexts, rather
than to memorize morphological sequences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
designed to have a broad impact because the learning modules are packaged for
users from many different areas of study, in both upper and lower division
courses, and feature a learning script for instructors. To ensure that the
materials are appropriately directed, students from underrepresented STEM groups
are critiquing content and design during module formulation. The module
developers include students, faculty at a research university and a community
college, animators, and professional evaluators of written and visual
educational materials. The learning value of the modules are being assessed
locally first so that improvements can be made as needed; however,web
dissemination with properly selected descriptors permits easy access for
students, faculty, and interested parties around the globe.