* 0942634
* Assessing the Impact of Federal Stimulus R&amp;D Funding on Employment and Scientific Output
* SBE,SBE
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2011
* Richard Freeman, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Maryann Feldman
* 09/30/2011
* USD 194,000.00

The federal stimulus funding increase represents a large shock to the Science
and Engineering (S&amp;E) labor market and provides a unique ?pseudo-experiment?
that offers an opportunity to better understand how federal agencies,
universities, firms, and ultimately students considering science careers respond
to an unexpected change in support of science. This project collects
contemporaneous information on the way participants in the market respond to the
new support. It then compares patterns of funding, employment, and scientific
outputs to those in earlier periods, in order to advance understanding about the
dynamics of the market that would otherwise be hard to discern.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project consists of three parts. Part 1 measures the
2009-2010 increased federal R&amp;D funding in the context of the total federal
R&amp;D budget, compares the responses of federal agency programs to the
funding, and assesses the immediate impacts on funded recipients. This is done
through analyses of obligations and expenditures and interviews and meetings
with agencies and recipients. Part 2 estimates the effect of past economic
shocks on the R&amp;D expenditures and Science and Engineering (S&amp;E)
employment of firms and universities, and the effect of past federal R&amp;D
funding on R&amp;D employment. This provides a baseline for assessing the effect
of stimulus R&amp;D funding on employment. Part 3 estimates the timing and
characteristics of research publications and patents from past NIH and NSF
research grants. This provides insights into how the stimulus R&amp;D funding
impacts science and technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;This research advances understanding about the way in which
federal R&amp;D funding affects science and engineering employment. The research
also addresses two key issues. The first of these is identifying the "success
rate" or "return" on funding?. The second is identifying the role of funding in
successful science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The research
enhances understanding of the impact of federal R&amp;D funding on employment
and scientific output. The assessment of immediate impacts and the estimates on
potential impact provide timely evidence on what the stimulus is doing and
inform agencies in their decision-making. In light of the critical role of
science and technology in U.S. economic growth, the study contributes to
understanding about the optimal level of R&amp;D funding.