* 0942344
* First-Year Research in Earth Sciences (FYRES): Dunes
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Crystal Bruxvoort, Calvin University
* Standard Grant
* Yvette Weatherton
* 08/31/2014
* USD 185,003.00

Earth Systems Science (40)&lt;br/&gt;Despite widespread recognition that
inquiry-learning improves education in STEM disciplines, too few undergraduate
science programs include authentic research experiences for students in their
first two years. The goal of the First-Year Research in Earth Sciences (FYRES)
project is to develop and implement a geoscience course in which first-semester
students at Calvin College learn science through engagement in undergraduate
research experiences focused on Lake Michigan coastal dunes. The FYRES project
combines elements from the best existing models of inquiry-based learning,
undergraduate research experiences, and early undergraduate experiences to form
an effective STEM learning experience. The FYRES project provides authentic
inquiry-learning experiences for two groups of undergraduate students: students
in their first-semester of college and students participating in the Student
Research Mentor Program. The research mentor program is open to upper-level
geography or geology majors and provides students with a substantive
undergraduate research experience. These students are working closely with the
FYRES course as research mentors, facilitating the early-course guided dune
investigations and leading teams of students working on specific Michigan
coastal dune research projects in the second half of the course. The Research
Mentors complete a written report on the research project and present the
results at a professional conference. The FYRES project includes one year for
development of course, mentor program and evaluation materials, followed by two
years of implementing and evaluating the course and mentor program.
&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the FYRES project lies in its innovative
approach to engaging first-year students in an undergraduate research experience
shared with peer mentors whose research roles are appropriate to their greater
experience and education. The FYRES project advances STEM education by creating
and adapting learning materials and teaching strategies to reflect knowledge
about authentic inquiry-learning experiences in undergraduate education. The
FYRES project contains a robust evaluation plan in studying the successes and
failures of two offerings of the course and student research mentor program,
matched by evaluations of student experiences in control groups appropriate to
both the first-year and upper-level FYRES student experiences. FYRES project
evaluation represents a significant contribution to knowledge about inquiry-
learning at the undergraduate level, a research area in which there is limited
study to date despite widespread promotion of this pedagogy. In particular, this
project advances our understanding of authentic research as inquiry-learning,
early research experiences, and the role of peer mentors in undergraduate
research experiences. The FYRES project also advances disciplinary knowledge by
providing six original coastal dune studies per year. &lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of the FYRES project include the direct benefits to the first-year
students who participate in the FYRES course, the upper-level geography or
geology majors who participate as student research mentors, the science
education students completing summer research projects, and three recent
graduates participating as Research Associates. All of these students receive
training and education in STEM that may encourage further opportunities or
involvement in science. The student projects strengthen collaborations between
Calvin College and the community as the research findings inform the
understanding, management and education of the public about west Michigan
coastal dunes. The project also strengthens collaborations between science
education and practicing scientists at Calvin College. The FYRES project will
attract the attention of incoming undergraduate students who possess some
measure of interest in hands-on or outdoor science, engage these students in
authentic inquiry-learning focused on a dynamic local natural environment, and
build a foundation for further participation in the earth sciences or other STEM
disciplines. By enhancing the practice and understanding of science education at
the undergraduate level, the FYRES project has the potential to transform
thinking about first-year courses at Calvin College as well as at other
undergraduate institutions.