* 0942090
* Discovering the Nanoworld: A New Module for Teaching about Molecules and Bonding in General Chemistry
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2016
* Lizanne DeStefano, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Tom Higgins
* 09/30/2016
* USD 199,989.00

The objective of this project is to create a new module on the nature of
chemical bonding, revising one of the most fundamental components of
undergraduate general chemistry. In place of memorizing rules, the new strategy
develops an understanding of the nature of bonding by exploring the process by
which atoms combine to form molecules, with an emphasis on developing predictive
intuition. Context is supplied by focusing on molecules in real world
situations, such as the gases that constitute Earth's atmosphere. The web-based,
extensively visual module is being developed by expert working scientists with
the aid and advice of seasoned general chemistry lecturers. It is being tested
in the classrooms of the University of Illinois and modified in response to
assessment of student comprehension. The performance of chemistry major
volunteers is being tracked through subsequent courses. In addition to critical
input from general chemistry lecturers, critiques from instructors of later
courses that depend upon a solid legacy understanding of bonding developed in
general chemistry also are used to improve the module. Instructors are being
trained in the new material through local workshops and resources on the
website, including video. The website establishes an online community to serve
as a nexus for implementing the module beyond the University of
Illinois.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. A great need exists to transform the
manner in which chemical bonding is taught in general chemistry, to update the
material to reflect the current state of knowledge, and to address and avoid
common misconceptions. The new module is founded on rigorous quantum chemistry
and is richly supported with both static and animated graphics. Each lesson is
approached heuristically, through discovery of principles rather than as rules
to be memorized, thus employing the same reasoning process working scientists
use to study basic phenomena. By pursuing this strategy in the new module, the
students develop their ability to confront the mysteries of the subject and
construct an effective cognitive framework for understanding bonding. The
approach builds a coherent narrative that connects atoms and their properties to
molecules and their properties. It emphasizes connecting theory and its symbolic
representations to actual molecules in real world contexts.&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts. This project is having a broad impact on STEM education in several
respects. (1) Impact from improving the chemistry curriculum. The project's
subject matter lies at the core of chemistry and thus impacts all of the diverse
sub-disciplines and applied fields of chemistry that depend upon a sound
understanding of the nature of bonding. The new module is expected to provide a
better foundation for developing deeper and more sophisticated understanding of
the subject in subsequent courses. (2) Impact from improving introductory
chemistry. The new classroom materials should improve the fundamental knowledge
of all students who take introductory chemistry and provide them with better
lifelong understanding of the subject. Improvement of introductory courses also
helps to increase student interest in STEM careers. (3) Impact through
developing a model for course revision. As an archetype for revising a subject
where much of what is taught is a matter of tradition that has not kept up with
advances in the state of knowledge, this project provides a template for
revising the entire general chemistry course as well as courses in STEM
disciplines beyond chemistry.