* 0942855
* VOSS: VIRTUAL SCIENTIFIC TEAMS: LIFE-CYCLE FORMATION AND LONG-TERM SCIENTIFIC COLLABORATION
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2012
* Kathleen Burnett, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Crowston
* 06/30/2012
* USD 380,226.00

Proposal: 0942855&lt;br/&gt;PI: Burnett&lt;br/&gt;Title: VOSS: Virtual
Scientific Teams: Life-cycle Formation and Long-Term Scientific
Collaboration&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). This project develops
and validates one or more lifecycle models of multidisciplinary scientific
collaborations. Grounded in the theory of information worlds, this project
analyzes social norms, social types, values and information behaviors to
identify factors that best support the transition from discrete experiment-
focused projects to long-term programs of scientific research. The research will
investigate whether teams that integrate the norms and practices of their
members? multiple external worlds into their internal team norms and practices
have higher rates of discovery and innovation, are more productivity and are
more willing to continue to work collaboratively. Lifecycle models will be
developed from multiple-case studies of scientific teams using a distributed
interdisciplinary scientific facility (the National High Magnetic Field
Laboratory). These models will enable virtual multidisciplinary scientific teams
to better exploit cyberinfrastructure to extend their lifecycles from discrete
projects to the long-term programs of research required to solve complex
scientific problems. They will also provide a theoretically-informed framework
for future research on cyberenabled virtual
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The lifecycle models developed in this
research will advance both practical and theoretical knowledge. This research
will show how distributed, multidisciplinary scientific and engineering teams
evolve into ongoing collaborations. It will enhance team science effectiveness
and improve the development of appropriate cyberinfrastructure tools by
identifying a previously understudied set of collaboration barriers and
enablers. Team members and virtual organization managers can use this
information to design more productive and enduring collaborations. The results
will be important to other national laboratories and to public and private
sector scientific and engineering collaborations, promoting national scientific
productivity and improving global competitiveness. &lt;br/&gt;