* 0942448
* Exploring the Relationships among Classroom Instruction, Engagement in Key Thinking Processes, and Students' Abilities to Apply General Chemistry Ideas Effectively in New Contexts
* EHR,DUE
* 06/15/2010,05/31/2014
* Nancy Levinger, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Nicole Bennett
* 05/31/2014
* USD 217,744.00

Chemistry (12)

This project is studying relationships between classroom instruction and
engagement in critical thinking processes to further understanding of how to
enhance students' abilities to apply general chemistry ideas effectively in new
contexts. A central issue being examined is how transfer of learning can be
promoted in traditional lecture-based general chemistry settings by integrating
carefully crafted classroom activities and homework assignments into the
courses. The project has four main goals: 1) to develop and implement such
activities and assignments for general chemistry in alignment with research on
transfer of learning, 2) to study how the implementation of each of the
activities and assignments influences how students engage in key thinking
processes, 3) to study relationships between key thinking processes and
students' application of general chemistry understanding to new contexts, and 4)
to explore how students' beliefs about learning, motivation, and preferred
learning strategies impact their engagement in key thinking processes. The
project team is adapting the Designs for Knowledge Evolution (DKE) instructional
method (developed by Daniel Schwartz's research group) and the Model-Observe-
Reflect-Explain (MORE) Thinking Frame instructional method to develop at least
twenty DKE-based "notice and reconcile" activities to be integrated with
lectures, eight MORE-based homework assignments that integrate in-class
activities and demonstrations with students' development of initial and refined
models through reconciliation with evidence, five "reflect on your learning
processes/strategies" assignments, and "clicker" questions designed to augment
and assess learning. The project team is collecting and analyzing data using
existing instruments measuring students' attitudes about science, strategies for
learning, and conceptual understanding in general chemistry, as well as field
observations and video of the implementation of classroom activities, students'
written coursework and responses to regular course exams. Analysis of video of
student interviews will measure retention of learning through isomorphic
questions and transfer of learning through questions that require students to
apply their understandings in new contexts. Resources developed by this project
will be shared through peer-reviewed publications and through a workshop on how
to use the activities and assessments at the 2012 Biennial Conference on
Chemical Education. Participants in the workshop will be invited to test the
materials, and the project team will provide the materials and support effective
implementation.