* 0942180
* Introducing Research-inspired Modules in the General Chemistry Lab Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2013
* Monica Baloga, Florida Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* David Brown
* 12/31/2013
* USD 182,588.00

Chemistry (12)&lt;br/&gt;Most science and engineering students take general
chemistry as a requirement for their major. However, students may generally feel
disconnected from this course because they cannot appreciate how chemistry
relates to their fields of study. One way to form connections is to use
interdisciplinary research-inspired modules in the general chemistry laboratory.
Thus, the four 3-week lab modules being developed in this project emphasize
connections to physics, environmental science, and engineering. Additionally,
exercises that allow students to develop their own experimental procedures are
underrepresented in general chemistry lab manuals. This is a vital step in
bridging the gap between a beginning science/engineering student and an
autonomous research-oriented one. The modules from this project are filling a
critical gap among the types of inquiry lab experiments in the education
literature. They are designed to cultivate and measure progress in inquiry
methods development and to foster positive attitudes about and increase interest
in chemistry in particular, both of which are topics of interest to most
chemical educators. Students who might normally be disengaged from their
traditional chemistry course favorably view these projects as interesting and
informative. Educators wishing to illustrate the relationship between chemistry
and other fields are interested in this project's development of
interdisciplinary lab modules or use the experiments developed from this project
directly.