* 0942877
* International Symposium Support for the Biomaterial Interfaces Division of the AVS; San Jose, CA
* MPS,DMR
* 12/15/2009,11/30/2010
* Stefan Zauscher, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* David A. Brant
* 11/30/2010
* USD 5,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 0942877 PI: Zauscher, Stefan ORG: Duke
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: International Symposium Support for the
Biomaterial Interfaces Division of the AVS&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL
MERIT: The goal of this project is to help support the program of the
Biomaterial Interfaces (BI) Division at the American Vacuum Society?s 56th
International Symposium in San Jose, Nov. 09-13, 2009. The AVS is an
international society dedicated to all aspects of Surface Science and has 10
Divisions, of which the BI Division is one of the youngest and fastest growing.
The BI Division was organized to redress the lack of an interdisciplinary
scientific forum that focused on the intersection of biology with artificial
surfaces from a fundamental scientific perspective. The BI program at the AVS
International Symposium reflects this original mission, and is hence motivated
by the rationale that there is an urgent need to increase the understanding of
interactions between biomolecules and surfaces, the behavior of complex
macromolecular systems at materials interfaces, driven by the rapid growth in
biomedical research and the role these interactions play in the fields of
biology, biotechnology, diagnostics, dentistry and medicine. The general theme
of this year's BID technical conference is centered on progress and innovations
in characterization and control of biological interactions with materials,
surfaces, and structures, across several scaling regimes from the macroscopic to
the nanoscopic. The program design maintains its highly regarded tradition of
bringing together world renowned scientists, bioengineers, and clinicians all
seeking to understand materials-centered issues in the context of bio-
interfacial research and technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: An
important objective of the symposium is to gather a group of presenters and
participants comprising widely acknowledged thought-leaders as well as younger,
aggressive, and vibrant investigators already notable for the novelty and
quality of their work. Speakers and session chairs will represent both academic
and commercial research efforts, comprising diagnostic and imaging experts,
bioengineers, and basic surface and materials scientists all working in the
broad field of biomaterial interface science. This group will similarly
represent the gender diversity characteristic of researchers working in these
areas. In support of the effort to provide an international and diverse forum
this project provides support for travel and registration for four invited young
investigators and three women in the early stages of their careers in the field
of Biointerface Science. Furthermore, NSF funding will provide registration
support for eight graduate student research poster participants. Another
objective for the symposium is to facilitate interactions between junior
scientists/faculty with prominent senior and international investigators in the
field. One mechanism to engage students and postdoctoral researchers is through
the poster competition. Here, a panel of senior investigators will be recruited
to engage students/postdocs in discussion, and to judge the scientific merit and
originality of their research&lt;br/&gt;