* 0942214
* A Composable Hardware/Software Architecture for Instruction on Wireless Systems and Networks
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2010,06/30/2013
* J. Nicholas Laneman, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 06/30/2013
* USD 180,000.00

Computer Engineering (32) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this project
include construction of a hardware and software prototype of a customizable
wireless educational WIPER platform. This platform allows teachers and students
to emulate real-world devices by plugging in the desired modules such as
different radio technologies, sensor types, and other components typically found
in wireless systems. From the software perspective, WIPER automatically
recognizes the inserted modules and provides programmers access to library
functions that facilitate rapid development of wireless applications. The WIPER
programming environment is extensible and offers an easy-to-use graphical
programming interface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project provides instructors
with a tool for rapid development of wireless networks and systems with minimal
learning curve. Besides this new learning platform, the project provides novel
learning materials for the WIPER platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The WIPER
platform can be used in courses such as computer networks, sensor networks,
mobile computing, or wireless communications. The PIs leverage the WIPER
platform to further raise interest in wireless systems and recruit students from
underrepresented groups. The PIs work with Notre Dame's Innovation Park to
explore commercialization opportunities to provide educators with access to the
WIPER platform.