* 0942552
* Collaborative Research: Develop Innovative Labs-to-Go Kits for Multidisciplinary Undergraduate Engineering and Technology Education
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2013
* Heidar Malki, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Gul Kremer
* 06/30/2013
* USD 170,000.00

Engineering-Mechanical (56)&lt;br/&gt;This project is a collaborative project
between the University of Houston at Clear Lake and the University of Houston to
develop multifunctional Labs-to-Go (LTG) kits that would enable undergraduate
engineering students to engage in take-home hands-on experiments. The LTG kits
include a set of components that can be easily configured to perform a range of
experiments. The kits will be used in combination with course modules on the
topics of systems dynamics, vibrations, controls, smart materials, active
vibration damping, and sensors. The LTG kits provide students with an
experimental and experiential component to help them better understand the
associated physical concepts and theories. The project engages seven instructors
from two universities. The LTG kits will be integrated into 16 courses with an
anticipated impact on 525 engineering and technology students. Due to the
diverse nature of the student populations at the institutions, the project aims
to impact approximately 260 minority students. The LTG kits will target student
learning of structures, dynamics, control, and electronics technology in
multiple disciplines including civil engineering, mechanical engineering, and
electronics technology. The project includes outreach efforts such as an
exhibition at the Children's Museum of Houston and performing demos at local
high schools.