* 0942480
* Upgrading the Image: Using New Technology to Alter Perceptions of Radio Astronomy in Undergraduate Instruction
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2015
* Carl Heiles, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 08/31/2015
* USD 149,687.00

Intellectual Merit: This project upgrades the undergraduate experience in the
radio astronomy laboratory through the creation of learning materials and
teaching strategies and development of faculty expertise. Specifically, it
introduces new digital technologies and programming techniques into the
curriculum along with a visit to a working radio astronomy observatory (the
Allen Telescope Array) that features many of the technologies and principles
that the students study in the class. These innovations serve to give a complete
picture of the role of signal processing techniques that range from existing lab
components in theory, bench experiment, and programming in general purpose
computers to include the cutting edge digital technology of field programmable
gate arrays (FPGAs). Applications in radio astronomy research as well as
telecommunications are emphasized through the course.

The enhancements also couple with the scientific emphases of the class. The new
technology supports the use of a small dish for mapping large areas of the
galactic plane for study of spiral arm structure and demonstration of the
existence of dark matter. New experiments include topics such as the study of
hydroxyl masers and detection of pulsars. The instructional materials are being
made available to other institutions, many of which use small radio telescopes
that can be coupled with the digital technology and curriculum developed in this
project.

Improvements in the laboratory are intended to achieve the following goals: 1)
modernize facilities to enable experiments that probe a wider range of
astrophysics and technical issues; 2) create enthusiasm in students through use
of cutting edge technology; 3) strengthen the link between teaching and
research; 4) increase the engagement of women and minorities with radio
astronomy; and 5) prepare students for broad range of careers. Expected outcomes
for students with success of the project include: 1) a deeper understanding of
the links between signal processing theory and implementation in real-world
devices, including telescopes and telecommunication systems; 2) increasing the
number of women taking the radio astronomy labs, leading to greater number of
women finding careers in radio astronomy.

Broader Impact: The project is broadening the opportunities for undergraduate
students in radio astronomy. In addition, an important goal of the project is to
increase the number of women and minorities with an engagement and education in
radio astronomy. As one of the leading institutions in the field of radio
astronomy, Berkeley has a unique opportunity to have a national impact through
undergraduate education. The use of undergraduate TAs in the lab is an important
tool for creating the next generation of teachers and scientists.