* 0942581
* Collaborative Project: Teaching Cryptography through Hand-on Learning and Case Studies
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2014
* Joseph Kizza, University of Tennessee Chattanooga
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 07/31/2014
* USD 99,984.00

Computer Science (31)

This collaborative project from the University of Tennessee at Chattanooga,
Southern Polytechnic State University, and Tuskegee University develops a
sequence of two cryptography courses. The first course adopts intensive labs and
focuses on understanding the properties and vulnerabilities of various
cryptography techniques. The second course challenges students with real-world
cases in emerging areas in a collaborative environment. The project develops
five teaching modules based on labs and case studies and conducts a detailed
assessment of the proposed hands-on learning materials, case studies, and
modules. The PIs organize three summer mini-workshops to train faculty members
from the three campuses and other universities nationwide on how to use the new
courses.

The project proposes novel pedagogies for undergraduate Cryptography and the
hands-on exercises tied with cryptography topics teach students cryptographic
algorithms and their vulnerabilities. The designed case studies bridge the gap
between cryptographic theory and real-world cryptographic applications in
emerging areas. The modules can be used in several courses such as network
security or security management.

The project facilitates faculty collaboration and development at three
institutions in three states Tennessee, Georgia and Alabama. It broadens
participations of minority students in Information Assurance due to the
leadership of Tuskegee University, an experienced institution in minority
education. Dissemination of the generated teaching materials is supported by
summer mini-workshops, a dedicated website developed and maintained by the PIs,
conference presentations, and journal publications.