* 0942822
* Making Simulated Biology Laboratories Accessible to Visually-Impaired Students
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2013
* Eleanor Steinberg, SimBiotic Software
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 03/31/2013
* USD 100,017.00

Biological Sciences (61) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Incorporation of audio and
tactile tools for making simulated experiments in virtual biology laboratories
accessible to blind and low vision students are being explored. Students and
consultants with visual impairments are participating in the development and
testing of different techniques for presenting screen information and for
allowing interactions with simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
The immediate goal is the development of a set of techniques that will allow
participation of a more diverse set of students in inquiry-based biology labs,
including visually impaired students for whom most traditional biology labs are
inaccessible. Ultimately, this focused project should help improve simulated
laboratories for all students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The
techniques being developed are breaking down some of the challenges facing those
with visual impairments in the pursuit of scientific careers. In addition to
directly benefiting the students who use the Simbiotic labs, the results of this
project will be published in both technical and non-technical forms to inform
and inspire other educational software developers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is partially supported by funds from the Research in Disabilities
Education program and the Directorate for Biological Sciences, Emerging
Frontiers Division.