* 0942997
* Virtual Civility, Trust, and Avatars: Ethnology in Second Life
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2009,03/31/2011
* Eiko Ikegami, The New School
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 03/31/2011
* USD 149,419.00

This is a sociological study of the ways in which people voluntarily develop
"virtual civility" and trustworthy identities in 3-dimensional virtual
communities such as Second Life. This exploratory project will develop a
comparative ethnographical study of several carefully chosen virtual sites in
which what might be called "spirituality" or "self-help" plays an important
role. These virtual sites are intriguing because when people share their inner
experiences - which are usually considered highly private - this would normally
indicate a deep trust of others. But in 3D virtual worlds, avatar-actors' real
identities are often hidden. The project is intended to clarify how these
virtual sites manage to create virtual civility and trust among geographically-
distanced "strangers," and what specific cultural mechanisms prompt and enable
these avatars to develop trustworthy identities.

Studies to date of virtual worlds tend to be dominated by approaches that
emphasize technological and regulatory aspects of ensuring trustworthiness. In
contrast, this research is sociological because it locates the civility and
trust that emerge within the interactional context of collaborative knowledge
projects in particular cultural settings. For example, the ways that communities
accomplish the actual building of a virtual culture of civility might in part
depend on shared images of transcendence associated with 'spiritual approaches.'
This observation is entirely in line with the classical but still-influential
theories of sociologists like Max Weber and Emile Durkheim, yet its implications
have not yet been explored in virtual, online environments. The project will
study relational processes in which the development of such site-specific
cultures and the emergence of individual avatars' civilized behavior, as well as
the developments of their trustworthy identities, are intimately connected.

This project will contribute to the knowledge required to make virtual worlds
with user-created contents positive grounds for socially meaningful
collaborative knowledge productions. The study's potential import may go beyond
virtual community dynamics, because it is possible that the new social forms
shaped by the unique characteristics of virtual worlds may then in turn migrate
back out into real life, becoming the new standard forms of trust and civility
in human interactions generally.