* 0942287
* EAGER:  Environmental Alterations of the Animal Development Plan: Testing the Heterokairy Hypothesis
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Warren Burggren, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Leslie Pick
* 08/31/2012
* USD 198,344.00

This project investigates a potentially transforming concept in developmental
physiology - physiological heterokairy (restructuring of the animal's
physiological developmental plan at the individual and population levels) - that
currently is mostly theoretical. The goal of this project is to determine
whether deprivation of oxygen during development affects the timing of the
development plan for the start of aerial respiration in an air-breathing fish,
the blue gourami. Measurements will be made of the structural development of the
air breathing organ and of the onset of its effectiveness. The hypothesis being
tested is that the onset of air-breathing and the development of supporting
organs, which would "rescue" the larvae from the harmful effects caused by the
lack of oxygen, will develop sooner in larvae growing with little oxygen,
illustrating fundamental restructuring of key events in organ system
development. Experimental support for heterokairy could create a major change in
how developmental physiologists interpret the environment's effects on the
developmental timetable at the organ system level. We suspect that heterokairy
occurs, but this concept has yet to be systematically examined. Our preliminary
experiments show that the gourami has the ability to change its development in
response to environmental changes and so is a highly appropriate species for
testing. Beyond the impacts of graduate training, this grant will create
international research experiences through partnership with UNT's "sister
institution" in Mexico, helping to enable "heritage rediscovery" in students of
Hispanic/Latino descent who have drifted from their cultural origins. These
activities will provide students with an appreciation for the international
scope of biology; provide opportunities for scientific networking; and create
awareness among students of Mexican descent of the rich scientific and cultural
achievements of their ancestral home. This project is funded by the Division of
Integrative Organismal Systems (Directorate for Biological Sciences) and the
Office of International Science and Engineering.