* 0942790
* CCLI:CREATE Cornerstone--Inspiring undergraduates to persist and succeed in the Biology major
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2013
* Sally Hoskins, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 06/30/2013
* USD 199,723.00

Biological Sciences (61) CREATE Cornerstone is a freshman-level adaptation of
the novel C.R.E.A.T.E. method (Consider, Read, Elucidate hypotheses, Analyze
data, and Think of the next Experiment; Hoskins et al, 2007). The CREATE
Cornerstone course is teaching freshmen the universal language of data analysis
through tools that build a foundation for persistence and success in science
majors by promoting development of transferable learning gains, while at the
same time changing misconceptions about who does science and why. In alignment
with recommendations of science reform documents, e.g. Bio 2010, CREATE
Cornerstone (a) models the intellectual activities of working scientists, (b)
guides students in learning how to learn biological information and (c) helps
students discover that science is a creative field open to people like
themselves.

Intellectual merit: CREATE Cornerstone is an adaptation of CREATE a multiply-
assessed pedagogical method demonstrated to bring about significant increases in
both understanding of, and interest in, biological research, among junior/senior
minority undergraduates. Previous work on CREATE has expanded the knowledge base
of undergraduate STEM educational practice by producing new knowledge about
minority student learning and by improving the practice of undergraduate science
teaching. Development of CREATE Cornerstone for freshman students is leading to
similar solutions with broad applicability for introductory level undergraduate
education. Results will be broadly disseminated through the CREATE Cornerstone
Teacher's Handbook being written during the grant period. The handbook is
designed to provide class activities grounded in educational research, to allow
best practices to be applied by teachers at multiple levels (graduate, college,
9-12) in diverse institutions to a diverse set of students.

Broader impacts: CREATE Cornerstone modules are designed to: foster development
of transferable learning skills applicable to courses requiring critical
analysis or interpretive ability; highlight the contributions of a diverse set
of scientists, both male and female and from a variety of backgrounds and
ethnicities; and provide all participants, whether or not they choose research
careers, with a deeper understanding of the scientific process and of how
science research efforts progress.