* 0942659
* VOSS: The Roles of Awareness and Social Networks in the Initiation and Sustenance of Research-Oriented Virtual Organizations
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Geraldine Gay, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Crowston
* 08/31/2013
* USD 185,567.00

The objective of this project is to understand the role of awareness in the
initiation and sustenance of research-oriented virtual organizations. Research-
oriented virtual organizations enable: 1) interaction between researchers with
diverse perspectives who might not otherwise work together; 2) the sharing of
expensive and scarce resources; and 3) novel ways of accomplishing tasks and
solving problems. Despite these advantages, one frequent problem encountered by
members of research-oriented virtual organizations is persistent difficulty in
communicating and coordinating with remote colleagues. One key reason for this
is that many research-oriented virtual organizations lack the capacity to
support effective awareness and interaction among their members as projects
progress.

This work builds on theories of social networks and transactive memory as well
as theories of interpersonal awareness in focusing on what we call ?awareness
networks? ? that is, networks of individuals who, at some level of detail, keep
track of each other. The work focuses on 3 key issues: 1) developing a novel
two-staged approach to awareness that bridges the current theoretical and
practical gap between the initiation of research-oriented virtual organizations
and sustained effective work; 2) developing an understanding of the roles of
network ties in interpersonal awareness that allow us to apply a network- and
relationship-based understanding of individuals to the larger problem of
designing tools to provide interpersonal awareness and expertise information in
research-oriented virtual organizations and communities; 3) extending
transactive memory theory to include multiple dimensions of awareness beyond
simple knowledge of expertise distribution.

This work will result in new theories and technologies that inform and enhance
our ability to support virtual organizations that address key challenges
confronting society. Prospective and current ROVO members will be better able to
locate each other, coordinate and collaborate toward successful joint outcomes.