* 0942447
* XRF as a Tool for Curricular Enhancement in Earth Systems and Environmental Chemistry
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Charles Taylor, Pomona College
* Standard Grant
* Peter Lea
* 08/31/2012
* USD 200,000.00

Geoscience (42) X-ray fluorescence is a primary analytical technique providing
accurate and precise analyses of major, minor, and some trace chemical
constituents of many materials. This project is enhancing the teaching and
research programs in Geology and Chemistry Departments at Pomona College by
creating a shared use wavelength-dispersive X-ray fluorescence laboratory that
enables students to perform quantitative compositional analyses on samples
ranging from 1 ppm to tens of percent. Intellectual Merit: This new instrument
is infusing new technology into the curricula of both departments as well as
other members of the Claremont Colleges (Harvey Mudd, Scripps, Pitzer, and
Claremont McKenna Colleges). In addition to gaining hands-on experience using an
industry standard analytical instrument, students are engaging with a variety of
applications, and thus career options, including analysis of geological samples
including soils and igneous, metamorphic, sedimentary rocks, metallurgical
samples such as steel and brass, archaeological samples, and environmental
aerosols. Pomona?s field-based research projects is able to combine GIS and XRF
data, overlaying composition with location in order to visualize changes in
composition across a location to aid in directing future research projects, such
as mapping contaminant plumes. Broader Impacts: The implementation of XRF
enhances undergraduate STEM learning and research experiences for students from
Pomona, Harvey Mudd, Scripps, Pitzer, and Claremont McKenna Colleges. A number
of uses of the XRF, such as investigations of contamination in soils, air
quality, and climate studies in the Los Angeles Basin and environs, enable
students to apply XRF data to solve real-world problems that serve the public
interest. Awareness of the value and importance of scientific training through
solving civic problems is at the heart of the Science Education for New Civic
Engagements and Responsibilities (SENCER) program. Some of the outcomes of this
project are being used as course design models and potentially cross-fertilizing
the SENCER program. Planned outreach and collaboration with other L.A. Basin
schools are fostering synergistic activities in facilitating teaching and
research collaboration between two XRF labs and six other geoscience departments
in the L.A. Basin, thereby reaching out to help train a large number of
underrepresented students in geoscience programs. The XRF also is being used by
students participating in Pomona College?s Academy for Youth Success (PAYS), a
summer research program for local high school students.