* 0942044
* From Cook Book to Exploration: Optimizing Learning Gains in Introductory Physics Laboratory Instruction
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2012
* Eric Mazur, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 06/30/2012
* USD 200,000.00

Traditional laboratory exercises are often intended to provide hands-on
experience in science to students, reinforce the rules and relationships
presented in lecture, and convey a sense that science is cool. Other potential
goals, such as clarifying the scientific method and improving student
understanding of measurement, error and assumptions, are poorly framed and
largely neglected during instruction. Even primary goals are not always made
clear, which frustrates students and promotes negative attitudes toward the
laboratory, or worse, science in general. This project is developing three
different instructional strategies for the laboratory component of an
introductory physics course: a strongly guided, content-focused strategy; a
question-driven, minimally guided strategy; and a question-driven, scientific
ability-focused strategy. Each of these strategies is being developed with
assessable student learning outcomes in mind, to ensure that we can evaluate the
success of each strategy. Formative assessment of student efforts to reach these
goals involves rubric-based evaluation of individual laboratories and
laboratory-focused examination questions. Summative assessment incorporates the
final exam, FCI or CSEM, and CLASS. This assessment is informing future
iterations of laboratory instruction and provides significant insight about
strategies for laboratory-based education in the science education community.

Broader impact: This project advances understanding on how different levels of
guidance in content and scientific abilities impact student learning,
epistemological beliefs, and laboratory skills. As laboratory instructors can
have very different goals for their courses, the project is assessing several
different outcomes to determine how instructors can design their laboratories to
match these goals. Furthermore, the project is gathering additional data on
student behavior in laboratories - through videotapes and interviews - that can
be used to structure laboratories and modify how students interact with each
other, the instructor, and the laboratory equipment. The quantitative and
qualitative data allow for extensive collaborations with other researchers and
can advance understanding on designing, implementing, and assessing
laboratories.

Intellectual Merit: The project is deeply embedded in current research in STEM
education. Recent research on student learning in the laboratory setting
suggests that the instructional strategy is crucially important. The STEM
community is just beginning to develop a cohesive framework for understanding
these factors, and this study plays a pivotal role in its development. The
laboratory component of an introductory science course is often the only
exposure that nonmajors get on what physicists do and how they think. Without
effective laboratory instruction, students may leave the course with unclear
views about science and be less knowledgeable consumers of scientific research
beyond the classroom. By helping instructors develop laboratories that not only
impact future scientists, but help develop the scientific content knowledge and
abilities of the general public, the project can lead to a more scientifically
literate society, able to make reasoned decisions involving scientific data.