* 0942721
* Collaborative Research: Increasing Conceptual Understanding through Annotation Visualization
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2013
* John Barr, Ithaca College
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 09/30/2013
* USD 32,680.00

Computer Science (31)

This project's goal is to conduct a large study involving more than 400 students
at two different institutions to study the relationship between conceptual
misunderstandings, code testing and development times.

Conceptual understanding is measured by engaging students in reading and
annotating documents that contain both accurate and erroneous concepts, and
measuring how many students detect the errors and how many iterations it takes
to detect all errors. This is then compared with code debugging times with the
expectation that the text engagement process will actually reduce the amount of
time spent on project tasks. The project establishes a scalable model of
Reading-Annotation-Visualization (RAV) that can be deployed in any of the early
programming courses. RAV model proceeds by pre-analyzing the important
conceptual challenges students will encounter in the programming phase and then
supporting the comprehension of these concepts prior to the programming phase
through annotation, visualization and classroom discussions.

This project assesses the potential of a participatory reading, discussion and
learning environment to improve the reading comprehension, writing, and
programming skills of computer science undergraduates. It contributes to the
understanding of the relationship between reading and discussion and programming
skills in computer science. The project results are disseminated via conference
proceedings. RAV model and Classroom Salon are shared with any other institution
willing to implement a classroom instruction model where understanding of
student misconceptions early in the learning process is critical to better
learning outcomes.