* 0942408
* Statistics Teaching Using Resampling and Randomization (STURR)
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2010,12/31/2011
* Robert delMas, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Ron Buckmire
* 12/31/2011
* USD 49,995.00

In recent years many statisticians have become involved in the reform movement
in statistical education aimed at improving the teaching and learning of
introductory statistics. While instructors are incorporating technology into
courses, it is primarily used to support outdated methods even though freely
accessible technology for teaching modern statistical approaches is available.
Many educators in the reform movement are embracing the power of technological
advances to promote statistical thinking through the teaching of statistical
computing, especially at the undergraduate level. In conjunction with the NSF-
funded Change Agents for Teaching And Learning STatistics (CATALST) curriculum
project, the Statistics Teaching Using Resampling and Randomization (STURR)
project makes some of these statistical computing approaches accessible to non-
statistics majors enrolled in general, non-calculus based introductory
statistics courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing software packages (such as
SPSS, Minitab, R, and Fathom) can be programmed to carry out modern
methodologies, but the knowledge and skills required to do so are often daunting
for most of the undergraduate students who enroll in an introductory statistics
course. The primary goal of the STURR project is to develop freely accessible
and easy to use tools that provide a Graphic User Interface (GUI) to the R
statistical computing environment. The incorporation of these "R Tools" into the
CATALST curriculum supports and builds students' conceptual understanding of
modern statistical methods, such as resampling and randomization, but without
requiring them to learn computer programming or develop other computational
skills needed to use R. In this project the research team fully develops and
tests the R Tools. They also make modifications and improvements to the tools,
and integrate them into the CATALST curriculum, resulting in a more effective
CATALST course. Videotaped think aloud interviews with individual students and
small groups working together on activities that use the R Tools, along with
videotaped class sessions, and results from assessments provides feedback for
modifying the R Tools.