* 0942282
* CCLI: The Geoscience Student Data Network:  A Cyberinfrastructure-Based Approach For Collaborative Classroom-, Field-, and Laboratory-Based Undergraduate Education
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2015
* Karin Block-Cora, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 06/30/2015
* USD 299,580.00

This project is developing a software application with social networking
capabilities known as the Geoscience Student Data Network (GSDNet) that is being
created in partnership with the National Geothermal Data System. GSDNet is
enabling students to work in a single cyberenvironment where they are
collaboratively and collectively contributing, accessing, manipulating, and
analyzing data. GSDNet is also facilitating classroom instruction related to
data management and modeling of earth processes via the integration of data
layers and student-peer collaborations. The tool is being tested within a
curriculum offered in parallel at City College of New York, a large minority-
serving urban institution, and Boise State University. The project is developing
three courses and supporting lab and field activities related to the applied
research theme of geothermal energy. The project is exposing students from both
institutions to field studies of geothermal systems and subsequently is
requiring the two student populations to exchange ideas, information and data
both in the field and in the classroom using the GDSNet cyberinfrastructure. The
project is testing the efficacy of this approach, and also is assessing whether
student communication skills involving writing and communication are improved
via the use of GSDNet. Moreover, the project is determining how students from
different socio-economic and cultural backgrounds interact in the field and via
the associated cyberinfrastructure. The field investigations are leading to
individual senior thesis or independent study projects that are resulting in
student research presentations at local and national conferences. The project is
employing an iterative formative evaluation that is helping to improve the
courses and the GSDNet in addition to a summative evaluation that is assessing
the short- and long-term impacts of the curriculum and associated cybertools on
student learning and performance. The PI and Senior Personnel are presenting the
results of the program at conferences and through peer-reviewed publications. In
addition, a series of webinar modules are being produced to raise awareness and
provide training on the use of the GSDNet to the larger geosciences community.
Summarily, the project focuses on developing and implementing cybertools and
curricula that are better preparing students from diverse backgrounds for
successful careers and graduate studies in the geosciences.