* 0942658
* VOSS: Supporting Interpersonal  Awareness in Multicultural Virtual Organizations
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Jeremy Birnholtz, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Crowston
* 08/31/2013
* USD 388,994.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The research objective of this award is to consider how
people manage their attention in multi-cultural collaborations between
geographically distributed individuals. ?Virtual organizations??aggregations of
individuals, facilities and resources that span geographic and institutional
boundaries?allow large numbers of people to collaborate across geographic,
temporal and cultural barriers to achieve important societal goals. Despite the
advantages of virtual organizations, it can be difficult for people to work
effectively together at a distance. Most virtual organizations include
communication tools, such as instant messaging, email, and even real time video
conferencing. But because virtual organization members lack awareness of who is
around and whether or not they are busy, they can?t use these tools effectively
to coordinate their work with colleagues.

This award considers the issue of managing attention in virtual organizations in
which people must collaborate with a culturally heterogeneous set of remote
partners. The work addresses three critical issues for the support of awareness
information in these organizations: 1) How do people assess others?
availability, and what cues to availability do they themselves wish to provide
others? 2) How can these processes be supported in awareness tools, both for
desktop use and for use in mobile environments? And 3) how can these processes
be supported in a way that tools will be accepted by the diverse membership of
global organizations? These questions are addressed through a combination of
tool development, survey and interview research, and controlled laboratory
studies.

This work builds on substantial research in the area of interpersonal awareness
and fostering informal interaction in geographically distributed groups and on
awareness and attention in distributed groups. The work provides four unique
contributions: (a) integrating empirical behavioral research with technology
design and implementation, such that technology and theory inform each other
directly; (b) understanding and harnessing culturally appropriate attentional
behaviors in distributed groups to enhance our understanding of human behavior;
(c) building and evaluating novel technologies for interaction in geographically
distributed groups; and (d) considering how awareness and attention tools can
meet the needs of a culturally diverse workforce. The work will lead to new
theories and tools that will improve collaboration in virtual organizations of
all types.