* 0942154
* Polyhedral Combinatorics and Algorithms for Stochastic Integer Programming
* NONE,NONE
* 05/16/2009,07/31/2011
* Yongpei Guan, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* michael fu
* 07/31/2011
* USD 124,517.00

This grant provides funding to study polyhedral combinatorics and algorithms for
stochastic integer programming (IP). During the last decade, stochastic IP has
received broad attention in the literature as an efficient tool for modeling and
solving real-time decision making problems with the consideration of uncertain
events. Meanwhile, stochastic IP incorporates both the complexity of integer
programming and stochastic linear programming, which makes it challenging to
solve large-scale problems. This research focuses on studying fundamental
structures of general stochastic IP and developing fast algorithms for the
solution of large-scale problems. The research work consists of 1) studying
strong valid inequalities and developing efficient branch-and-cut algorithms for
stochastic lot-sizing problems, 2) exploring polyhedral combinatorics for
general stochastic IP, and 3) identifying properties that would lead to fast
polynomial time and approximation algorithms for several special classes of
stochastic IP problems. Significant efforts will also be spent developing
teaching modules for integer programming and stochastic optimization.
Undergraduate and graduate students, emphasizing underrepresented groups, will
participate in the project.

If successful, the results of this research will lead to scientific methodology
innovations for stochastic IP. Polyhedral studies will contribute to the
development of improved commercial software for a wide range of stochastic IP
problems. The results may also be combined with decomposition algorithms and
optimization-based heuristics to improve modeling and computational capabilities
on large-scale practical problems. Examples include production planning,
manufacturing repair overhaul workforce scheduling, and facility location
problems. The research outcomes will finally provide content and methodologies
that can be incorporated into graduate level courses and can serve as the bases
for development of new courses.