* 0942438
* The Challenge of Change: Studying a Model for Transforming Courses, Instructors and Departments at a Research-extensive University
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2010,10/31/2013
* Sandra Laursen, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 10/31/2013
* USD 199,994.00

Research and Assessment (91) The proposed project is a mixed-methods study that
is collecting time-sensitive and critical data that document classroom, faculty
and departmental change that are part of the Science Education Initiative (SEI)
at the University of Colorado. It is exploring the extent and nature of the
changes made to date, and seeking to understand the processes by which these
have come about. The results from this study are illuminating the attitudinal
and cultural shifts necessary in individual faculty values and within
departments to bring about widespread adoption of classroom practices that
embody understanding of how students learn most effectively.

The study is exploring two research questions. First, what are the linkages
between individual faculty members' instructional practices and their belief
systems around teaching and learning, and what consequences do these have for
the extent and pace of uptake of research-based STEM educational approaches?
Second, what are the linkages between individual faculty members' belief
systems, and departmental and institutional structures and cultures that affect
the uptake of research-based STEM educational approaches?

The research design is using embedded case studies. Five departments are being
studied. Each represents a culture of faculty belief systems. Case studies can
increase understanding of complex social phenomena in a way that allows
investigators to retain the holistic and meaningful characteristics of processes
or events. Other social science methods, such as experiments, often separate a
phenomenon from its context in an attempt to control variables. Case studies,
however, investigate phenomena in their real-life context and are thus better
able to explain the social and cultural processes by which outcomes are
achieved.