* 0942131
* Enhancing Undergraduate Chemistry Education through Incorporation of Research-based Environmental Experiments
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2010,04/30/2013
* Anja Mueller, Central Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 04/30/2013
* USD 190,688.00

Chemistry (12)&lt;br/&gt;Stewardship of the watershed and sustainability of
natural resources requires training of students in the science of Environmental
Chemistry. This project incorporates authentic research-based laboratory
experiences that highlight environmental testing, watershed sustainability, and
current research topics into undergraduate chemistry courses. The goals of this
work are to 1) increase interest and skills of students in chemistry, 2)
increase real-world relevancy in general chemistry courses, 3) enhance two
outreach programs, one involving middle school children and one involving the
Saginaw Chippewa Tribal College, by incorporating environmental testing units
into their programs, 4) improve undergraduate environmental, chemical, and
toxicology research by additional instrumentation and training, 5) increase data
and information on environmental contaminants in the mid-Michigan area for the
community. In freshman and sophomore laboratories for chemistry majors as well
as non-majors and students preparing to be K-8 teachers, students are studying
environmental toxic entities in water and soil including: metal ions (mercury,
cadmium, lead, and chromium) and other contaminants (nitrates, nitrites,
phosphates, and dissolved oxygen). Implementation at two locations gives
students the opportunity to study sampling methodology and actually collect
samples directly at the Chippewa River close to the Central Michigan University
(CMU) main campus and at the CMU Beaver Island facility located several miles
off the western shore of Lake Michigan. The results of the analyses of local
rivers and soils are presented to the public by students, and harmful levels, if
found, are reported to the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality.
Undergraduate students also are part of a research project dealing with the use
of imprinted resins in wastewater remediation. The students' research experience
is enhanced by instrument refresher training to deepen their analytical
instrumentation knowledge. With that preparation the students are able to
concentrate on developing research ideas, implementing necessary experiments,
analyzing data, and ultimately presenting their results. The effects of the
curricular changes will be assessed by an evaluator external to the department.
The assessment will determine the efficacy and ease of implementation of the
enhanced laboratory procedures developed by the investigators, and their impacts
on student learning gains and interest in chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: The project expands the chemistry program at CMU by implementing selected
environmental analyses into the existing curricula and motivating student
interest in chemistry with self-designed and research-based laboratory
projects.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Each year this project directly impacts
about 1000 undergraduate students in chemistry at CMU, as well as 20 students at
the Saginaw Chippewa Tribal College, and approximately 40 gifted middle school
students. Community members are kept abreast of current data on environmental
contamination obtained by the students. Not only are the students participating
in research, but it is a research that is much needed in the mid-Michigan area
since this work provides a tool for monitoring 'hotspots ' that are not
currently being monitored due to financial strains on the State. By completing
the laboratory experiences and seeing real-life applications, students are
expected to expand their critical environmental awareness and motivate their
interest in chemistry.