* 0942400
* Sketched-Truss Recognition Tutoring System
* EHR,DUE
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2013
* Tracy Hammond, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 02/28/2013
* USD 199,769.00

Sketched-Truss Recognition Tutoring System&lt;br/&gt;Improved Student Learning
through Active Learning and Immediate Student
Feedback&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research (91) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is
designed to evaluate and refine a sketch recognition tutoring system for trusses
that enhances engineering learning by providing intelligent and immediate
feedback. Through a study of student learning and the revision of the software
based on the study's findings, this work provides a springboard for future
development of tutoring systems for a much wider array of engineering courses
including, but not limited to thermal sciences and a range of other mechanics-
based classes. The software actively engages the student while providing
guidance and develops a cognitive scaffold between concepts students understand
to deeper levels of learning. Most professors are aware of the importance of
open-ended problems for deepening learning and enhancing innovation skills.
Intellectual Merit: The STRAT (Sketched-Truss Recognition and Analysis Tool)
facilitates the incorporation of open-ended design problems into large
traditional classes. STRAT software is designed to provide a more efficient
means to teach engineers basic mechanics concepts thus allowing study time to be
more productive and additional material to be added to the curriculum. Users
draw diagrams as they would naturally and thus there is no steep learning curve
associated with this tool unlike tool palette or other CAD-based programs.
Furthermore, very minimal hardware is required; a standard computer and mouse is
adequate. The project has two goals. The first goal is to measure the effects on
student learning of the STRAT software through both quantitative and qualitative
methods. The second goal of the project is to refine and improve the STRAT
software based on experimental data, customer needs collected from students and
professors, and on user feedback. To increase external validity and utility,
STRAT is being tested in a classroom setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact: The STRAT software has the potential to profoundly increase student
learning and the efficiency of the instructional process. The STRAT tool can be
used at a variety of institutions of higher learning ranging from small
classrooms at teaching focused schools to public research focused universities
with very large classrooms. Visual aids are common in civil and mechanical
engineering but active sketching and feedback provides additional benefits.
Providing immediate feedback improves learning by eliminating the possibility of
reinforcing inaccurate assumptions produced by the learner. The sketch tool also
encourages users to actively process the information instead of passively
viewing visual representations. The task of free-sketching encourages and
demands, that learners actively construct their knowledge leading to higher
levels of comprehension and longer term learning. This approach to learning is
also particularly suited for the sciences as it encourages the creation of new
knowledge rather than the memorization of previously established information.
Furthermore, there are plans for the STRAT software to be freely available on a
website and results broadly disseminated through conferences and journals.