* 0942720
* The Brooklyn Waterfront 2050
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2014
* Peter Spellane, CUNY New York City College of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 09/30/2014
* USD 199,559.00

99 New York City College of Technology, City Tech, is using its downtown
Brooklyn New York setting at the base of the Brooklyn Bridge as an
interdisciplinary laboratory for first year students. The project, Brooklyn
Waterfront 2050 is using the unique setting of the Brooklyn waterfront and its
history shaped by 19th and 20th century industrial production, factories,
chemical plants, wharves and shipyards of the once vibrant port to examine the
legacy of environmental degradation and the challenges posed by modern climate
change. City Tech faculty, together with faculty from the Urban Design Lab at
the Earth Institute of Columbia University, develop engaging course curriculum
to help students scientifically contextualize critically examine public issues
in environmental remediation design. The project uses the integrated tools of
multiple disciplines--biology, chemistry, physics, mathematics, engineering and
architecture--to explore important questions about the impact of climate change
on port cities. The Brooklyn waterfront is used by students as a live text and
work with real-time data. This urban field work has the potential to contribute
to many different research questions such as local variations in urban heat
island intensity and impacts of heat islands on local precipitation. Columbia
University faculty facilitate City Tech's faculty development seminars through
presentation of their research on core topics and respond to curriculum units
created by City Tech faculty. Faculty Professional Development seminars are open
to all City Tech faculty so both the information and the approach to pedagogy
impact the college beyond the development of one course. An expanding circle of
students are taking the course and subsequently more underrepresented students
are being exposed to career options in STEM fields. The course adds depth to the
dialogue on climate change and urban sustainability.