* 0942298
* CCLI: Scaling Up Undergraduate Research Experience through Student-led Class-wide Projects in an Introductory Materials Science
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2010,03/31/2015
* Jeffrey Froyd, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Amy Chan Hilton
* 03/31/2015
* USD 197,871.00

Engineering - Materials Science (57)&lt;br/&gt;This project is modifying a
sophomore level introductory materials science course to enable every student in
the class to benefit from a one-semester undergraduate research experience. The
key premise of the project is that by using modern pedagogies and team-based
research projects a scalable and sustainable model can be developed for
universal undergraduate research experiences that does not require one-on-one
mentoring. By implementing this approach during the sophomore year, the project
also seeks to improve engineering student retention. The specific objectives of
the course reform are to (1) to improve the learning process in an introductory
materials science course by emphasizing active learning pedagogies, (2) to allow
the development of scientific reasoning skills and to provide students with
direct experience in the scientific process, and (3) to increase the interest of
sophomore undergraduate students in science/engineering and materials science.
The project includes rigorous formative and summative evaluation plans with both
qualitative and quantitative components coordinated by an independent evaluator.
The evaluation plan includes an advisory board consisting of representatives
from seven institutions that are interested in adopting the revised course
materials and pedagogical approach. The project's results are being disseminated
through conferences and journal publications and through professional societies.