* 0942789
* Developing and Assessing Process Skills in Conservation Biology and Other Integrative Fields
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2016
* Nora Bynum, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 08/31/2016
* USD 212,681.00

Biological Sciences (61) Research and Assessment (91) This project is a
combination of educational materials development and research & assessment in
conservation biology. It is building on two prior DUE grants that have developed
several dozen modules in conservation biology. A major focus of this project is
the development of assessment tools to determine whether students in this field
are learning "higher-level" thinking skills as well as the process skills needed
to operate professionally. Conservation biology requires higher-level thinking
skills because the problems and issues are integrated, complex, and require
abilities to make connections, predict and test models, and synthesize
information. Prominent conservation practitioners and academics have noted a
persistent disconnect between most current academic preparation and the
knowledge and skills actually needed in the professional world.

There have been efforts to address the development of professional and process
skills in higher education in a wide variety of disciplines; these efforts have
ranged from the description of desired competencies to efforts to fostering
skill development, e.g. by implementing active or learner-centered teaching
methods. Few projects or initiatives have attempted to systematically evaluate
the development of process skills in their students, or have assessed the
possible effects of different teaching methods on the development of these
skills.

This project is supporting a team of faculty to explore how to effectively
develop the teaching of process and professional skills in conservation biology,
and to evaluate the development of these skills in students. The project plans
to pilot developed teaching and assessment materials in diverse classroom
settings. Although the project is managed by the American Museum of Natural
History, it is supporting participants from a diverse group of 20 institutions.