* 0942397
* PeerWise: Students Creating, Sharing, and Evaluating their own Exam Questions
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2009,02/28/2014
* Elizabeth Simon, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Jane Prey
* 02/28/2014
* USD 247,090.00

Computer Science (31) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students' learning is often assessed
through exam questions - but can students learn by creating their own "exam
questions" and practicing on questions created by their peers? This project
investigates the benefits offered by PeerWise, a collaborative web-based tool
for developing students' learning through a shared repository of course-
specific, student-generated multiple choice questions. In a course using
PeerWise, students regularly reflect asking themselves, "What is it I really
need to know from this week's material? How might the professor test me on
this?" They then construct and submit a multiple choice-style question on the
PeerWise website, creating appropriate distracter answers, writing an
explanation in their own words, and tagging the question with relevant topic
terms. They also "practice" by taking questions submitted by other students.
After answering a question, students can see how their peers answered the
question (e.g. 25% said A), rate that question, and write a comment on it that
is visible to the author of the question and their
peers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores the potential of PeerWise in
18 computer science classes with 9 different instructors, impacting
approximately 900 students at multiple institutions. Three key issues drive an
interest in studying PeerWise use in computing courses: (1)A preliminary study
in a CS1 course at the University of Auckland has shown a positive correlation
between final exam score and activity level on the PeerWise system; (2)PeerWise
supports a student-centered learning environment; and (3) Adoption of PeerWise
places little burden on the course instructor, and yet creates and supports
content that is closely aligned to course-specific learning
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through the process of question writing, students
are actively engaged in meta-cognitive activities (considering what they know,
or need to know) and, through explanation writing targeted at their peers, a
form of tutoring. By answering the questions written by their peers, students
can perform self-assessment and can engage in peer review - in rating and
commenting on peers' questions.