* 0942583
* CCLI: Establishing a Microarray Teaching and Learning Center in the Shenandoah Valley in Support of Science Education
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2010,08/31/2013
* Ronald Kander, James Madison University
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 08/31/2013
* USD 249,211.00

(Biological Sciences 61)&lt;br/&gt;James Madison University (JMU) is
establishing a regional microarray teaching and learning center to support
curricular innovations at a consortium of regional colleges in the Shenandoah
Valley. The equipment at the center includes a recently purchased microarray
reader and an inkjet oligoarray synthesizer and microarrayer which is being
built and maintained by students in JMU's engineering program. Over 150 students
per year in biology and bioinformatics courses at 3 four year colleges
(Bridgewater College, Eastern Mennonite University, and JMU) and 2 community
colleges (Blue Ridge and Virginia Western Community Colleges) are using the
equipment in inquiry-based, research-oriented classes. These students include
science and education majors and students in general education classes. In
addition the consortium is beginning to include local high schools (Roanoke and
Shenandoah Valley Governor's Schools, Stuart Hall School and Huguenot High
School) and teachers in its efforts through: summer workshops designed to
familiarize the teachers with the equipment; utilization of the teacher's
expertise in design of high school courses to assist in developing teaching,
learning, and assessment materials for future workshops and to be disseminated
via a website; and involving the high school students and teachers in hands on
research experiences. An annual symposium brings a genomics or proteomics expert
to the Shenandoah Valley to provide a forum for consortium members to meet,
share experiences, and celebrate accomplishments. The project is making use of
facilities and resources made available through a Howard Hughes Medical
Institute supported genomics course, the presence of SRI International in
Harrisonburg and coordination with the Genomic Center for Active Teaching on the
Davidson College campus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The microarray
teaching and learning center is creating a number of research-based and inquiry-
based laboratory experiences for undergraduates. The knowledge base in several
sub-fields of biology, including host/parasite interactions, immunological
responses to stimulae, toxic effects on gene expression in bacteria, comparative
genomics of bacteriophage, and others, is being enriched through these
activities. Approximately twenty undergraduate science faculty are participating
in intensive technological and educational training experiences. A better
understanding of how sophisticated technology impacts teaching and learning in
science is emerging through the project's assessment and evaluation
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Teaching and learning materials
are being made available through a freely accessible consortium website. The
center is increasing the technical expertise, equipment, and networking
available for undergraduate research and education efforts and is providing
modern facilities and infrastructure for several regional institutions. The
project brings together students in biology, computer science, and engineering
courses to promote understanding of multidisciplinary approaches to research and
education in the sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being co-funded
by the Discovery Research K-12 program of the Division of Research on Learning
in Formal and Informal Settings