* 0942099
* Collaborative Research:   Building Global Climate Change Literacy through Analogical Reasoning
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2013
* Dedre Gentner, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Finger
* 06/30/2013
* USD 93,494.00

Earth Systems Science (40)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is creating new
learning materials and strategies to foster the ability of students to reason by
analogy about global climate change and is assessing student ability to use
analogies to make and evaluate claims about global climate change. The PIs are
testing the hypothesis that we can dramatically improve the climate change
literacy of non-science majors through explicit instruction about analogical
reasoning in a general education-science course that focuses on Global Change.
The project is focusing on analogical reasoning because 1) analogical reasoning
is central in higher-level learning, 2) scientists routinely use analogies to
generate hypotheses and to solve research problems, and 3) scientists commonly
use analogies to convey information about complex systems responsible for global
climate change. The PIs are testing their hypothesis using matched experimental
and control classes taught by the same instructor. They are assessing the
ability of students to generate causal explanations of processes that drive
global change through a mixed methods approach. The PIs are developing new
instructional materials and assessment instruments based on the understanding of
analogical reasoning by cognitive scientists. In particular, the PIs are helping
students to understand analogies and are also improving their analogical
reasoning by focusing on five dimensions of analogical reasoning suggested by
decades of research: retrieval, mapping, evaluation, abstraction and re-
representation. By analyzing the efficacy of their approach, the PIs are
developing a new, detailed model of how best to teach analogical reasoning
specifically within the context of improving climate change literacy.