* 0942570
* Development of an Interdisciplinary Course, Chemical Analysis in Chemical Ecology
* EDU,DUE
* 12/01/2010,11/30/2014
* Thomas Arnold, Dickinson College
* Standard Grant
* David Brown
* 11/30/2014
* USD 199,903.00

Intellectual merit &lt;br/&gt;Global warming. Overpopulation. Renewable energy.
National security. Access to clean water. Targeted therapeutics. The grand
global challenges facing the 21st century world are complex and necessitate the
creation of new educational models for training undergraduate scientists. To
better prepare students to meet these challenges requires educators to radically
re-think and restructure the way students experience the process of science in
the laboratory. Current models no longer serve students well because they ignore
fundamental realities of how science is conducted beyond the campus walls: in
collaborative research teams comprised of scientists who bring multiple fields
of expertise to the issues at hand. Student learning should no longer be
artificially compartmentalized within disciplinary boundaries without providing
students an opportunity to experience a more authentic model of the process of
science early in their educational careers. To address this need, an upper-level
interdisciplinary laboratory course entitled "Chemical Analysis in Chemical
Ecology" is being created. The course is team taught by an analytical chemist
from the Chemistry Department and a chemical ecologist from the Biology
Department. The course enrolls 24 students per semester (12 registered through
the chemistry department and 12 through the biology department) who work
together in research teams of six students (3 biologists/3 chemists) each. The
teams learn a set of common analytical techniques to investigate four current
research questions in chemical ecology, culminating in the application of this
knowledge to an original research question utilizing these techniques.
&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact &lt;br/&gt;A guiding principle in the development of
the course is the recognition that undergraduate scientists need authentic
research experiences early in their undergraduate careers to help develop the
critical-thinking skills needed to solve the world's most pressing problems.
Furthermore, the course is expected to: 1) generate excitement for science and
its relevance in students' lives; 2) provide students with realistic research
experiences involving collaborative team-based problem solving approaches; 3)
help students to develop confidence in the hands-on use of state-of-the-art HPLC
instrumentation; 4) provide opportunities to cross disciplinary boundaries in
seeking more complete answers to scientific questions; and 5) provide
opportunities for students to clearly communicate their results to diverse
audiences. The outcomes of this interdisciplinary course will be presented at
two conferences. One, the annual meeting of the International Society for
Chemical Ecology (ISCE), will introduce scientists in the field of chemical
ecology to these efforts. The second, the Biennial Conference on Chemical
Education, will disseminate the results to chemists familiar with new
initiatives in undergraduate education.