* 0942715
* Virtual Ecological Inquiry (VEI) - A Virtual Environment for Inquiry-based Learning and Research
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2014
* Jane Schielack, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 03/31/2014
* USD 199,950.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is developing and testing a virtual learning
environment for use in undergraduate ecology courses. Built upon prior NSF-
supported research, the Virtual Ecological Inquiry (VEI) environment promotes
inquiry-based learning in ecology classes to enhance student conceptual
knowledge related to the control of physical environment and biotic interactions
on the distribution of organisms. VEI consists of three modules that provide
general ecological information, a virtual tour of Wolong Nature Reserve of
western China, and a web-based field investigations component that lets students
perform virtual field sampling, data analysis, and interpretation of the
results. Each module contains imbedded assessment units for user self-
assessment, peer assessment/feedback, and non-obtrusive observations of learning
behavior. By evaluating the effectiveness and impacts of IT- and inquiry-based
methods in ecological education, the project team seeks to contribute to the
existing undergraduate STEM education knowledge base and explore how and why
virtual learning environments benefit students' learning and attitudes. The
research findings will be disseminated through presentations, workshops,
publications in scientific and education journals, and will serve as a template
for virtual learning environments in other scientific disciplines.