* 0942943
* Inquiry-Based Integrated Natural Sciences for Pre-Service Elementary Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/2011,12/31/2013
* Sacha Kopp, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 12/31/2013
* USD 172,685.00

Interdisciplinary (99)&lt;br/&gt;This project is continuing to develop a
4-semester inquiry-based integrated natural science curriculum for all pre-
service elementary education majors at the University of Texas. It is supporting
the remaining development of that curriculum, focusing on astronomy and earth
climate. This 4-semester model has built on existing models of integrated
natural science content courses and, as such, represents a refinement of past
models. The curriculum is purposefully interdisciplinary and provides a special
emphasis on making connections between the disciplines by using common
vocabulary, evidence supported reasoning, and scientific laws while studying the
phenomena of the natural world. A stand-out feature of this refinement is the
extensive use of formative assessment. The curriculum includes frequent testing
of the pre-service students' mastery of content. It also includes frequent
testing of their self-efficacy in conducting scientific experiments or hands-on
activities with K-12 students. This testing is guided by current research on
using formative assessment during inquiry activities and aims to teach pre-
service teachers how to use formative assessment in their classrooms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is also supporting faculty training to
prepare instructors for offering the necessary multiple sections of these
inquiry-based courses. The new curriculum uses the guided inquiry method as the
primary form of instruction. This is a teaching approach not frequently employed
in service courses at large universities. Nevertheless, hands-on, inquiry-based
instruction is the model that should ultimately be employed by in-service
teachers. This curriculum will initially serve 400 pre-service elementary
teachers at the University of Texas each year.