* 0942290
* Class Generated Community Clicker Cases:  testing a novel pedagogic approach connecting science and non-major students in large introductory biology classes
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2015
* Tamar Goulet, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* julio soto
* 12/31/2015
* USD 199,674.00

(Biological Sciences 61) The use of clickers, particularly in large introductory
courses, is becoming increasingly promising as a means of stimulating class
discussions and encouraging participation by all students. This project is
developing and testing the efficacy of a novel pedagogic alternative, Class
Generated Community Clicker Cases (CGCCC), to lecturing in a large introductory
biology course. A minimum of 1540 students, in 14 sections, are being involved
in development and evaluation of this technique that has been successfully pilot
tested by the Principle Investigator.

Before the start day for class discussion of a topic, students are given a one-
page faculty generated questionnaire relevant to it. The students are told to
use the questionnaire to interview a real person and write down the verbal
answers as they hear them, in the tone of the interviewee. During the next class
period, students use clickers to report interview responses. The class results
are displayed in histograms immediately after the question is asked. Students
then read about the topic in their textbook and, in the next class period,
utilizing the clickers, they take a quiz to determine their knowledge of the
topic covered and their understanding of the concepts within it. The course is
constructed so that interview data analysis days alternate with days devoted to
discussion and explanation of chapter content and concepts. Ultimately students
are challenged to reveal what misconceptions their interviewee had about the
topic and, in the penultimate assignment about a specific topic, they return to
their interviewee and discuss with them one of the interview questions and share
one aspect of the course content. The students then hand-in a brief statement on
how the interviewee responded to their discussion.

The effectiveness of CGCCC versus lecturing will be assessed using four
indicators, two assessing student knowledge of biology, and two assessing
students opinion of the course: students' factual knowledge; students' ability
to assimilate and apply the learned information; rates of student attendance in
the class; and self-reported student satisfaction with the course.

Intellectual merit: The intellectual merit stems from: the improvement of a core
curriculum course; the production of an entire syllabus that can be used by or
serve as a model for other institutions and, the potential for the data
generated by these studies to address faculty concerns about the use of non-
lecture alternative methods for teaching large introductory science classes.

Broader impacts: The broader impacts stem from: the training and mentorship of
graduate students to be educators as well as scientists; the regional workshops
for faculty from a variety of academic settings; and the journal publications
and conference presentations being produced.