* 0942646
* EAGER:  An Empirical Exploration of Contemplative Multitasking
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2009,12/31/2012
* Jacob Wobbrock, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 12/31/2012
* USD 143,872.00

While personal computers, the Internet, cell phones and other information
services and technologies are unquestionably powerful resources for
communication and for information access, there is growing concern that the
widespread use of these tools may be negatively affecting individuals, groups,
and even society as a whole. The press is filled with articles on information
overload, multitasking, fragmented attention, and the accelerating pace of life.
And there is a growing body of scientific literature that bears on these issues,
demonstrating in particular that multitasking degrades human performance. New
technologies are sometimes suggested as a way to alleviate the problem. This
study explores a different but complementary approach: training users through
meditation to work more effectively and less stressfully with existing
information technologies. The PI will offer people training in meditation and
then test their ability to perform a set of time-limited information-intensive
tasks. While prior studies of the efficacy of meditation have provided
experimental evidence that such training helps people maintain focus and reduce
interference resulting from distraction, no one has yet attempted to demonstrate
such effects specifically in relation to the use of information technology. The
PI's goal in this study is to do just this. Human resources personnel in San
Francisco and Seattle will be recruited to attend eight weeks of training in
either meditation or relaxation. Participants will be given a test of their
multitasking abilities (involving the use of e-mail, instant messaging, phones,
and face-to-face conversation in an office-like setting) both before and after
the training, and their performance will be evaluated along four dimensions:
accuracy; time to completion; satisfaction and well-being; and memory for the
task. Project outcomes will thus make a contribution both to the growing body of
scientific literature demonstrating that multitasking degrades human
performance, as well as to the largely separate literature demonstrating that
meditation training can help people maintain focus and reduce interference
resulting from distraction, and will serve as a bridge between them.

Broader Impacts: There is growing evidence that rampant multitasking and
accelerated modes of working can result in health problems and diminished
effectiveness. If it can be demonstrated that meditation training diminishes
some of these negative effects, then the door will be open to creating
ameliorative training for both students and adult workers.