* 0942680
* Collaborative Research: Portable Cyber-Laboratories:  Virtual Instruments and Affordable Prototyping Kits to Enhance Learning and Improve Access to Electrical Engineering Education
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2010,08/31/2012
* Jianchu Yao, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Finger
* 08/31/2012
* USD 88,100.00

Engineering - Electrical (55)

This project, a collaborative effort between Kansas State University and East
Carolina University, is developing mobile hands-on learning experiences for
electrical engineering concepts and formally assessing whether laboratories
performed at home are effective supplements for traditional lecture and
laboratory based courses. The portable laboratory is based on innovative virtual
instruments on laptop and handheld computers interacting with custom, low-cost
prototyping kits integrated with plug-and-play data acquisition units. The
project team is developing an affordable, portable circuit prototyping
capability, creating laboratory experiences (hands-on protocols and software
interfaces) that enable students to use the kits in their preferred environment,
developing lecture demonstrations with these prototyping kits, and integrating
these lecture and laboratory modules into existing courses. The evaluation
effort, which is being led by an independent consultant, is monitoring
cognitive, affective, and psychomotor changes using surveys, concept
inventories, performance on the FFundamentals in Engineering Exam, and direct
observation in the laboratory. Project materials and results are being
disseminated through website postings, conference presentations, and journal
publications and through connections with National Instruments. Broader impacts
include the dissemination of the materials and pedagogy, the potential of
providing laboratory experiences outside of the laboratory, and the
investigators' involvement in a special outreach program for junior high school
girls.