* 0942179
* REMOTE ACCESS ENVIRONMENTS FOR UNDERGRADUATE COMPUTER ENGINEERING LABORATORIES
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2012
* Jafar Saniie, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Don Millard
* 12/31/2012
* USD 99,996.00

Computer Engineering (32)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is providing remote
access capability for undergraduate computer engineering laboratories where
cyber-enabled and hands-on laboratory environments are being created.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three computer engineering undergraduate teaching
laboratories are accessible remotely. To enable the transformation of the
laboratory experiments into cyber-enabled status the PIs have designed custom
hardware interfaces based on programmable logic devices (FPGA units). These
custom interfaces provide network functionality to the devices employed in the
experiments and to the instrumentation devices such as oscilloscopes, logic
analyzers and routers in order to facilitate remote access. Equipped with these
new interfaces/faceplates, such devices have been configured by sending commands
to the Internet address of the device. The server/client software component is
focusing on intuitive user interface development for remote experiments and also
facilitates integration of teleconferencing between remote students and the lab
instructor and/or teaching assistant for live interaction.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This remote lab facility is helping to attract a large
undergraduate student body in computer engineering laboratories and coursework.
Apart from providing the capability to allow the remote students to take
laboratory based courses in the computer engineering program, this project
represents the basis of laboratory transformations within other disciplines and
even other undergraduate degree granting institutions.&lt;br/&gt;