* 0942977
* A Novel  Applied Quantum Mechanics Course Aligned with the Electrical Engineering Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Benjamin Flores, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Susan Finger
* 08/31/2012
* USD 193,520.00

Engineering - Electrical (55)

The project is developing and implementing a novel junior level Applied Quantum
Mechanics Course for Electrical Engineers that fits in the standard Electrical
and Computer Engineering curriculum. The proposed course aligns quantum
mechanics with existing courses on electromagnetic field theory and electronic
devices in order to connect related wave behavior and quantum theory between the
three courses. This combination is providing a more cohesive background in these
areas and allowing extended coverage in upper division solid state device
courses. The new course is using a spiral teaching model to incorporate
fundamental quantum concepts into applied scientific and engineering case
studies that are relevant to electrical engineering. It also is using computer
simulation tools to provide visualization of both fundamental and applied
quantum concepts and a peer led team learning (PLTL) model to facilitate
learning and to motivate students to become active learners. Course materials
are being developed in conjunction with the NSF funded Network for Computational
Nanotechnology (NCN) to be incorporated into the NanoHUB website. Assessment
efforts are being led by two independent evaluators with one measuring progress
toward project goals and the other conducting exploratory research and
evaluation on conative (motivation and volition) functions in learning and
performing in relation to course goals. The project team is disseminating their
materials and evaluation results through website posting, faculty workshops with
the University of Texas System's LSAMP, special programs with an alliance for
minority serving institutions, conference presentation, and journal
publications. Broader impacts include the dissemination of their material with a
special focus on minority serving institutions.