* 0942140
* Collaborative Research: Portable, Modular, Modern Technology Infused Courseware for Broader Embedded System Education
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2010,02/28/2013
* Xiaolin Hu, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jane Prey
* 02/28/2013
* USD 73,695.00

Computing-Others (35)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Embedded systems play more and more
important roles in all aspects of our society. The rapid growth of embedded
systems has resulted in a shortage of professionals for embedded software
development. This project is creating a new model of embedded systems education
with the following emphasis: (1) Portable and affordable. The developed
courseware is providing portable real labs based on a popular microcomputer unit
development kit that is expandable and affordable. This removes the barrier of
setting up high cost embedded systems labs; (2) Modular and flexible. The
courseware and projects that are being developed are modular and have multiple
learning levels. The modular design gives instructors the flexibility to adopt
the full course or integrate selected modules based on their specific needs. The
proposed modules and projects are infusing modern technology of embedded
software to promote students' creativity and to inspire life-long learning.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This courseware is delivered in an integrated package
including a supporting textbook bundled with a portable embedded system
development kit. The courseware is providing a "ready-to-adopt" model and
greatly saves resources and time for broadening embedded systems education to
meet emerging workforce and education needs in science, technology, and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The portable and modular design of this new
courseware is benefiting a wide range of universities and colleges that have a
for need of embedded systems education but are hindered by limited financial
budget, lab facilities, and scarce dedicated staff and faculty. This project
includes an academic community that has eight institutions from five states.