* 0942835
* Development of a Robust, High Speed, Underwater Optical Communications System for Ocean Science
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Norman Farr, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2014
* USD 2,523,471.00

Communication underwater is severely limited when compared to communications in
air because water is essentially opaque to electromagnetic radiation except in
the visible band. Even in the visible band, light penetrates only a few hundred
meters in the clearest waters and much less in waters made turbid by suspended
sediment or high concentrations of marine life. Consequently, acoustic
techniques have been developed for underwater communication systems and now
represent a relatively mature and robust technology. Acoustic systems, however,
offer limited data rates and significant latency (due to the speed of sound in
water). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI?s request funding to complete the
development of an optical communication system that complements existing
acoustic systems resulting in an underwater communications capability offering
high data rates and low latency in clear water combined with long range and
robustness in the presence of high turbidity. This combination of capabilities
will make it possible to operate self-powered ROVs from support vessels without
requiring a physical connection to the ROV. This in turn will simplify
operations, reduce costs and reduce the requirement for dynamically positioned
vessels. In addition, it will be possible to transfer large data files from
fixed sensors using AUVs (or ROVs) as data mules, to transfer real-time video
from untethered vehicles for inspection, identification and other related
operations, and to provide interconnectivity for dense arrays of underwater
sensors without the need for expensive and difficult to install undersea cables.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High rate optical
modems will be an important adjunct to cabled observatories and acoustic
networks. New sensing applications for ROVs will be enabled with video streaming
capability. Existing outreach programs to K-12 at WHOI will be leveraged to
include the new optical modem development. Reliable, high speed wireless
communication is an extremely important "missing link" in underwater research. A
good solution to this problem will have wide-reaching impacts on the use of
AUVs, sensor networks or wirelessly controlled ROVs in oceanography, will make
the deployment of vehicles easier and lower risk, and open up new
possibilities.&lt;br/&gt;