* 0942215
* Guided Group Activities To Enhance Ways of Learning in Biology:  GATEWAY Learning in Biology
* EHR,DUE
* 03/15/2010,02/28/2013
* Alison Crowe, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 02/28/2013
* USD 199,834.00

Biological Sciences 61

The Guided Group Activities To Enhance Ways of Learning in Biology (GATEWAY
Learning in Biology) project is testing the efficiency of GATEWAY activities--
in-class, pencil-and-paper exercises done by small groups in a large lecture
setting--designed to increase student understanding of three particularly
important and difficult challenges for students in introductory biology:
understanding the processes of evolution; developing the ability to interpret
phylogenetic trees; and appreciating the principles of experimental design.
These concepts are fundamental but are particularly susceptible to
misconceptions and present well-defined teaching problems.

Intellectual Merit The work is one of the first examples of "2nd-generation"
research in STEM education, where investigators test alternative active learning
exercises instead of comparing active-learning to passive-learning approaches.
The alternative small-group approaches being compared in the large lecture
setting are guided, in-class activities to be completed by groups of 3-4
students. The GATEWAY exercises are being added to a large-enrollment course at
the University of Washington (UW) that has already implemented such innovations
as peer Teaching Assistants, weekly practice exams, automated response systems
(clickers), and inquiry-based labs, but not extensive small-group work. The
guided activities are also being tested in a small lecture class at a 2-year
community college to ascertain their effectiveness in classes with a different
student population, class size, and institutional setting. Involvement of
numerous undergraduates in conducting the research is: (1) providing a conduit
for student feedback on the design of the in-class activities; (2) exposing
students to STEM education research early in their careers; and (3) providing
insight into students' thought processes that lead to misconceptions of key
concepts in biology.

Broader Impact The GATEWAY activities developed and tested in this research have
the potential to impact the approximately 300,000 students who take introductory
biology in the U.S. each year. The use of graduate students as research
assistants and undergraduates as research advisors for this study helps broaden
the base of young professionals with experience in STEM education research and
contributes to the development of a growing and vibrant national STEM education
research network.

This project is being co-funded by funds from the Directorate for Biological
Sciences, Emerging Frontiers Division.