* 0942047
* Guiding General Chemistry Laboratory Toward a Green Revolution:  An Inquiry Approach
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2012
* Will Lynch, ARMSTRONG STATE UNIVERSITY
* Standard Grant
* David Brown
* 12/31/2012
* USD 192,595.00

Chemistry (12) This grant provides two years of funding to allow the Department
of Chemistry and Physics at Armstrong Atlantic State University to infuse guided
inquiry green chemistry experiments to spur student interest in and commitment
to chemistry. The involved faculty and staff are developing a series of guided
inquiry modules, which are based on the 12 Principles of Green Chemistry and
environmental sustainability, into the general chemistry laboratory.
Traditionally, general chemistry laboratories have been modeled after "cookbook"
type activities that enable high throughput of students but limit the amount of
discovery and inquiry that are fundamental to science. The standard four week
guided inquiry modules are being investigated in groups to promote collaborative
student work and include projects with a green chemistry theme. These topics
include ore refinement, soil analysis, water pollution, green synthesis of
nanoparticles, biodiesel, acid rain, air pollution, and fuel cells, each of
which illustrate one or more of the major theoretical aspects of general
chemistry such as stoichiometry, gas laws, equilibrium, kinetics,
thermodynamics, electrochemistry, and acid/base chemistry. The overarching goal
of the transformative project is sharing the excitement of chemistry with
students to favorably affect the recruiting and retaining of students in
chemistry. The experience is equipping students with greater critical thinking
skills to better prepare them for future coursework and lifelong learning. The
general chemistry sequence impacts the greatest number of students across the
disciplines of science and is creating a community of green scholars. The two
semester inquiry experience culminates in an environmentally related green
chemistry research experience for every student enrolled. The adaptation and
results are being shared with educators for implementation in their classrooms
through internet based resources.