* 0942089
* Team Science
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2013
* Tracy Knowles, Kentucky Community & Technical College System
* Standard Grant
* David Brown
* 05/31/2013
* USD 195,472.00

Chemistry (12)&lt;br/&gt;Bluegrass Community and Technical College (BCTC) is
implementing the Team Science project to increase student success in "gateway"
chemistry and biology courses through the use of team-based learning, an
instructional strategy that uses theoretically based and empirically grounded
strategies for utilizing small groups to improve the learning process. The goals
of the project are to positively impact the instructional culture by
incorporating team-based learning concepts in the science curriculum, and to
positively impact student learning outcomes in selected chemistry and biology
courses. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A cohort of full-time faculty members is
participating in training, modifying curriculum, teaching redesigned courses,
and mentoring other faculty members. Faculty training is led by two experts in
the field of team-based learning. Adjunct faculty members are being trained in
the second year of the project and are participating in the implementation of
redesigned courses.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit is realized through
the effective use of team-based learning that requires a significant change in
the role and function of both the instructor and the student. Cyberlearning
plays an integral role through the use of tablet PCs and DyKnow software to
facilitate team activities and interaction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact
is achieved through the involvement of adjunct faculty in all phases of the
project, recognizing the increasing role of adjunct instructors in STEM
education. The evaluation and dissemination activities are validating the
effectiveness of team-based learning in a community college setting.