* 0942366
* Transforming a Civil Engineering Curriculum through GIS Integration
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2013
* Charles Camp, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Susan Finger
* 06/30/2013
* USD 199,350.00

The goal of the project is to integrate a GIS-enabled design approach across a
sequence of six required civil engineering courses. A collaborative development
model is ensuring that curricular links between the courses are explicit and
that a clear path for student skills progression in terms of technical
competency, data synthesis and analysis, and problem solving is articulated in
the developed materials. Through the use of these materials, students are
developing an improved ability to analyze engineering problems in multiple
contexts using a GIS platform. Furthermore, the project is leading to a new
curriculum infusion model for critical cross-disciplinary topics and a
sustainable curriculum transformation. It is also contributing to the body of
knowledge on improving student understanding of core content and engineering
decision-making abilities through the use of visualization software as the
platform for a completely integrated and project-based, collaborative approach
to learning. It is identifying best practices in terms of curriculum
transformation to achieve the goal of enhanced student skill level not only in
technical content, but also in societal and global context. The project is
building on an existing program (Girls Experiencing Engineering) to engage K-12
teachers and middle and high school students. Other dissemination efforts
include conference and journal papers and faculty workshops. Project evaluation,
under the direction of a independent campus center, is using competency
assessments and questionnaires to monitor the impact of the new material on the
students knowledge, skills, and beliefs. Broader impacts include the
dissemination of the instructional material, the faculty workshops, and the
outreach to female K-12 students and teachers.