* 0942675
* PNWTOX-The Columbia River plume and HABs in the Pacific Northwest: bioreactor, barrier or conduit?
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Barbara Hickey, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2014
* USD 1,000,000.00

The overall objective of this project is to improve predictability of harmful
algal bloom (HAB) events in Pacific Northwest (PNW) coastal waters by advancing
our understanding of HAB development, dissipation, transport and mixing
processes using existing data in parallel with state of the art physical and
bio-physical models that include, for the first time, both the Columbia River
(CR) plume and potential HAB source regions off both Oregon and Washington.

Intellectual Merit: This project will make use of results and data from two
recently completed, temporally overlapping 5-year, multi-institutional,
interdisciplinary studies jointly funded by NSF and NOAA (1. The Ecology and
Oceanography of Harmful Algal Blooms in the PNW, and 2. River Influences on
Shelf Ecosystems), to improve predictability of arrival of HABs, in particular,
toxigenic Pseudo-nitzschia (PN), at PNW shores. The overriding conclusion from
both studies is that lack of understanding of the effect of the CR plume on
cross-shelf and alongshelf transport and mixing is the greatest impediment to
understanding how phytoplankton, in particular, HABs, arrive on coastal beaches.
In this project, Drs. Hickey, Lessard and collaborators at NOAA, UC Santa Cruz,
Canada's Institute of Ocean Sciences will build on the wealth of complementary
information and enhanced knowledge generated in the two earlier research
programs to study the transport and mitigation of HABs to the Washington coast
from both northern and southern sources and extend our analyses to species other
than PN. Hypotheses to be tested include: 1. The Columbia River plume is a
bioreactor for growth but not toxin production. 2. During downwelling winds, the
Columbia River plume inhibits shoreward transport of toxic blooms. 3. During
upwelling winds the Columbia River plume enhances shoreward transport of toxic
blooms below the surface layer. 4. The Columbia River plume enhances northward
transport of toxic blooms along the coast.

Broader Impacts: A large group of Government and Tribal bodies (e.g., Washington
State Dept. of Fish and Wildlife, the Dept. of Health, the Quileute tribe) with
interests in coastal shellfish resources will benefit from both the improved
understanding of the likely occurrence of toxic Pseudo-nitzschia as well as a
forecasting ability so that harvest closures for razor clams and Dungeness crabs
can be minimized. New information on Alexandrium may allow managers to shorten
the typical annual Paralytic Shellfish Poisoning beach closures. This project
will provide interdisciplinary training for one graduate student and one
Postdoctoral fellow. The questions addressed will provide an excellent
opportunity for newly graduated Ph.D.s to broaden their training in
interdisciplinary coastal oceanography.