* 0942390
* Creating an Academic Community to Foster Curiosity and Discovery in Introductory Geoscience Classes
* EHR,DUE
* 03/01/2010,08/31/2012
* David Dempsey, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Lea
* 08/31/2012
* USD 175,000.00

Abstract This project creates a Teaching and Learning Community (TLC) composed
of faculty, graduate students, and advanced undergraduates who are combining
their professional and curricular development efforts to improve instruction in
geology, meteorology and oceanography lab courses. The TLC is also working to
improve student learning in associated lecture courses via the transfer of
skills developed by students enrolled in the labs. The project develops, adapts,
and refines lab materials that not only incorporate a consistent inquiry-based
learning (IBL) approach, real-world data, and problems relevant to students, but
also explicitly address the process of science. The project work is being
facilitated by a computer-equipped Geoscience Exploration Laboratory (GEL),
developed in part via this project, which is providing students with
opportunities to collect their own data, use computer tools to analyze,
visualize, interpret, synthesize and present their results and interpretations.
This is helping students to develop valuable thinking and communication skills
at an early stage in their university careers. The evaluation plan consists of
both formative and summative components that track student learning and
attitudes as well as the professional development of faculty and graduate
students who are involved in teaching the laboratory courses. The outcomes of
the project include a widely disseminated lab manual, a national workshop that
actively disseminates the project results, and the dissemination of evaluation
results that are of interest to the larger STEM community.