* 0942850
* Experimental Determination of Chemical Structure in the Undergraduate Curriculum: A Data-Driven Approach
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2013
* John Tansey, Otterbein College
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 12/31/2013
* USD 199,409.00

Chemistry (12)&lt;br/&gt;Experimental structure determination remains beyond the
experience of most undergraduate students in spite of the central role X-ray
crystallography plays in the understanding of materials and biomolecules. Rapid
advances in instrumentation and computing power have created equipment that is
both rugged enough to allow operation by the non-expert and powerful enough to
collect data in a time scale compatible with a teaching environment. Few models
exist for the incorporation of crystallographic data and techniques at all
levels of the undergraduate chemistry curriculum. The key goals of this project
are to: (1) develop a new model for integration of structural methods into the
undergraduate chemistry curriculum, (2) assess student engagement and learning
when working with experimental structural data, (3) establish a local PUI user
group to broaden the incorporation of X-ray diffraction methods and resources
into the undergraduate curriculum, and (4) create interactive web-based
materials for teaching crystallographic symmetry.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
The project is creating a model for integration of structural methods into the
undergraduate chemistry curriculum. Assessment is occurring at the local,
regional and international level while each component of the project addresses
the need for high quality resources for teaching structural methods. Connections
with the STaRBURSTT CyberInstrumentation Consortium are being used to build on
previous NSF-supported projects for the incorporation of X-ray structural
methods into the undergraduate curriculum. The project builds upon the PI's
previous NSF-CCLI project NSF-0536710, "Visual-Spatial Learning: Development of
an Interactive Web-Based Symmetry Tutorial," and makes use of the expertise of
faculty in synthetic inorganic chemistry and lipid
biochemistry.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The project is impacting students and
faculty (1) locally through curricular development and implementation, (2)
regionally through a PUI user group, (3) nationally through dissemination of the
curricular products and their assessment, and (4) internationally through the
development of web-based resources for teaching symmetry in crystallography.
Faculty and students are being trained in aspects of crystal growth, X-ray data
collection, and X-ray data analysis through laboratory exercises, courses, and
workshops. The creation of a cyber-enabled shared use facility dedicated to
undergraduate education is providing much needed infrastructure for teaching and
undergraduate research in the central Ohio area. Finally, the details of the
curricular development project and its evaluation will be disseminated through
presentations at national meetings and publication in a chemical education
journal.&lt;br/&gt;