* 0942953
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Resource Intensification in Early Village Societies: Dairying on the Great Hungarian Plain
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Hanneke Hoekman-Sites, Field Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2011
* USD 15,000.00

Under the direction of Dr. William Parkinson, Hanneke Hoekman-Sites will examine
early dairying practices on the Great Hungarian Plain during the Neolithic and
Copper Age (6000-3000 cal BC) to identify how milk product use changed through
time. This study advances the study of economic intensification by examining
archaeological residues from prehistoric Hungary. The results of this analysis
will yield information about patterns of dairy residue distribution across
individual sites and in various vessel types. The impact of this project reaches
beyond the confines of residue analysis. By providing information about general
trends of animal product use over time, our knowledge about the process of
economic intensification in Eastern Europe will be greatly expanded.

Hoekman-Sites's project investigates a question with immediate effects on our
understanding of the Great Hungarian Plain and with broad archaeological
implications for the interpretation of social organization and the development
of residue analysis methodology. The complex social systems in place across
Europe during the Bronze Age grew out of the Neolithic and Copper Age societies
through periods of economic intensification and differential exploitation of
faunal resources. Understanding the role of animals and animal products in this
intensification is crucial to understanding how social stratification developed
in this region.

The presence of animal adipose and dairy fat will be identified directly in
ceramic vessels using residue analysis. Residues from past use have been shown
to remain in unglazed ceramic vessels long after the vessel falls out of use and
is deposited into the archaeological record. The ceramic samples were collected
from materials excavated by the Körös Regional Archaeological Project and from
three local museum collections in eastern Hungary. In all, 339 samples were
collected from 10 Neolithic and Copper Age sites. At least 50 samples were
collected from each time period. After extracting the residues from each ceramic
sherd the samples will be analyzed using gas chromatography-mass spectrometry
(GC-MS) to determine if animal fat is present. After the samples are tested,
those that contain animal fat residue will be tested further to determine the
type of animal fat present. The second round of testing will differentiate
between dairy fat, adipose fat, and porcine fat using compound specific isotopic
analysis, which will bring a higher degree of data resolution than the animal
fat presence testing alone.

This project will result in valuable knowledge on eastern European economic
intensification. It will provide opportunities for future collaboration by
illustrating to Hungarian archaeologists how residue studies can be used to
further their own research goals. The results of the project will be
disseminated broadly. Initially the research will be published in dissertation
form, followed by several articles on theoretical, methodological, and broader
geographical aspects in peer-reviewed journals. The data will also be available
online, which will add to the database of residue studies.