* 0942327
* Development of Novel Learning Materials for Green Energy Education Centered Around a Photovoltaic (PV) Test Station
* EHR,DUE
* 08/15/2010,07/31/2014
* Hirak Patangia, University of Arkansas Little Rock
* Standard Grant
* Amy Chan Hilton
* 07/31/2014
* USD 199,965.00

This project establishes a 2.5 kilowatt photovoltaic test station with
associated instrumentation that is integrated into several courses in the
undergraduate electrical engineering curriculum at the University of Arkansas,
Little Rock. Laboratory experiments using the test station and corresponding
course modules covering renewable energy, sustainability, and the smart grid are
to be inserted into a project based freshmen engineering course and a junior
level course on power systems engineering. A new senior level course in
renewable energy is also being developed. The senior level course is
multidisciplinary and is being offered to students in electrical engineering,
systems engineering, engineering technology and physics. The project includes
rigorous formative and summative evaluation plans with both qualitative and
quantitative components coordinated by an independent evaluator. The evaluation
plan is designed to establish the quality of the materials and to ensure the
project goals are met. The project's results are being disseminated through
conferences and journal publications and through workshops coordinated with
professional societies. The photovoltaic test station is also being used as part
of an outreach effort to high schools in the Little Rock area with the goal of
getting high school students, particularly those from underrepresented groups,
interested in science and engineering.