* 0942109
* Classroom activities to promote a deep understanding of evolution among biology majors in introductory courses
* EHR,DUE
* 01/15/2010,12/31/2013
* Steven Kalinowski, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Katherine J. Denniston
* 12/31/2013
* USD 149,994.00

Biological Sciences (61). Evolution is the central unifying theory of biology,
but is poorly understood by many students. A large body of evidence shows that
evolution is an inherently difficult theory to learn, in part because 1)
students often lack the conceptual background to understand evolution, and have
misconceptions about it, 2) evolution can be difficult to observe, and 3)
evolution is often taught in large lecture-based classes. Three decades of
research have charted a clear path for overcoming these obstacles. In
particular, instructors can 1) design instruction to address student
misconceptions, 2) illustrate evolutionary changes as concretely as possible, 3)
emphasize scientific thinking, 4) give students multiple examples of key
concepts, and 5) incorporate active learning exercises into lectures. This
project is addressing these recommended ways to improve instruction of evolution
at the undergraduate level through development of a series of 20 research-based
classroom activities for teaching evolution to biology majors in introductory
undergraduate biology courses. Development of the activities is being guided by
evidence-based principles for effective course design. Each activity is being
carefully evaluated through student interviews, video recordings of students
working, student surveys, and comparison of student conceptions before and after
instruction. Validated standardized tests are also being used to measure student
learning across the entire course. Descriptions of the classroom activities and
results from the evaluations are being disseminated through a series of peer-
reviewed publications and conference presentations and workshops. In addition,
videos of the classroom activities are being made available through an online
database of teaching videos for use by potential adopters of the materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit &lt;br/&gt;Reviews of undergraduate
biology education in the United States have repeatedly called for the kinds of
classroom activities that are being developed in this project. A novel feature
of these activities is that they are being designed to bring recent discoveries
in genomics into the classroom, for the purpose of engaging students and as an
effective strategy for dispelling common misconceptions regarding how natural
selection occurs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts &lt;br/&gt;The primary
impact of this project is on improving undergraduate education about evolution
in the United States, both by creating classroom activities that other
instructors can use, particularly in large enrollment introductory courses, and
by providing instructors with a model of exemplary teaching practices, from
which they can create their own activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
being co-funded by funds from the Directorate for Biological Sciences, Emerging
Frontiers Division.