* 0942362
* Computing Foundations for the Scientist
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2010,06/30/2015
* Catherine Bareiss, Olivet Nazarene University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 06/30/2015
* USD 199,600.00

Computing - Other (35)&lt;br/&gt;Due to rapid technological advances in the
sciences, software is becoming a 'black box' to the scientist. However, it is
essential for scientists to understand the benefits and limitations of the
technology that supports their work. This knowledge is not currently taught in
typical technology courses. The goal of this project is to make future
scientists more intelligent users of computing technology in their practice of
science. This is achieved by introducing students to computational thinking in
the areas of algorithms, data representation, abstraction, performance issues
and database concepts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Expected outcomes include fifteen
learning modules designed for students in a variety of disciplines including
computer science, biology, mathematics, chemistry, engineering and geology. The
modules can be delivered in three ways: 1) as part of a comprehensive and
interdisciplinary course, 2) as stand-alone modules suitable for use in existing
science courses, and 3) as self-paced web tutorials to support student
exploration. Materials can be adopted by many institutions with undergraduate
programs in the sciences. The project has the potential to improve undergraduate
science education by promoting the integration of computing concepts and science
pedagogy.