* 0942085
* WIKIed Biology
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2015
* Meg Murray, Kennesaw State University Research and Service Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 06/30/2015
* USD 199,544.00

Interdisciplinary(99) WIKIed Biology provides a model of instruction utilizing
Web 2.0 technologies to deepen and enhance teaching and learning in STEM
disciplines, with the specific focus on learning biological concepts. The
project supports the creation and implementation of two concurrent upper level
undergraduate courses, one for computing students and one for biology students.
Using the wave of momentum in Web 2.0 as a more dynamic, participatory and
collaborative medium, computer science and information systems students research
and identify the most feasible and sustainable of the current technologies for
use in the courses. Computing students gain experience in practicing
implementation and management of computing concepts, whereas biology students
gain experience using Web 2.0 technologies to broaden and deepen their
understanding of biological concepts. The model introduces new teaching
strategies that incorporate ways students engage information and communication
technologies and identifies best practices related to implementing Web 2.0
technologies into the teaching and learning process. The project also encourages
interdisciplinary active learning experiences for students, which incorporate
current information on how students acquire information and use web-based
communication technologies. Information gained from the project expands
knowledge in the field of student learning and pedagogical practices using
technology.