* 0942320
* Travel Support for U.S.-Based  Students to Attend  8th International Semantic Web Conference 2009
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Joel Sachs, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2010
* USD 20,000.00

The 8th International Semantic Web Conference (ISWC), held October 25-29, 2009
in Northern Virginia is the major international forum where the latest research
results and technical innovations on all aspects of the Semantic Web are
presented. This student travel support enables students who want to become part
of the Semantic Web research community to participate in ISWC 2009. In
particular, the ISWC Doctoral Consortium creates an opportunity for doctoral
students to test their research ideas, present their current progress and future
plans, and to receive constructive criticism and insights related to their
future work and career perspectives. This is expected to be a significant event
in the graduate students' careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In selecting
applications for the ISWC 2009 Travel Support, preference is given to students
selected to participate in the Doctoral Consortium, followed by students who are
first author on a paper accepted at the conference, followed by students who
have other authorship on a conference or related workshop paper, with an
additional aim to broaden participation in computer science among the
underrepresented students. ISWC details, including the Doctoral Symposium and
Travel Support, can be found at the conference website
(http://iswc2009.semanticweb.org).