* 0942809
* PREDICT: Predicting Results and Evaluating Data using Insights from Computational Techniques
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2014
* Jacqueline Bennett, SUNY College at Oneonta
* Standard Grant
* David Brown
* 12/31/2014
* USD 164,753.00

Chemistry (12) Project PREDICT (Predicting Results and Evaluating Data
using&lt;br/&gt;Insights from Computational Techniques) is enhancing the
educational experience for all students enrolled in the chemistry curriculum at
the State University of New York College at Oneonta (SUNY Oneonta) by
introducing computational chemistry through a graduated approach. The
coordinated nature of PREDICT facilitates students' ability to transfer and
develop skills throughout the entire undergraduate chemistry curriculum, from
general chemistry through advanced courses. Activities combine hands-on
experimental components with in-depth complementary computational exercises to
demonstrate how microscopic phenomena lead to macroscopic properties. Chemistry
students are gaining an enhanced understanding of the particulate nature of
matter by using computational chemistry to visualize molecular properties and
processes. The accessibility of computational software on students' own
computers permits more comprehensive inquiry than is possible with location-
restricted computational resources. Materials developed for non-majors are
shared with local educators via the Science Discovery Center of Oneonta, a
hands-on physical science activity center located on the SUNY Oneonta campus.
These teachers gain experience to discuss and implement computational techniques
into their classrooms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PREDICT reaches more than 750
individual students each academic year, including roughly 115 pre-service
teachers who deliver science curricula to all K-12 levels. Non-majors more
easily visualize the microscopic interactions of matter, which improves their
scientific literacy and helps them develop interpretive, interpolative, and
extrapolative skills. Education majors enter their profession with direct
experience they can use as they educate future generations of scientists and
citizens, and have the opportunity to return to the SDC with their students to
use these resources.