* 0942345
* Cross-Course Collaboration in the Undergraduate Chemistry Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 08/15/2010,07/31/2014
* Arthur Halpern, Indiana State University
* Standard Grant
* David Brown
* 07/31/2014
* USD 107,279.00

The Department of Chemistry is implementing the use of a gas chromatograph-mass
(GCMS) capable of electron impact (EI) and chemical ionization (CI) modes and
capable of tandem mass spectrometry (MSMS). This instrument is an important
analytical tool for use in chemistry, especially in environmental,
pharmaceutical, and biochemical applications. This instrument is being used to
support experiments in the fields of organic, inorganic, and physical chemistry
and is impacting four undergraduate courses including materials exchange between
courses and a cross-course collaboration between the sophomore organic and
physical chemistry laboratories. Students are carrying out kinetic isotope
effects in a chemical reaction, regioselectivity in the Bayer Villager
oxidation, selective reduction of limonene with Wilkinson's Catalyst, chemical
ionization MS and Tandem Mass Spectrometry, and enantioselective epoxidation
using Jacobsen's catalyst. The instrument also is used in undergraduate research
for projects that include natural product isolation and synthesis and organic
synthesis. These projects involve 5-10 undergraduate research students per year,
while the course-related projects involve 90-120 undergraduate students per
year. Students from a neighboring women's college, Saint Mary of the Woods
College, which does not have an instrument of its own, also use the instrument.
Further, high school teachers from nearby schools participate with students in a
program involving GCMS headspace analysis of fruit candy and mint leaves as a
chemical "sniffer." Intellectual Merit. The use of hands-on GCMS in the
curriculum introduces the undergraduate students to this common analytical tool
for chemical analysis and allows students to address scientific questions from
an early point in their learning. The outreach programs to high school students
illustrate the use of GCMS as a tool to identify volatile substances. GCMS
practice and theory is introduced in Sophomore Organic laboratory for analysis
of isotopic labeling and structure elucidation. Advanced applications of
chemical ionization and tandem mass spectrometry are introduced in the Advanced
Organic laboratory. Organic and physical chemistry students collaborate via
exchange of materials and data from isotopic labeling and kinetic isotope effect
experiments including presentations by students to each group. Exchanges take
place between the Sophomore Organic and the Inorganic laboratories, as well as
between the Inorganic and Advanced Organic laboratories, from materials that are
passed between courses. These interactions promote ownership of materials and
data as well as conceptual connections between the courses, including the idea
that compounds can be isolated or synthesized for pragmatic purposes, as well as
for answering chemical questions (regioselectivity/reaction mechanism). The
expected outcome of this experience is students who are more engaged by seeing
the connections between content in their courses and its importance. Also,
students are expected to be more prepared by hands on experience, obtaining
needed skills for graduate and professional studies or industrial chemical
careers. Broader Impacts. The use of this instrument is having a significant
impact on the educational and research infrastructure of the department and the
institution. Access to modern state-of-the-art instrumentation is critical to
curricular and research training in the department. The department has a long
history of undergraduate research and nearly all of the graduates have been
involved in some form of undergraduate research. Indiana State University has
the second largest percentage of minority students in Indiana and serves a large
proportion of female students.