* 0942454
* CCLI: Enhancing Expertise, Sociability and Literacy through Teaching Artificial Intelligence as a Lab Science
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2016
* Cathleen McGrath, Loyola Marymount University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 08/31/2016
* USD 179,897.00

Computer Engineering (32)

This proposal develops a new approach of teaching introductory Artificial
Intelligence (AI) concepts through a laboratory experimentation approach. Each
topic includes several components that range from "the concept in the real
world" through detailed code implementation. The laboratory setting supports
communication skills as well as software engineering and process understanding,
and the laboratories cover a wide range of AI applications. The laboratory
approach supports students who learn better in a social setting, including women
students, or who learn better by reading and developing mental models.

The project has several components, including developing laboratory materials to
be used in a sequence of lab exercises as the student works through the
laboratory (including the basic concept, some applications of the concept,
sample processing concepts, design description, code hints, test suites,
experiments, full source code, and a complexity analysis). It extends beyond
that available through current repositories of AI materials. The project
includes three workshops, which are primarily assessment activities where
participants review course materials.

The project develops a repository linked to an appropriate element of the NSDL
and appropriate development of metadata is included. Along with the repository,
a mix of papers, conference presentations, and conference workshops make this
available to the broader community.