* 0942211
* RAPID:   Perception of and Adaptation to Extreme Flooding Disturbances in the Okavango Delta, Botswana
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Kelley Crews, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 07/31/2011
* USD 25,708.00

It is generally hypothesized that people's environmental perceptions are an
important part of how they organize their resource evaluations, extraction
patterns, and rules of access. A fundamental component of perception is
uncertainty, often inversely related to residence time in a local system.
Underlying this theory is the presumption that longer residence time would be
sufficient for people to have observed a large portion of the range of possible
environmental fluxes, and thus know how to bracket or perceive environmental
change and react accordingly. Further, greater environmental variability in a
given environmental system will increase uncertainty, particularly when that
variability is predictable. That is, regular variability such as ocean tides may
exhibit a large change, but it is a very predictable change. A more difficult
scenario is where the variability exhibits non-linear behavior or appears to
have frequent stochastic events. Thus hazards present a doubly difficult
situation for those living on the margins: they pose both an environmental /
biophysical danger but also present a cognitive challenge when those events
reach outside a person's individual or shared
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Kelley Crews from the University of Texas
Austin, along with Dr. Brian King at the Pennsylvania State University will
assess pre-event attitudes, perceptions, and judgments of an impending extreme
flooding hazard in and around the Okavango Delta, Botswana. The crux of this
research relies upon collecting people's perceptions of the impending flood
prior to the flood's arrival, such that repeat interviews can be conducted post-
event to see how people's prior perceptions relate to their post-event
situation: did they adapt some or all livelihood strategies, did they out-
migrate, or did they go on government benefits? While post-event interviews have
been shown to be successful in subject recall of actual information such as "how
far did the water reach in your village before you left?," they are notoriously
poor at triggering accurate subject recall of their pre-event attitudes and
feelings. Thus, without speaking to people pre-event, there is no way to assess
any change in people's perceptions in response to such hazards or system
dynamics. Gathering this information pre-event is therefore absolutely required
for any further study, and will be able to be leveraged with longer-term studies
by starting the data collection immediately. The findings regarding the
interplay of hazards, perception, and response to extreme disturbance will be of
immediate value to local decision-makers and stakeholders as well as the larger
hazards and livelihoods research communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While this
study is primarily field-based, it presents an opportunity to grow education
opportunities in the United States and in Botswana. This study will engage
interdisciplinary students from multiple backgrounds and countries, as well as
students from local college programs in Botswana. Results of this study will be
made available to University of Botswana students interested in participating in
the project. These educational opportunities are particularly important for
females and non-BaTswana who have historically not been allowed access to
educational institutions in the same proportion as other BaTswana. This project
will also continue substantive interaction with local collaborators, and the
status of Botswana as a contracting party to the Ramsar Convention on Wetlands
provides an established means of transmitting the methodological and management
findings to all other signatory countries for greater international societal
impact of this research on the sustainable use of wetland ecosystems prone to
hazard events.