* 0942067
* Curriculum and Laboratory Development Through 3-D Interfacing via the Nintendo Wiimote
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2012
* Charles Crowell, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 12/31/2012
* USD 170,000.00

Computing-others (35) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds and evaluates a
laboratory and curricular experience to support an engaging intuitive interface
for interacting with computational learning materials: motion capture and the
Nintendo Wiimote. This interface supports the capture of 3-D motion, a natural
means of gesturing for human learners. A Wiimote interface enables multiple
learners to interact simultaneously with specially designed exercises that are
intended to promote collaborative exploration of computational principles and
system design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The collaborative exploration modules that
have been developed utilize the 3-D motion interface and possess two unique
advantages. First, by learning the theory and applications, students discover
the need for and the uses of computational concepts and methods directly.
Second, the unique motion capture and facility for interactive play enables
novel and engaging explorations with the Wiimote, which has an instant appeal
with young students. Thus, this work is leveraging this increased enthusiasm and
motivation for a significantly stronger development of computational-thinking
competencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work augments inter-disciplinary research
through robust evaluation of the efficacy of teaching by 3-D motion interfacing,
involving faculty from Computer Science as well as Psychology.