* 0942387
* Collaborative Research: CCLI (Exploratory): Introduction of Nanoelectronics Courses in Undergraduate Computer Science and Computer Engineering Curricula
* EHR,DUE
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2013
* Rabi Mahapatra, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 04/30/2013
* USD 90,000.00

Computer Engineering (32)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal develops a
simulation-based project oriented curriculum to bootstrap a nanotechnology track
among undergraduate engineering programs, with initial emphasis on computer
science and engineering. The proposal develops three courses, five experimental
modules for each of the courses, and web-based courseware for wider distribution
of the materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal investigates methodologies
and tool sets for nanoscale design and integrates them into a novel engineering
curriculum. It advances nanoelectronics education and provides students with the
ability to perform futuristic nanodesigns. The free exchange of courseware and
simulation-based education enables low-cost learning of nanotechnology compared
to a traditional experimental approach. The proposal promotes discovery in
nanoelectronics and nanotechnology due to advanced simulation, experiments, and
design. The proposal replaces experimental-based highly-expensive nanotechnology
education with simulation-based low-cost nanotechnology
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This nanotechnology educational program
contributes to building a workforce in the nanotechnology industries. The
project-centered nanoelectronics courses provide a unique learning opportunity
for faculty and students in computer science and engineering.