* 0942456
* Collaborative Research: Statistical Content Helping to Empower Mathematicians at Two-Year Colleges (SCHEMATYC)
* EHR,DUE
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2012
* Robert Gould, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Richard A. Alo
* 04/30/2012
* USD 62,120.00

Mathematical Sciences (21)

This project is using workshops and a distance-learning course to improve the
statistical expertise and pedagogical knowledge of instructors of introductory
statistics at 2-year colleges. The project is conducting a series of eight
traveling workshops, each held in conjunction with a regional meeting of the
American Mathematical Association of Two-Year Colleges (AMATYC), to disseminate
best practices and statistical content knowledge to an audience of instructors
who may have limited backgrounds in statistics and limited opportunities for
professional development. In addition, the project is conducting a 2-day
workshop in conjunction with the 2010 national AMATYC meeting, is offering a
distance learning course, and is establishing online discussion groups for
instructors of introductory statistics. All of these activities are aimed at
2-year college instructors and are addressing both statistical content and
pedagogy following recognized national guidelines. This project is preparing
faculty at 2-year colleges to effectively teach introductory statistics by
providing access to exemplary resources. The workshops, distance course, and
discussion groups are affecting substantial change in the way introductory
statistics is taught at 2-year institutions, and are building a stronger
community of introductory statistics instructors.