* 0942261
* Project Synergy: Transforming undergraduate large-enrollment science courses using graduate-student "scaffolded" apprentices
* EHR,DUE
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2014
* Marguerite Brickman, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 02/28/2014
* USD 192,258.00

Project Synergy is being accomplished with the context of Biology 1103, the
quintessential introductory biology course for non-science majors at the
University of Georgia and one that typifies general education introductory
courses taken by undergraduates throughout the nation. The project addresses two
parallel and interconnected objectives: (1) to advance the functional science
literacy skills of non-science majors using technology-enhanced communication in
even the largest undergraduate general education courses, and (2) to involve
graduate students in a long-term "scaffolded" apprenticeship program that aims
to create and implement these strategies. This research builds upon and extends
prior work related to learner-centered instruction, especially in large-
enrollment courses. The project is creating active learning modules about
current relevant issues in the biological sciences. Examples of communication
strategies developed for the course include collaborative problem-solving
exercises that mirror real life applications, followed by opportunities for
students to further investigate and communicate their understanding using
current technologies such as wiki pages and digital storytelling. Several
instruments are being used to measure changes in students' functional science
literacy, confidence in scientific abilities, and desire to continue learning
about biology after course completion. In the scaffolding process, novice
graduate student instructors assume increasingly independent roles in creating,
implementing, and training their peers in the development of teaching
strategies. Evaluation of the graduate apprenticeship program includes
quantitative instruments and qualitative interviews to document shifts in
attitudes toward teaching, competency and likelihood of adopting these teaching
practices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is advancing functional science
literacy for more than one-third of the University of Georgia college graduates.
This is the only college science learning experience for most of the
University's undergraduates and is representative of the educational experience
nationwide. The project is also creating a self-sustaining process in which
future faculty will be trained to mentor the next generation of instructors. The
novel instructional practices and apprenticeship program are generalizable
across STEM disciplines. Both the materials and strategies are being
disseminated at multiple scales, in partnership with graduate student
participants: locally, across STEM disciplines at the University of Georgia;
regionally, through workshops for instructors at other institutions in the
University System of Georgia; and nationally, through workshops at science and
education conferences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific project goals for
undergraduate are to (a) identify and cultivate an interest in current
scientific issues centered in biology, (b) apply science process skills (e.g.
generate questions, identify variables and assumptions, collect and describe
data, explain consequences and limits of results) to make decisions about
relevant scientific issues, and (c) communicate their understanding through
writing, discussion, and new media. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific project goals
for graduate students are to (a) learn to create and implement new instructional
practices for large-enrollment courses, (b) measure the effectiveness of their
changed teaching practices using evidence-based assessment methods, and (c)
peer-mentor novice graduate students in active learning practices and the
scientific teaching process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being co-
funded by funds from the Directorate for Biological Sciences, Emerging Frontiers
Division.