* 0942208
* Integration of NMR into the Chemistry Curriculum at WKU and ECTC and Assessment of Factors Leading to a Successful Collaboration Between 2- and 4-Year Colleges
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2010,09/30/2012
* Darwin Dahl, Western Kentucky University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Grabowski
* 09/30/2012
* USD 250,000.00

Chemistry (12) Central to this collaborative project, two Anasazi FT-NMRs are
being integrated simultaneously across the chemistry curriculum at Western
Kentucky University (WKU) and Elizabethtown Community and Technical College
(ECTC). Modern NMR theory and practice are being incorporated throughout the
chemistry curriculum at WKU and ECTC. Existing experiments and lecture topics
are being enhanced by enabling direct student access to the new instrumentation.
Additionally, new laboratory exercises that emphasize the full range of NMR
techniques are being added to the curriculum. The project incorporates the
following three key objectives: (i) enhance student's understanding of
chemistry; (ii) increase student's competency with modern technology by
providing a carefully designed course sequence of hands-on experience and real-
life applications; and (iii) establish and evaluate a sustainable partnership
between the Departments of Chemistry at WKU and ECTC. The integration of modern
instrumentation into WKU and ECTC's chemistry laboratory programs is essential
for improving the undergraduate educational experience and preparing the student
for post-graduate opportunities. The project also enhances WKU and ECTC's
efforts in education by providing modern scientific instrumentation to stimulate
research and educational collaborations. The success and viability of the
partnership between ECTC and WKU will be critically assessed throughout the
project which will serve as a model for the development of equitable
partnerships between universities and community colleges.