* 0942973
* U.S.-Norway Planning Visit:  Ice-Edge Autonomous Underwater Vehicles Mapping and Navigation Experiments in the Arctic
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Mark Moline, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 08/31/2010
* USD 19,963.00

OISE 0942973&lt;br/&gt;Clark&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through this international
planning visit Christopher Clark of California Polytechnic State University will
initiate cooperative research with Geir Johnsen from the Trondheim Biological
Station of the Norwegian University of Science and Technology. Clark?s
experience with robotics complements his Norwegian partner?s expertise in Arctic
marine biology. Together, they intend to employ new navigational control
strategies for an autonomous underwater vehicle (AUV) to conduct sampling along
the ice edge in the Arctic Ocean near Ny-Alesund Research Station in Svalbard,
Norway. The goal is to sample and characterize bio-activity in the polar region.
New information provided by robot plankton sensors during the planned exercises
should help inform ecosystem models specific to the Arctic Ocean. Furthermore,
tests conducted by this interdisciplinary team are expected to refine AUV ice-
edge detection, position estimation and tracking capabilities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This team visit to Svalbard fulfills the program objective
of advancing basic knowledge of Arctic environments by enabling experts in the
United States and Europe to share research resources and plan beneficial
projects in areas of strong mutual interest and competence. Broader impacts
include the training of two U.S. undergraduate students and one post doctoral
participant through an early career introduction to collaborative polar field
work and oceanographic sampling. The experience will provide these junior
researchers with a valuable introduction to a unique Arctic site, international
teamwork, and use of AUVs.