* 0942962
* TIE: Evaluation of Biosurfactants Produced by Anaerobes and their Performance in Cleansing and Environmental Remediation
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Ponisseril Somasundaran, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 08/31/2012
* USD 50,000.00

PROGRAM DIRECTOR'S RECOMMENDATION

IIP-0942962 Columbia University Somassundaran

This proposal is a collaborative (TIE) project between Columbia University (a
research site of the I/UCRC for Particulates and Surfactants) and the Indian
Institute of Technology (IIT), Madras. The objectives of this joint research are
very much in line with this Center's goals in the "green initiative" area.

This TIE project outlines research for the development of a pathway for
producing commercial surfactants under anaerobic conditions, which is unique as
most of the biosurfactant producers reported in literature are aerobic
organisms. The proposed work will be extremely valuable for understanding of and
optimization of structure/activity relationships. The thorough evaluation of the
biosurfactants will make their use as cleansers and surface modification agents
a viable application; thus, opening an environmentally-friendly, renewable
source for surfactants currently generated from petroleum sources. The proposed
work can be accomplished effectively given the expected good synergies between
surface chemistry (Columbia University) and experiences in the area of microbial
growth in confined, porous media in IIT (within the general area of civil and
environmental engineering).

The information from this TIE project will have a broad impact on participating
students, and should be useful to may industries: soil cleaning, oil spill
cleaning, cosmetics, coating and mineral processing. This project will start a
USA-India network; and, student and research exchange will be a plus. The
Columbia group will continue to train women graduate and undergraduate students
in the surface and colloidal science.

