* 0942293
* CCLI: Multidisciplinary Instructional Transformation in Science and Math Courses Supporting Teacher Preparation and Institutional Change
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2010,08/31/2014
* Stuart Burris, Western Kentucky University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 08/31/2014
* USD 175,000.00

This project is contributing to the national effort to transform Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) education to use what is now
known about student learning and effective instructional practices in the
classroom. Success depends on more than educating instructors to become
confident and able users of instructional practices that are learner-,
knowledge-, assessment-, and community-centered. Much work has been done to
develop instructors and curriculum, but structural barriers have impeded the
spread of this type of active learning methods in science and mathematics at the
college and K-12 level. Scaling up change requires not only changing individual
instructors' beliefs but also the cultural norms, time pressures, reward
systems, and preparation of science and math instructors. &lt;br/&gt;This
project is engaged in an important first step of institutional transformation in
science instruction at Western Kentucky University, an institution with a
history and tradition for valuing teaching. (It is also designed to affect K-12
instruction through building on and strengthening the "SKyTeach" program at this
university, a replication of the UTeach STEM teacher preparation program.) The
SkyTeach approach is to develop learning communities for STEM faculty. These
nascent communities inform interested instructors about effective teaching,
build community, and support faculty already engaged in this transformation. The
communities are engaged in identifying and recognizing exemplary courses and
supporting the development of additional ones. &lt;br/&gt;An emphasis in this
project is the education of pre-service teachers. New curriculum development
work strives to include pre-service teachers in development, implementation, and
revision of curricula. Active learning in large introductory courses is being
supported by a Learning Assistant (LA) program that also serves to recruit
students into teaching. Learning assistants collaborate with faculty and
graduate students in instruction in order to reduce a structural barrier
(limited instructor time) to active learning. Classroom observations and
measures of student learning gains are being used to model alternative ways of
evaluating instruction. Colleagues are learning about these efforts through
different forums ranging from informal hallway conversations to organized
conference sessions. Formative evaluation is being used to guide the design of
this pilot project, and is also being used to inform the host college,
university, and other institutions.