* 0942005
* The Incorporation of Graphite-Furnace Atomic Absorption Spectroscopy Across the Chemistry Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2010,08/31/2014
* Timothy McNeese, Loyola University Maryland, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 08/31/2014
* USD 120,611.00

Chemistry (12)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A graphite furnace atomic absorption
spectrometer (GF-AAS) is being integrated across the college's chemistry
curriculum and also in cross-disciplinary courses with the biology department.
Specifically, usage of the GF-AAS is being incorporated into new or revised lab
experiments in both semesters of general chemistry, and four upper-level
chemistry courses: quantitative analysis, the second semester of physical
chemistry, the first semester of biochemistry, and instrumental methods. In
addition, project faculty are developing laboratory experiments involving GF-AAS
usage in a cross-disciplinary ecology lab course, a course on the global
environment, and the plant physiology lab course in the biology department. The
lab experiments for chemistry and biology courses are being developed with
special emphasis on capturing students' interest, and several of these
experiments are creating vehicles for learning chemistry content that naturally
touch on social justice issues in ethically appropriate ways. Learning and
disposition outcomes for each of the laboratory experiments involving GF-AAS
usage have been identified and are being assessed. The project has four main
goals: 1) to offer real-world application of chemical analysis in student
laboratories; 2) to use GF-AAS in new and interesting experiments in upper level
chemistry laboratories; 3) to use chemical analysis in teaching disciplines
other than chemistry; and 4) to make chemistry fun and interesting, i.e.,
accessible. These goals are integrated with the learning aims in the chemistry
department's plan for assessing its overall commitment to offer a rigorous
program that prepares students for future careers in science. The evaluation is
analyzing pre- and post-course measurements of students' conceptual
understanding through concept inventories in several courses. The evaluation is
also longitudinally tracking chemistry majors as they progress through the
undergraduate chemistry curriculum, to assess how usage of GF-AAS in many of
their courses intensifies student interest in and understanding of techniques
involving GF-AAS. The new laboratory experiments are being disseminated through
peer-reviewed publications in chemical education and biology education and
through cross-postings on NSDL. Research results are being shared through
conferences and peer-reviewed journals in science education. The experiments are
also being made available through Perkin-Elmer for use by other institutions
that use the same instrument or are interested in incorporating usage of the
instrument into their curricula.