* 0942569
* Development of Collaborative Computational Thinking (Colla-CT) Inventory for General Education and Teacher Education Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2012
* Osman Yasar, SUNY College at Brockport
* Standard Grant
* Jane Prey
* 12/31/2012
* USD 199,813.00

Computing-others (35) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project bridges the boundaries
between computer science (CS) and natural sciences, as well as the gap between
institutions of higher education and K-12 by teaching Computational Thinking
(CT). Recent attention to CT as a "fundamental skill for everyone" is shifting
the curricular focus in computing from programming to design and applications in
such a way as to bring scientific thinking into mainstream education. It is
producing an inventory of CT modules and assessment tools that are being
developed for use in new undergraduate courses, including a general education
introductory CT course and an upper-level Computational Scientific Thinking
course for teacher candidates and STEM - Science, Technology, Engineering and
Mathematics majors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These courses are using a scalable game
design. Through the progression from designing games to simulations, students
are learning many skills including computer science concepts, computational
problem-solving, mathematical modeling, analysis of system evolution through
simulations and visualization, and experimentation with
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computational science serves the nation as
both a teaching pedagogy and a workforce strategy. In teaching, the project
stimulates a systemic change in undergraduate education that reflects
computation becoming an essential and permanent element in sciences. The project
is providing CT skills to a wide audience of undergraduate students (CS &amp;
non-CS majors), including teacher candidates.