* 0942338
* Opportunity at the Bottom of the Pyramid: A Faculty Development Program to Prepare the Global Engineer
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2012
* Bryan Willson, National Collegiate Inventors and Innovators Alliance
* Standard Grant
* Don Millard
* 06/30/2012
* USD 99,996.00

Engineering-Other (59)&lt;br/&gt;A growing number of engineering programs have
developed innovative educational programs to prepare students to create and
deploy low-cost, environmentally and socially beneficial solutions. Often, these
programs use experiential approaches to provide students with opportunities to
develop technologies that will meet the needs of geographically, culturally and
economically diverse customers. This project will provide training and support
to faculty who are committed to doing work in this area, but need access to
additional resources and a network of people who share a similar vision. The
project will develop and offer a workshop to provide faculty with key
information and resources to develop, implement, and enhance programs that focus
on designing and commercializing breakthrough technologies that address basic
human needs and alleviate environmental problems in an economically and
environmentally sustainable way. The project addresses several significant needs
in this emerging area of engineering education: 1) a mechanism for faculty to
share and learn about best practices in educational innovations; 2) a hands-on
opportunity to develop curricula and strategies for implementation based on
information and feedback from experienced colleagues; and 3) an evaluation of
the impact these activities have on teaching and curriculum, including the
successes and challenges of implementing educational innovations in the
university and in the field.