* 0942313
* Visualizing Strain in Rocks with Interactive Computer Programs
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Paul Karabinos, Williams College
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie August
* 08/31/2015
* USD 144,244.00

Geology (42)&lt;br/&gt;Strain is a fundamental topic in structural geology, and
researchers endeavor to quantify strain in rocks to understand the development
of deformation fabrics, and examine strain gradients in folds and fault zones in
order to constrain mechanisms of their formation. This CCLI Type I project is
providing students in structural geology opportunities to gain confidence
gathering and analyzing data from rocks and relating deformation to large-scale
structures. The two computer programs and accompanying tutorials being created
are providing students with opportunities to determine strain in rocks and an
opportunity for them to gain experience in data acquisition and error analysis.
Students are also learning about important problems that complicate all attempts
to quantify strain, such as ductility contrast between marker object and matrix,
initial shape and distribution of marker objects, and area or volume change
during deformation. Thus, the value of such exercises goes far beyond training
students to measure strain in rocks; these projects also are providing an
opportunity for students to critically examine the assumptions and limitations
of any attempt to quantify a natural process.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. Two
common methods for estimating strain in rocks are the Rf/Phi and center-to-
center methods. Both require making numerous measurements, plotting the results
on graphs, and interpreting patterns in the graphs to estimate strain. Students
commonly have trouble connecting the objects measured in deformed rocks with the
graphs. The programs being created are continuously and instantaneously linking
images of the rocks, as deformation is simulated by linear transformations, with
the graphs that are used to calculate strain. This approach is giving students a
visual link between deformation and the otherwise abstract graphical display. A
prototype program is being refined and tutorials are being created to help
students become familiar with the Rf/Phi method for determining strain. A second
similar program for measuring strain by the center-to-center method and
tutorials are also being developed. A third tutorial is for advanced treatments
of strain analysis describing how both methods can be used to measure strain in
some rocks to partition strain into shape change and area change components. The
programs are being written in Java, so they can run on virtually any computer.
The tutorials are available as text documents with screen captures of the
programs, and as PowerPoint presentations for use in the classroom.
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. The programs and associated tutorials being developed
will impact the teaching of structural geology, a core course taken by nearly
all geology majors. The programs and tutorials are improving undergraduate
courses in structural geology by fostering a deeper understanding of how
commonly used strain methods work. The programs are also being used to
demonstrate some basic principles of strain for introductory geology courses. To
support wide dissemination and increase the number of geology faculty that are
using the programs in their structural geology courses, workshops are being held
at national and regional geology meetings. All material is freely available and
is downloaded from the Williams College Geosciences and Information Technology
web pages.