* 0942776
* Creating and Implementing a Research-Infused Botanical Curriculum:  Exploring Plants from Communities to Molecules
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/2010,01/31/2014
* Jennifer Ward, University of North Carolina at Asheville
* Standard Grant
* Katherine J. Denniston
* 01/31/2014
* USD 196,339.00

Biological Sciences (61). This plant-based life sciences curriculum project
entails the design, implementation, and assessment of an innovative model for
research-based pedagogy that allows all students to do original biological
research across multiple levels of the biological hierarchy, from molecules to
communities. The model introduces laboratory modules developed from ongoing
undergraduate thesis work into core first-year courses, then incorporates
undergraduate research projects vertically into biology curricula at the
sophomore, junior, and senior levels. The modules supplement traditional
instruction in basic plant science concepts (community ecology, taxonomy,
physiology, and molecular population genetics), and facilitate development of
experimental design and analysis skills. In addition, the modules are being
designed to expose classroom researchers to several different facets of and
approaches to studying the same problem during multiple time periods (lower- and
upper-division courses), and to engender in them an appreciation of the
scientific process. Rather than using only traditional one-on-one methods for
mentoring undergraduate research, this approach provides first-hand, course-
based research experiences for all biology students. The evaluation of the
effectiveness of the modules at addressing goals for student learning
incorporates use of several established and reliable instruments. The modules
are designed to be flexible, allowing for adoption of the research-based
pedagogy model at a variety of institutional types (including secondary schools,
urban or rural universities, and schools with small or large student bodies),
and are being shared through a website. This research-based pedagogy model also
incorporates use of upper-level research students to mentor cohorts of
underclassmen during laboratory exercises. The research students benefit by
receiving invaluable instructional training; serving as mentors is giving them
opportunities to become more knowledgeable and adept at communicating about
their chosen research topics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being co-
funded by funds from the Directorate for Biological Sciences, Emerging Frontiers
Division.