* 0942518
* Collaborative Research:  Bringing Seismology's Grand Challenges to the Undergraduate Classroom
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Margaret 09, The College of New Jersey
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 08/31/2014
* USD 166,946.00

Geology (42)&lt;br/&gt;Through collaboration among The College of New Jersey,
the Incorporated Research Institutions for Seismology Education and Outreach
Program (IRIS E&amp;O), and IRIS member institutions, seismological instruction
at the undergraduate level is being enhanced through the creation of curricular
materials that foster hands-on and active engagement with content related to
current research. To provide a structure for these new educational resources,
the framework of the "Seismological Grand Challenges in Understanding Earth's
Dynamic System" is being used. The "Grand Challenges" are ten questions that
identify promising research directions on the frontiers of seismology that were
posed as a result of the "Long Range Science Plan for Seismology" workshop held
in September, 2008 and attended by members of the seismological and geophysical
research community. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. Though the "Grand Challenges"
identify exciting research directions in seismology, they also intrinsically
allow for the creation of curricular materials that integrate cutting edge
research and authentic data. Classroom activities are being created for each of
the ten "Grand Challenges", including at least 6 inquiry-based extended
laboratory exercises. Each activity addresses a novel and interesting research
problem and is helping address shortcomings in current seismological instruction
at the undergraduate level. The focus of the modules is on an Earth Systems
approach and the data-intensive activities are being designed to challenge
students to address common geoscience misconceptions. The modules are being
tested at pilot institutions and evaluated and revised by undergraduate
educators and seismological research personnel. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts.
Dissemination efforts are taking advantage of IRIS E&amp;O's existing
infrastructure. The course materials are being posted on the IRIS website with
links from other teaching websites such as SERC. In recognition of the cutting-
edge nature of the content of the modules, the instructor's guide contains
materials communicating an approach for delivering the content in the classroom,
as well as promoting instructor learning of subject matter, pedagogy and
pedagogical content knowledge. Varied approaches to dissemination are
contributing to improving and potentially transforming seismology education for
students nationwide.