* 0942614
* Ice Sheet Models for the 21st Century: Summer School
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Christina Hulbe, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Julie Palais
* 06/30/2010
* USD 28,084.00

This award is for support of an ice sheet modeling summer school that responds
to the need for both improved physics in the models and well trained scientists
able to make those improvements. The summer school will be held at Portland
State University in August 2009. The list of topics to be covered during the
two-week summer school include the theoretical basis of ice sheet models, code
development, data for model initialization and performance, hypothesis testing,
model sensitivity, stability, and parameter estimation, the community ice sheet
model (CISM), the community climate system model (CCSM). The school is designed
with a collaborative, problem solving framework. Participants span a range of
experience levels, from senior scientists in lecturer roles, to invited young
scientists, to graduate students selected by application. Participants have been
invited from both academic institutions and national research labs. This
framework is in keeping with a community model development strategy that makes
resources available to the widest possible range of
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project is that
ice sheet contribution to sea level rise is observed to have transitioned from
slightly negative to positive and growing over the last decade. At the same
time, rapid changes in ice discharge have been observed in Greenland and in some
Antarctic regions. How long or at what magnitude these trends will continue is
unknown. The climate system models now in use to make future projections were
not designed to address the physical processes associated with rapid
fluctuations in ice such as those now observed. Thus, there is considerable
recent interest in improving the representation of ice sheet dynamics in climate
system models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this activity include
not only the education and training of the next generation of polar researchers
but also the relevance to a topic of importance to society. The summer school
follows from an ice sheet modeling workshop held during the 2008 Scientific
Committee on Antarctic Research and International Arctic Science Committee joint
meeting in St. Petersburg, Russia. We anticipate that this program too will lead
to other, similar events in the years ahead. The opportunity for working
interaction among an inter-institutional group of senior and junior researchers
is rare and we anticipate that it will lead to future research collaborations.
Lecture notes and exercises will be collected into a summer school document and
distributed to participants as well as the wider glaciological and climate
modeling community. This, and other resources, will also be available at a
website maintained at the University of Montana. The group of lecturers, other
invited participants, and student applicants is international. About 30% of the
invitees and 20% of student applicants are women.