* 0942762
* Reinvigorating CS1 by enabling creative Web 2.0 programming
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Stephen Edwards, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Don Millard
* 08/31/2012
* USD 160,500.00

Computer Science (31) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This project
produces educational materials and the necessary technological infrastructure to
allow the use of state-of-the-art Web 2.0 technology in CS1, enabling a new
generation of programming activities that significantly increase student
engagement. This research develops an open-source server environment based on
custom virtual machines that allows students to create and deploy rich internet
applications without exposing them to the complexity normally associated with
these applications. The environment's design provides the necessary abstractions
that facilitate students developing such applications while retaining
instructional focus on CS principles and concepts, rather than transient
technology trends. This project develops an open-source class library that
allows students to integrate many real-world data sources into their
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A complete set of CS1 course assignments is
developed, including programming exercises and labs with automated grading
support, and a custom-published textbook suitable for a semester-long course.
Topics are geared towards using real-world problems that are relevant in a
student's life, including problems that show the social impact of the
discipline, creating solutions that are meaningful to others outside the
classroom, and giving students more creative control and more flexibility in the
solutions they create. The project is evaluated by performing a concurrent,
outcome-based assessment of the teaching infrastructure across the duration of
the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The immediate impact is that
first-year computer science students are able to create applications whose style
is indistinguishable from the modern web applications they are using daily.
Further, connecting activities to externally meaningful problems and allowing
students greater creative control works to increase engagement and personal
investment in learning. By making materials available to others under an open
source license, and by actively disseminating results via a community website,
others are able to similarly increase the attractiveness of their first CS
offerings. The growth in relevance the project enables is specifically intended
to increase recruitment and retention of women to CS who, as prior research
indicates, are more likely than men to study computer science as an enabling
technology for meaningful pursuits in non computer science domains.