* 0942453
* A Cloud-based Resource and Service Sharing Platform for Computer and Network Security Education
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2010,06/30/2013
* Dijiang Huang, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 06/30/2013
* USD 200,000.00

Computer Science (31) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to
develop a computer and network security instructional laboratory (CNS-IL) to
enhance undergraduate education in STEM disciplines. CNS-IL is designed to be a
cost-effective, scalable, user-friendly, flexible, and remotely accessible
virtual laboratory offering significant enhancements to undergraduate education
in information assurance. It utilizes highly advanced Cloud Computing and Web
2.0 for easy experimentation of various computer and network security
applications and attack scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This instructional
laboratory allows researchers and students to experiment and learn a variety of
modern technologies such as Cloud Computing, wireless applications and provides
a platform for studying emerging security issues in Cloud Computing. Using
infrastructure-as-a-service (IaaS), platform-as-a-service (PaaS), and software-
as-a-service (SaaS) allows a share development results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project adopts clustering technologies that utilize surplus college computing
resources so it can be easily set up in colleges with limited budgets and
laboratory space. It is designed as a cost-effective solution since it uses
open-source software with a rich set of experiment files and related course
materials shared using modern Web 2.0 principles. This allows rapid
dissemination in new laboratory developments in security-based curricula. Also,
while the CNS-IL is designed mainly for undergraduate courses, it can be used as
a showcase for high school student recruitment efforts.