* 0942165
* CCLI/Type1: VUE: A Versatile Unix Emulator of Embedded Systems for Software Oriented Students
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2014
* Saad Biaz, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 02/28/2014
* USD 102,934.00

Computer Science (31)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We are surrounded by embedded systems
that use software to control devices in cars, appliances and cell phones. There
is a worldwide shortage of engineers with core skills for designing embedded
systems. Computer science students rarely have an opportunity to design
meaningful software for embedded systems. Investigators are developing a
Versatile Unix Emulator (VUE) to address this need. It is used to emulate four
software architectures: round robin, round robin with interrupts, function queue
scheduler and real-time operating system software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;VUE
creates an application with three groups of processes: 1) virtual input devices,
2) virtual output devices, and 3) control processes. An instructor creates a
laboratory exercise by specifying input, output devices and a scenario of
events. Students develop software to control the process of the embedded systems
and must consider design trade-offs such as energy consumption and
responsiveness. VUE generates a rich and repeatable set of events that stress
test student designs. The automated random events create repeatable experiments
to evaluate software quality. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Expected outcomes include
the emulator and a collection of laboratory exercises. VUE is being piloted at
Auburn University and Tuskegee University. Workshops are provided to train
faculty how to adopt the materials. &lt;br/&gt;