* 0942936
* CIF: SMALL: Explorations and Insights into Adaptive Networks, Animal Flocking Behavior, and Swarm Intelligence
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Ali Sayed, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 06/30/2012
* USD 300,000.00

Abstract



Since the early 1990s, some useful optimization algorithms have emerged from the
social and biological sciences in their studies of animal flock behavior and
swarm intelligence. It has been observed, for example, that while individual
agents in an animal colony are not capable of complex behavior, the combined
coordination among multiple agents leads to the manifestation of regular
patterns of behavior. Several algorithms have been developed to model the
movement of animal flocks. These investigations are proving useful in modeling
and understanding complex phenomena and in developing applications in areas
ranging from biology to nanotechnology. The research involves investigating
interconnections between these studies on swarm intelligence in the biological
and social sciences, and more recent studies on adaptive networks in system
theory.



Adaptive networks consist of isotropic nodes spread over a geographic domain.
The nodes sense the environment and attempt to understand a phenomenon of
interest based on their noisy observations and without any node taking a central
control role. The nodes cooperate with each other through local interactions and
adapt their states, and the network topology, in response to data collected at
the nodes and data received from their neighbors. Information arriving at a node
propagates throughout the network by means of a diffusive process. The diffusion
of information results in a form of collective intelligence as is evidenced by
improved learning and convergence behavior relative to non-cooperative networks.
A closer study of the dynamics of swarm behavior and adaptive networks can
suggest alternative techniques for designing adaptive networks and for
understanding flock behavior, with potential impact on the applications that can
be motivated from these developments.



