* 0942279
* Production and Assessment of Student-Authored Wiki Textbooks
* EHR,DUE
* 02/15/2010,10/31/2012
* Edward Gehringer, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Jane Prey
* 10/31/2012
* USD 110,518.00

Computer Science (31) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Emerging information technologies
are enabling new forms of content delivery. Students are provided with the
opportunity of writing a peer-reviewed textbook for their own course. Instead of
being merely the consumers of knowledge, students become co-producers, along
with the instructor. This is forcing them to learn the material in greater
depth, and to reflect upon it more frequently. The natural medium for the
creation of such a textbook is a wiki, because it standardizes the format and
makes it easy for students to edit parts of a larger work. This project is
combining two sets of expertise: wiki textbook creation and software for peer
review of student-generated content. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A software system to
manage the creation and peer review of a wiki textbook has several automating
features. These features include rubric creation by students, double-blind
feedback between author and reviewer, and quality-control strategies for student
peer reviews. This software system also provides support for flow management to
allow different chapters of the text to be written and reviewed at different
times during the course of the creation to support this experience.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project is advancing understanding in a variety of disciplines
by engaging students in knowledge generation as well as knowledge acquisition.
Students not only learn existing material better, but they uncover and codify
new knowledge for their peers. This gives students first-hand experience with
the process of inquiry and scientific discovery. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By making
it easier to manage the writing of a wiki textbook in a class, it encourages
instructors to have their students write wiki textbooks. Finally, the software
system that is being developed is adoptable in disciplines other than STEM.