* 0942702
* Rebuilding the Astronomy Curriculum around Robotic Telescope Observations and Active Learning Exercises
* EHR,DUE
* 08/15/2010,07/31/2015
* Jack Gabel, Creighton University
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 07/31/2015
* USD 199,306.00

The university is revising its Astronomy curriculum. The changes are guided by
recent physics education research findings that emphasize interactive and hands-
on learning strategies in order to better serve the educational needs of
Creighton and two other local universities (Metropolitan Community College and
the University of Nebraska at Omaha), area middle and secondary schools, and the
greater metropolitan Omaha community. The changes are made possible by the
purchase, installation, and operation of a robotic telescope capable of remote
observations that is being made available to students and faculty at local and
regional institutions as well as middle and secondary students in the region.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: Using this facility, the project is
adapting observationally-based exercises that have been designed and used
successfully at other institutions for use with remote telescopes into the
introductory astronomy curriculum. The exercises are designed for non-science,
introductory astronomy students but can readily be used with high school and
mid-high students. Other components of the revision involve the introduction of
physics and astronomy education research strategies in the introductory
astronomy lecture, including increased use of tutorials and problem/research
based learning. A separate advanced lab section is being offered for interested
introductory astronomy students and freshmen who may be considering a physics
major, as well as an upper division observational astronomy course for science
majors. Both are implementing project-based learning with emphasis on advanced
observational astronomy techniques and instrumentation, including imagery,
photometry, and spectral analysis using the robotic telescope. A comprehensive
evaluation is being undertaken to gauge progress in learning outcomes and
overall success in achieving project goals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact: The project benefits approximately 500 students who enroll in
introductory astronomy at Creighton, and 1000 students who enroll in courses
offered at Metropolitan Community College and the University of Nebraska at
Omaha. In addition, the project provides project-based learning opportunities in
astronomy for thousands of middle/secondary students in the Omaha metro region
and state of Nebraska. The project has a broad reach in a geographical area that
is currently underserved in astronomy education and outreach.