* 0942156
* CAREER: A Study of Stochastic and Robust Integer Programming: Algorithms, Computations and Applications
* NONE,NONE
* 05/17/2009,07/31/2014
* Yongpei Guan, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Edwin Romeijn
* 07/31/2014
* USD 400,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award provides funds for research
and education activities to advance the theory, computations and applications of
stochastic and robust integer programming. Integer decision variables are
commonly used in models for decision making problems. Moreover, in real-time
decision making problems, instance parameters are usually uncertain. This work
will study stochastic and robust integer programming approaches to formulate and
solve decision making problems with integer decision variables and uncertain
parameters. The research activities include 1) studying polyhedral structures
and polynomial time algorithms for fundamental problem formulations, 2)
discovering new methods to integrate cutting planes with decomposition
algorithms, 3) exploring cyberinfrastructure to implement the algorithms
efficiently in high performance computing facilities, and 4) integrating
theoretical analysis with application problems in power asset optimization,
joint pricing and inventory planning, and weather forecasting and evacuation
plans. The education activities include 1) promoting the practice of stochastic
and robust integer programming as an efficient approach to solve decision making
under uncertainty problems and 2) stimulating student interest in research in
science and technology, especially in operations research.

The research and education tasks are integrated in a way that both benefit from
each other. If successful, the results of the research activities will lead to
methodology innovations for solving large-scale decision making under
uncertainty problems and advance the utilization of cyberinfrastructure in
optimization. These research outcomes will provide new methodologies that can be
used to instruct the next generation of engineers on efficient optimization
methods. In addition, the activities will have big impact on industry and
society by disseminating advanced methodologies to practitioners and providing
outreach to underrepresented minority students, through collaborations with
local industry and research centers such as Center for Engineering Logistics and
Distribution, Center for Analysis and Prediction of Storms, and the K20 Center.