* 0942097
* Collaborative Research: Portable, Modular, Modern Technology Infused Courseware for Broader Embedded Systems Education
* EHR,DUE
* 03/15/2010,02/28/2013
* Kai Qian, Southern Polytechnic State University
* Standard Grant
* Jane Prey
* 02/28/2013
* USD 96,305.00

Computing-Others (35)

Embedded systems play more and more important roles in all aspects of our
society. The rapid growth of embedded systems has resulted in a shortage of
professionals for embedded software development. This project is creating a new
model of embedded systems education with the following emphasis: (1) Portable
and affordable. The developed courseware is providing portable real labs based
on a popular microcomputer unit development kit that is expandable and
affordable. This removes the barrier of setting up high cost embedded systems
labs; (2) Modular and flexible. The courseware and projects that are being
developed are modular and have multiple learning levels. The modular design
gives instructors the flexibility to adopt the full course or integrate selected
modules based on their specific needs. The proposed modules and projects are
infusing modern technology of embedded software to promote students' creativity
and to inspire life-long learning.

This courseware is delivered in an integrated package including a supporting
textbook bundled with a portable embedded system development kit. The courseware
is providing a "ready-to-adopt" model and greatly saves resources and time for
broadening embedded systems education to meet emerging workforce and education
needs in science, technology, and engineering.

The portable and modular design of this new courseware is benefiting a wide
range of universities and colleges that have a need for embedded systems
education but are hindered by limited financial budget, lab facilities, and
scarce dedicated staff and faculty. This project includes an academic community
that has eight institutions from five states.