* 0943237
* (Voss) A Comparative Study of Virtual R&D Organizations: A Socio-technical Systems Analysis
* CSE,OAC
* 01/15/2010,09/30/2013
* Betty Barrett, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Crowston
* 09/30/2013
* USD 200,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). This study investigates the characteristics of effective
virtual organizations across different stages of research and development using
a comparative case study approach. Socio-technical systems analysis will be used
as a theoretical lens to examine how virtuality influences the quality of
deliberations in the work of four different research and development
organizations. While deliberations as a key component of the research and
development process has been well established in the face-to-face context, not
much is known about their efficacy in the virtual context. A grounded theory of
effective virtual organization design in research and development will be
derived by collecting data from both private and public sector organizations.
Using a mixed methods approach, both current and prospective virtual research
and development projects from these sites, including comparisons of successful
versus unsuccessful projects will be studied across the research and development
continuum. Using a comparative case study approach allows for a closer
examination of the critical success factors of virtual research and development
deliberations, resulting in more in-depth and descriptive accounts of the social
and technical factors that influence research and development project outcomes.

This research advances socio-technical systems theory and practice by extending
the deliberation analysis method to the study of virtual organizations.
Deliberations are equivocality reducing events that are critical to nonroutine
work systems, especially those involving knowledge generation and knowledge
utilization. A focus on deliberations is then a means of examining the non-
obvious and counterintuitive patterns of work that would normally be invisible
to approaches that limit their focus to formal organization, technical system
features, or the efficacy of various IT solutions. Findings from this project
are relevant to other research and development organizations that are
increasingly conducting knowledge generation and product development via virtual
organizations, in particular, scientific projects that require large-scale,
multi-institutional efforts. Case studies generated from this award identify
best practices of how virtual deliberations are designed and managed will be of
direct and practical benefit to multi-university centers, pure research labs,
commercial development operations, and for profit or non-profit business
activities.

Findings from this study will be disseminated in mainstream academic journals
and professional conferences in the organization sciences, human resources and
engineering management disciplines. Dissemination and sharing of best practices
on virtual organizations to the wider corporate community and government
agencies will be conducted through webinars and conferences.