* 0943873
* Economic Stimulus and Innovation Capacity at the Department of Energy
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Fred Block, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Julia I. Lane
* 07/31/2011
* USD 110,311.00

The research addresses a fundamentally important question -- namely how the
federal government can accelerate the rate of progress in energy innovation.
Over the last twenty-five years, the Federal Government has significantly
expanded its role in supporting the private sector?s commercialization of new
civilian and dual use technologies. However, as contributors to the ?science of
science policy? have noted, the research community has not yet developed a set
of effective metrics or even conceptual tools to track the relative
effectiveness of different initiatives and funding strategies. The consequence
is that there is still much work to be in done in identifying the ?best
practices? for allocating Federal R&D dollars.

Two key questions are addressed in order to advance the understanding of ?best
practices?. The first is what types of resources and what types of capacities do
agencies need to improve their effectiveness in moving technologies towards
large scale deployment? The second is how do the agency?s patterns of network
collaboration shift in response to the science investments? The answer to the
second question is particularly important given that both technological
breakthroughs and continuing industry development rely on the construction of
complex collaborative networks that link government officials with businesses
and with technologists in universities and federal laboratories

The PI develops a comprehensive database on all of the agency?s initiatives for
three distinct technologies: photovoltaics, advanced batteries, and cellulosic
ethanol through the fir. The database will consist of data provided by the
agency as well as interviews with agency and private sector officials. The
resulting three rich case studies will inform a broader understanding of both
success and failures during the implementation period. Such case studies are
critical to developing a better understanding of the varieties of strategies
pursued by government agencies and they also illuminate the complex web of
collaborators in the private sector, in universities, and in federal
laboratories.

Broader Impact: The enhanced understanding of how public-private technology
partnerships work is likely to lead to more effective partnerships that better
promote technology commercialization. The timely and the "on the ground"
analysis of the very substantial increase in funding for the DOE both generate
knowledge of significant importance to our knowledge of the larger question of
the role of the federal government in supporting innovation but yields immediate
benefits for the DOE itself -- providing an opportunity for careful reflection
and analysis in close to real time.