* 0943721
* RUI:  Laboratory Studies of Particle Nucleation--Homogeneous Nucleation Involving Sulfuric Acid (H2SO4), Water (H2O), and Ammonia (NH3) Vapors
* GEO,AGS
* 01/15/2010,12/31/2014
* David Hanson, Augsburg University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 12/31/2014
* USD 308,758.00

The investigator will measure the rate of nucleation of new particles in flow
reactor experiments. The formation rate of new particles will be measured as a
function of sulfuric acid concentration, temperature, relative humidity and
ammonia concentration. The researchers plan to deploy as sources of sulfuric
acid both the vapor over the bulk liquid and in situ oxidation of sulfur dioxide
via hydroxyl radical generated photolytically. Measurements in the binary system
to higher relative humidities and to lower temperatures are needed as a baseline
for understanding nucleation within the flow reactor and for evaluating
theoretical models. The photolytic system will allow for an extended source of
sulfuric acid that balances its loss to the wall, facilitating the analysis and
interpretation of nucleation results. For example, it will allow for a
controllable exposure to a particle growth agent so that particles can be
efficiently detected by the particle detector. The extended source will also
allow for exploration of nucleation at low sulfuric acid concentrations.
Finally, verification is needed of recent work using a photolytic source that
showed enhancements in the nucleation rate of factors of 105 or more over bulk
source nucleation rates. This work will contribute to understanding nucleation
in the atmosphere and how it influences the concentration of cloud condensation
nuclei whose role in climate processes is believed to be large but is still
quite uncertain. Understanding the formation of atmospheric particles is also
important as inhaled particulate matter is a health hazard. Flow reactor
experimental methods for measuring particle formation and growth will be further
developed. Results for nucleation rates in the sulfuric acid, water, and ammonia
systems will be synthesized and a comprehensive picture of laboratory work will
be developed. This will aid interpretation of field data and evaluating
mechanisms of nucleation.

The project will enhance the research and the educational culture at Augsburg
College by offering a research opportunity for undergraduates interested in the
environmental sciences. The work is timely and important, which will foster a
dedication to the work and fuel the student's imagination. The project will
enhance undergraduate training by providing: (a) a high quality work experience
where basic laboratory skills will be developed, (b) enhance motivation by
obtaining research results that can affect our understanding of global warming
processes, and (c) provide opportunities for presenting results at local and
national meetings. This project will foster the continuation of the partnership
between a private liberal arts college and a public research university, thereby
expanding learning and training opportunities for Augsburg College's student
population. It is expected that women and persons from underrepresented groups
will continue to be the majority of the undergraduate students in the PI's lab.
Dissemination of results will include presentations at local and national
scientific meetings and manuscript publications.