* 0943407
* Abrasion by Bedload and Suspended Load: Experimental Study
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2013
* Kelin Whipple, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 03/31/2013
* USD 128,674.00

Abstract: ASU Flume Study &lt;br/&gt;?Abrasion by Bedload and Suspended Load:
Experimental Study?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;River incision into rock plays an
important role in diverse problems ranging from practical to academic. From dam
spillway design, to river management planning including maintenance of suitable
aquatic habitats in mountain rivers and river restoration efforts, to the long-
term controls on the slope, width, and roughness of mountain rivers, a
quantitative understanding of the mechanics of river incision into rock is
essential and of broad interest. There has been substantial progress in the past
decade on understanding the interactions among climate, topography, erosion, and
tectonics; recognition of the central role of river incision into rock has been
a key insight. Exploration of the role played by bedrock channels, however, has
been accomplished primarily with simplified stream power models (generic rule
sets for river incision that lump together a diverse set of erosional
mechanisms). Refined, and more realistic, model predictions require advances in
our quantitative understanding of erosion processes. Field-based investigation
of bedrock incision processes is essential, but does not allow the investigator
full control of critical variables. Controlled laboratory experiments have
increasingly been used to explore fundamental aspects of the physics of river
incision, to test existing models, and to guide their refinement.&lt;br/&gt;
This research project at ASU includes flume experiments, data analysis, and
theoretical development. The experiments will be designed to complement and
extend previous flume studies. The primary controlling variables (flux and size
distribution of sediment; channel slope; water discharge; and substrate
hardness) will be varied in a systematic exploration of conditions, including
the transition from bedload to suspended load transport. Bed morphology will be
allowed to evolve naturally, and the critical feedbacks between bed morphology,
fluid dynamics, sediment flux, and local erosion rate will be quantified. Based
on preliminary experiments, field observations, and previous numerical studies,
we formulate quantitative hypotheses that can and will be tested by direct
measurement of erosion rate, bed topography, grain saltation trajectories,
sediment transport rate, and fluid flow conditions, thus allowing refinement of
current theory. &lt;br/&gt;The results from this research project will have
important implications for basic science and a number of practical concerns of
societal relevance. Advances in the understanding of the linkages between
bedrock lithology, sediment characteristics and channel morphology are of
potentially great value in solving applied problems of minimizing and mitigating
for landuse impacts and restoring damaged riverine habitat and ecosystems.
Engineering planning and management demand understanding of the processes that
govern channel changes, including bed roughness and alluvial cover
characteristics. A postdoctoral researcher, a graduate student and several
undergraduates will receive invaluable training from this research project.
Also, laboratory demonstrations will be developed for use in undergraduate
courses and for public outreach events. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;