* 0943485
* U.S.-Australia Planning Visit:  Geometrical Structure and Applications in the Symmetric Non-communtative Spaces of Measurable Operators
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2011
* Anna Kaminska, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* R.  Clive Woods
* 04/30/2011
* USD 10,171.00

0943485&lt;br/&gt;Kaminska&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a planning
visit to enable Professor Anna Kaminska at the University of Memphis in
Tennessee to meet with Professor Fedor Sukochev at the University of New South
Wales in Sydney, Australia and Professor Alan Carey at the Australian National
University in Canberra. The visit will help develop a detailed international
collaborative research project on isomorphic and isometric geometric properties
of (quasi) Banach spaces. They will also include non-commutative operator theory
in Hilbert spaces and non-commutative phenomena. The non-commutative spaces are
generalization of the unitary ideals to the spaces of measurable operators
affiliated to von Neumann algebra with trace, whose singular values lie in a
symmetric Banach function space. In recent years they have become subjects of
intense studies. During the visit in Sydney, the suggested research topics will
be prioritized according to their importance, the degree of difficulties and
their promises to be solved. The specific approach to each problem will be
discussed and the work will be divided appropriately.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is sufficient overlap of interests between faculty
at the University of Memphis (with expertise in symmetric Banach function
spaces), the University of New South Wales (with expertise in the non-
commutative theory of measurable operators) and the Australian National
University (with expertise in non-commutative geometry to indicate that they can
successfully pursue the activities proposed, and that the interaction will
benefit both sides. In addition, the involvement of a US graduate student from
the University of Memphis will enable her to gain a valuable international
perspective and insight. She will also participate in discussions on future
collaborative activities with the researchers and will present her own research
results at an Analysis Seminar at the South Wales University.