* 0943338
* Collaborative Research: Metabolism and Transfer of Nitrogen in the Arbuscular Mycorrhizal Symbiosis
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Heike Bucking, South Dakota State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 08/31/2011
* USD 203,047.00

The arbuscular mycorrhizal symbiosis, a close interaction between plant roots
and soil fungi, is essential for the nutrient uptake of approximately 80 % of
all known plant species. The arbuscular mycorrhizal fungus with its extraradical
mycelium takes up nutrients such as phosphate and nitrogen for the plant, and is
supplied in exchange with carbohydrates from the plant. However, our knowledge
of the metabolic pathways involved in nitrogen uptake and transfer to the host
plant and about the regulation of nutrient exchange between the symbiotic
partners is still limited. The goal of this project is to understand the
exchange of nutrients in the arbuscular mycorrhizal symbiosis, which is also key
to applying arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi as "biofertilizers" in sustainable
agriculture. The experimental approach we plan includes stable and radioactive
isotope labeling, protein quantification and enzymatic assays, gene expression
studies and protein and elemental localization techniques such as
immunohistochemistry and energy dispersive X-ray microanalysis. This project
will tell us how nitrogen is handled in the arbuscular mycorrhizal symbiosis,
and how the flux of nitrogen in the symbiosis is regulated. The trainees,
including a postdoc, a graduate student and undergraduates will learn an
unusually broad range of modern biological techniques and will gain insights
into the arbuscular mycorrhizal symbiosis and its importance for the nutrient
acquisition of plants.