* 0943321
* EAGER:  Nanoparticle-Based Integrated Microsystem for Selective Targeting of Bio-Species in Flowing Suspensions
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Linan Jiang, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2012
* USD 149,934.00

The objective of this research is to develop a high-performance system to target
individual bio-species with dramatically enhanced specificity and sensitivity.
The approach is based on utilizing smart nanoparticles, encapsulating various
chemicals and equipped with homing features, to provide a vehicle for pin-point
delivery of payloads at a nanoscale with high efficiency. Current systems
utilize drugs with very low specificity resulting in serious side effects and
poor system response. Organic-inorganic nanoparticles will be functionalized
with antibodies for specific binding to circulating tumor cells flowing in
complex mixtures to improve the system performance.&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit lies in the goal of selectively capturing a rare moving bio target that is
still a tremendous engineering challenge. Metastatic cancer cells circulating in
the blood stream will be targeted. To meet this challenge, unique trans-membrane
cell-cell adhesion molecules are used as receptors. The antibodies on the hybrid
nanoparticles, having a liposomal bilayer structure and a silicate surface, are
used as homing ligands for selective binding to the target cell
receptors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project could have a major impact by
applying the proposed methodologies not only to detection but also diagnosis,
monitoring and treatment of diseases. An automated immunoassay employed at the
point-of-care with enhanced specificity will increase the efficacy of patient
treatment helping eradicate diseases such as cancer. The proposed project
directly supports the Bio-MEMS educational program currently under development;
it incorporates workforce development by providing an opportunity for students
to carry out advanced interdisciplinary research. Science education outreach for
K-12 and general communities will also be arranged.&lt;br/&gt;