* 0943441
* Collaborative Research:  Revolutionary New Capabilities for EPR and Toroid NMR
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Thomas Skinner, Wright State University
* Standard Grant
* Tanja Pietra√ü
* 08/31/2012
* USD 225,889.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). In this EAGER award, funded by the Experimental Physical
Chemistry program, Professors Thomas Skinner and Klaus Woelk and their students
will employ optimal control theory as a comprehensive methodology to extend the
formidable capabilities of magnetic resonance spectroscopy for research. This
research will address current limitations in magnetic resonance spectroscopy:
(i) the extreme radio-frequency inhomogeneity seen in toroid cavity probes used
in nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR); and (ii) the extreme bandwidths required in
electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR). NMR and EPR have a wealth of applications
in chemistry, biochemistry, materials science, physics, and medicine that
directly benefit society. Achieving objective (i) for the field of toroid cavity
NMR will fully enable its unique potential for high pressure and high
temperature studies of in-situ chemical reactions and micrometer-scale chemical-
shift imaging. Achieving objective (ii) will enable true Fourier transform EPR
and its use for structural and conformational studies. In addition, this project
will provide postdoctoral training, thesis projects for graduate students, as
well as junior and senior projects for physics, chemistry, and engineering
majors at Wright State University and Missouri University of Science and
Technology. Students and postdoctoral graduates will be educated in state-of-
the-art computing and modeling techniques that they may use in potentially
unforeseen ways to enhance their viability throughout their prospective careers,
positioning them to take advantage of the flexibility in today's job market.