* 0943311
* East Coast Winch Pool Facility
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Susan Humphris, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Hawkins
* 07/31/2013
* USD 2,779,273.00

ABSTRACT &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;31 July 2009&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
0943311&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute
(WHOI)&lt;br/&gt;PI: D. Fisichella&lt;br/&gt;Co-PI: S.
Humphris&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal requests funding to initiate the UNOLS East Coast Winch Pool which will
support scientific operations aboard vessels in the US academic research vessel
fleet as well as other US government-owned research vessels. The bulk of the
funds provided will purchase portable winches and handling systems having
advanced ?next-generations? capabilities that will enhance safety and the
collection of scientific data at sea. This first year of funding for the East
Coast Winch Pool will include purchase and/or maintenance and up-grade of the
following:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Portable, general-purpose winches (Light-
duty, Medium-duty, and 0.680)&lt;br/&gt;2. Long Core System aboard the R/V
KNORR&lt;br/&gt;3. Portable Cable Spoolers&lt;br/&gt;4. JASON ROV Handling
System&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These winches and handling systems will support a
wide variety missions on all UNOLS vessels. The UNOLS East Coast Winch Pool, and
corresponding West Coast Winch Pool at Scripps, will also serve to ensure that
the equipment meets current UNOLS standards, provides commonality of design, and
provides proper maintenance, administrative and logistical support to the
academic fleet and the science community at large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The PI addressed the Broader Impact and Intellectual Merit of the
proposed UNOLS East Coast Winch Pool. The shared-use equipment purchased, and
the administrative structure established to support the equipment, will provide
improved services to both the vessel operators and the scientific community. The
Winch Pool structure will also ensure proper maintenance of equipment,
commonality of design, compliance with current standards, and efficiencies to
NSF with regard to logistics, tracking and oversight of shared-use assets. The
research projects supported have been individually peer-reviewed for scientific
merit. Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute participates in a large number of
outreach programs including web broadcasts from vessel while at sea, open house
events, and other initiatives such as ?Dive and Discover? with the submersible
ALVIN.