* 0943771
* Testing Predictions from the Cascade and Pre-Seismic Slip Models for Foreshock Occurrence with the High Precision Catalog for Northern California
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2014
* Felix Waldhauser, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 03/31/2014
* USD 238,367.00

An unanswered question is how do large earthquakes initiate and can their
nucleation process be distinguished from small earthquakes? The existence of
foreshocks before some large earthquakes is one of the best documented
observables preceding mainshocks and therefore may offer clues into these
processes. A related question is whether foreshocks are different than any other
earthquakes? Foreshocks are the most obvious and well recorded precursors to
some large earthquakes. It is essential to understand the physical mechanisms
for their occurrence. If a single triggering law can explain the observed
behavior for foreshocks, mainshocks, and aftershocks, then foreshocks have no
more predictive power than any other earthquake. If, however, they occur as a
byproduct and indirect evidence of an aseismic nucleation phase that scales with
eventual mainshock magnitude they may have some forecasting ability, in and
among themselves, or provide confirmation and support of the pre-seismic slip
model predicted by experimental and theoretical research to occur before large
earthquakes. Other methods of detecting this nucleation phase may then perhaps
be developed. The implications of this research will bear directly on the
question of earthquake predictability, thus having broad impact and interest to
the general public, but especially among hazard forecasting analysts,
governmental agencies, and policy makers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal
will test two competing models for the occurrence of foreshocks. The first is
the cascade model where foreshocks are a successive series of failures that push
the mainshock closer to failure. The second, pre-seismic slip, is one where
foreshocks are indirect evidence of a slow, aseismic nucleation phase that is
predicted to scale with mainshock magnitude. Both predictions can be evaluated
with the high resolution catalog we have developed for northern California (up
to three orders of magnitude improvement). Static stress change calculations
with improved source parameters and locations can determine if this is a viable
mechanism for enhancing or destressing mainshock failure in the cascade model.
Conversely measurements of the foreshock zone radius and rupture may show a
correlation with mainshock magnitude as predicted in the pre-seismic slip model.
Interpretation of these measurements has been difficult before in most prior
studies because the location errors were greater than the expected size of the
nucleation region. Our preliminary results on a larger data set of 162 foreshock
sequences show that there is a negative correlation of foreshock occurrence with
normal stress manifested in both the lithostatic load with depth and with
regional tectonic stress indicated by the orientation of mainshock slip. Our
proposed work will examine if a single, unifying triggering law on theoretical
grounds can explain the observations in our data. Clear well-defined predictions
of two competing models for foreshock occurrence can now be tested with better
quality data and much more of it to determine meaningful statistics and reliable
conclusions. These scientific hypotheses were essentially untestable before due
to location errors, but now with a large, 300,000 event complete high- precision
catalog of northern California, both the static stress triggering mechanism of
the cascade model and the aseismic nucleation phase of the pre-seismic slip
model can independently be examined if they are consistent with the observed
data. It is still not known how large earthquakes initiate and therefore it is
important to gain knowledge and insight into the physical processes for
immediate foreshocks.