* 0943711
* Photovoltaics in Nanoscale Ferroelectric Films
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Sushma Kotru, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* john zavada
* 06/30/2012
* USD 152,271.00

Photovoltaics in Nanoscale Ferroelectric Films&lt;br/&gt;Proposal no: ECCS
0943711.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is
funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this exploratory effort is to
investigate photovoltaic effects in nanoscale ferroelectric films. The approach
is to demonstrate higher photovoltaic conversion efficiency in solar cells made
from nanoscale ferroelectric films. Compared to the conventional Si solar cells
where the limited charge transport at the junction constrains the PV conversion
efficiency of the cell; the effect is essentially a bulk-effect in
ferroelectrics. This property makes nanoscale ferroelectric films an excellent
choice for such applications which remain unexploited to
date.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;Enhanced photovoltaic
effects in nanoscale ferroelectric films will be demonstrated with the potential
for higher photovoltaic conversion efficiencies in solar cells made from these
materials. This work could pave the way for future research directions in
photovoltaics based on nanoscale ferroelectrics. This activity will lead to
research data in photovoltaics and other optical applications for
nanoferroelectric films that can be used in future devices, combining the
ferroelectric, electronic and optical functionalities of such
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;This effort will
contribute to new knowledge in processing, characterization and understanding of
the transport properties responsible for photovoltaic effects in nanoscale
ferroelectric films. The knowledge gained will have broader applications for the
research community in applying processes to similar ferroelectric systems. The
education plan is to incorporate results from the proposed research in a
graduate/undergraduate level course on ferroelectrics. The project will impact
students by preparing them for the workforce as well as for graduate
study/advanced research on nanoferroelectric based photovoltaics. Results will
be disseminated to the research community through conferences and journal
papers. A strong outreach activity involving students, including minority
student, from elementary age to graduate level will be conducted.