* 0943449
* RAPID: The Impact of Stimulus Spending on Energy Efficiency in a Low-Income Dallas Neighborhood: Implications for Science Policy
* SBE,SBE
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2011
* Catherine Eckel, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Julia I. Lane
* 07/31/2011
* USD 198,037.00

An important part of the science stimulus is to improve household energy
efficiency. However, the effective implementation of such policy requires
understanding how individuals and households behave in response to economic
incentives. The research advances knowledge about the way improvements in the
energy efficiency of residential homes impact the actual consumption of energy
by residents. Without knowledge of the behavioral factors that influence energy
consumption, policymakers may underestimate the results of science policy
programs that are designed to conserve energy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are
multiple ways in which the research provides an important advance in
understanding what financial and behavioral factors influence the extent to
which low income people take advantage of government energy
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the micro level, the research addresses such
questions as whether risk-averse individuals are particularly reluctant to
participate in incentive programs, possibly because they have few margins on
which to reduce their consumption. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research also
further advances the scientific understanding of the impact of unintended
consequences. For example, increasing the efficiency of air conditioning
systems, may reduce the amount of time individuals spend on their porch or in
their front yards, and negatively affect neighborhood unity and safety.
Similarly, increasing car fuel efficiency may increase the likelihood of driving
with consequent negative impacts on health outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research may also provide scientific guidance for program implementation, in
that it can measure organizational trust (and provide guidance about which
governmental unit should implement policy), individual time preference (and
provide guidance about whether up-front expenditures that are subsequently
reimbursed are more effective than expenditures which involve no out-of-pocket
expenses) and measures of social preference (whether households participate out
of self-interest, local altruism or larger-scale altruism).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project builds on an existing NSF funded project
infrastructure that collects baseline and post-ARRA (American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act) energy usage data for a sample of households in a low-income
neighborhood of Dallas, TX. For a subset of households, the study also includes
collection of individual-level measures of preferences, derived from economic
experiments, including risk, time, and cooperative preferences, as well as
measures of trust in individuals and institutions. The study combines these with
the measures of energy usage to help understand the source of unintended
consequences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research has a number of broader impacts.
It advances the scientific understanding of how to design energy efficiency
programs funded by AARA by adding a behavioral dimension to the evaluation of
science policy. The research also investigates the behavior of residents in a
low-income urban neighborhood and advances understanding of the preferences of
this understudied demographic segment.