* 0943392
* Collaborative Research:  Synthetic integrons for continuous directed evolution of complex genetic ensembles
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Jay Keasling, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2013
* USD 433,116.00

Synthetic biology is emerging scientific and engineering discipline that seeks
to make it possible to build new biological systems (using building blocks
gleaned from the natural world) that can be customized to meet pressing needs in
areas such as renewable energy, specialty chemical production, and various areas
of biotechnology. A grand challenge in this field is the need for technologies
that enable the construction of novel complex functions in biological systems.
When these functions involve the expression and coordination of multiple genes,
building them becomes increasingly difficult. Assembling multigenic functions in
an organism by an iterative approach is both laborious and difficult, since the
engineered genes and their products often interact strongly with both one
another and with the pre-existing native functions in the organism. For example,
such complications have presented major challenges to efforts to engineer
metabolism in microbes and plants. Moreover, many desirable applications of
synthetic biology comprise complex novel functions and great genetic diversity,
such as the assembly of genes from a metagenomic library in order to synthesize
novel small molecules. In these cases, one might not know a priori which genetic
elements need to be included in such a synthetic assembly, much less how they
should be regulated in order to maximize the performance of a particular
function. While these properties make linear engineering inefficient and
difficult, sometimes prohibitively so, Nature has evolved mechanisms to deal
with such complexity. This research project will develop a synthetic system that
harnesses the power of these natural mechanisms to enable synthetic biologists
to generate, diversify, and refine complex multigenic functions. The core of
this technology will be based on a bacterial innovation called integrons, which
are natural cloning and expression systems that assemble multiple open reading
frames, in the form of gene cassettes, by using site-specific recombination and
conversion to functional genes by expression from an internal promoter. The
ability to capture disparate individual genes and physically link them in arrays
suitable for co-expression is a trait unique to these genetic elements. The
result is an assembly of functionally coordinated genes theoretically
facilitating the rapid evolution of new phenotypes. This project will generate a
novel technology platform based on synthetic integrons (syntegrons), including
computational optimization and analysis tools, that will enable the engineering
of complex multigenic functions (such as the biosynthesis of plant-derived small
molecules like taxol) through continuous directed
evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts&lt;br/&gt;This project will
generate a robust technology enabling the engineering of biological systems,
including both microbes and plants, for myriad useful purposes. Notable examples
include the production of renewable bio-fuels and biomaterials, the synthesis of
small biomolecules for applications in specialty chemicals, bioremediation, and
improvement of crops for agriculture. This project will also provide a
scientific tool for probing genome organization and dynamics in processes such
as the emergence of microbial resistance to small-molecules and metabolic
pathway evolution. In addition, this project will introduce students at both
graduate and undergraduate levels to the potential of synthetic biology,
including exposure through the annual International Genetically Engineered
Machine (iGEM) competition. Finally, this project will engage the broader
community (outside the university setting) through the Science, Art and Writing
(SAW) initiative - a cross-curricular science education program that is
particularly targeted towards school-age children (www.sawtrust.org). This
initiative uses themes and images from science as the starting point for
scientific experimentation, art and creative writing, and in doing so stimulates
creativity and scientific curiosity.