* 0943506
* Gravity Wave Sources and Parameterization
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2010,06/30/2013
* M Joan Alexander, NorthWest Research Associates, Incorporated
* Continuing Grant
* A. Gannet Hallar
* 06/30/2013
* USD 592,877.00

Gravity waves are important atmospheric phenomena that affect atmospheric
circulation, and energy and momentum transfers. A three-year program of
modeling, observational analysis, and parameterization development will be
conducted, focusing on the local generation and global effects of gravity waves
in the atmosphere. The goals of the project are to develop a detailed
understanding of the processes causing wave generation, and to study the
conditions that determine whether the waves propagate upward into the upper
atmosphere or remain trapped in the low atmosphere. Trapped gravity waves can
affect weather, while vertically propagating waves influence the general
circulation and climate on the global scale via momentum transfer and forcing of
the circulation. The project uses a set of modeling tools spanning a hierarchy
of complexity and includes strict observational
validation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. The project seeks a deeper
understanding of the processes leading to gravity wave generation and the
translation of this knowledge into more realistic and better constrained
parameterizations for global models. Parameterization development means
capturing fundamental physical dependences and identifying key tunable
parameters that scale with nonlinear or other neglected effects. The research
efforts include parameterization applications in a global model to study short-
term climate change effects (such as the El Nino-Southern Oscillation) on
gravity wave sources and their subsequent effects on atmospheric circulation.
The fundamental understanding gained from this work on the processes of gravity
wave generation can provide a basis for evaluating the treatment of these
processes in future global models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. This
research will improve the treatment of gravity wave mean-flow forcing processes
in global models used for climate prediction, ozone recovery assessments, and
weather forecasting. Model improvements can have obvious impacts on human
society and the environment in general. In the tropics, additional broader
impacts of gravity waves are related to their effect on cirrus cloud occurrence
frequencies and ice particle sizes. The process-level studies of gravity waves
generated by convection will allow quantification of the roles of these waves in
cirrus and upper atmospheric water vapor changes. The study of gravity waves in
the vicinity of convection may also impact future work on local weather
forecasts and turbulence associated with breaking waves that impacts aviation.
This NSF-funded research also contributes to education and research training for
a postdoctoral scientist and a number of graduate students.