* 0943147
* VOSS: Understanding Distributed Socio-Technical Systems
* CSE,OAC
* 11/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Devan Rosen, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Crowston
* 09/30/2013
* USD 382,421.00

PI: Suthers Institution: University of Hawai?i at Manoa Proposal: 0943147
Proposal Title: VOSS Traces--Understanding Distributed Socio-Technical Systems

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). To more effectively support virtual organizations with
emerging technologies, we must understand how technological designs encourage
transformative interactions between people. There is an analytic gap between
microanalyses and aggregate analyses of the thousands of individual paths of
activity distributed across time, space and media. This project provides a
three-layered solution, the Traces framework, which consists of a theoretical
foundation for analysis, a common data model, and software tools to trace out
the movement, confluences, and transformations of persons, artifacts and ideas
in sociotechnical systems. The Traces framework views sociotechnical systems as
constituted by artifact-mediated interactions, which the data model captures.
The software tools expose sequential patterns of interaction and their
dependencies on features of the technological infrastructure. The project will
study how the movements and confluences of persons and artifacts in digital
environments affect the dissemination and transformation of ideas, and how ties
between participants develop in the process. It will apply this framework to
understanding sociotechnical systems used to support educators, and particularly
how resources influence participation to advance the objectives of the
communities. The project will offer the sociotechnical systems research
community a framework that addresses the analytic gap by scaling up analyses of
interaction, and facilitates multidisciplinary and cross-methodological
collaborations.

Sociotechnical systems are pervasive in today's societies, but little is
currently known about how they function or how best to design them.
Understanding how they function will enable the development of tools and
guidelines to help improve their effectiveness with further benefits to society.
This project will focus on sociotechnical systems that support the professional
development of PhD students and of K-12 educators, including educators serving
underrepresented and rural students. Thus, the results of this research will
directly enhance the infrastructure for virtual learning organizations.