* 0943599
* Collaborative Research: Present and future contribution of glacial runoff to freshwater discharge into the Gulf of Alaska
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2010,05/31/2014
* Eran Hood, University of Alaska Southeast Juneau Campus
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 05/31/2014
* USD 84,728.00

Freshwater influx to the Gulf of Alaska (GOA) is strongly influenced by glacier
runoff as roughly one fifth of its drainage basin is covered by glacier ice.
During the last decades GOA glaciers have generally thinned and retreated and
hence precipitation stored in the glaciers as snow and ice has been released
augmenting streamflow and freshwater influx to the Gulf of Alaska. Glaciers
draining to the GOA are highly sensitive to climate warming and mass loss rates
are expected to increase. It is hypothesized that runoff from glaciers will
initially increase by more than 50% as wastage accelerates, but then will reach
a turning point upon which runoff will decrease as the glaciers shrink and
partly disappear. Hence, the changes in the hydrological cycles due to glacier
wastage are substantially larger than expected changes in any other component of
the water budget in this region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will quantify
these changes in runoff. A glacier runoff model is used to simulate the current
magnitude and timing of runoff from glaciers that drain to the Gulf of Alaska
and project how glacial runoff along the Gulf of Alaska will change by 2100 in
response to future climate scenarios in Alaska downscaled by a high resolution
regional climate model. Further, potential changes to the biogeochemical fluxes
into freshwater and marine ecosystems associated with the projected changes in
glacier runoff are assessed. Results provide regional scale estimates of glacier
runoff changes and associated impacts on biogeochemical fluxes for the GOA. A
modeling strategy is developed that can be used to evaluate glacier runoff
changes and hydrologic ?tipping points? in other heavily glacierized regions.
Moreover, the downscaled climate scenarios we develop will be available for
other impact studies. Visualization products of the results are made available
to the Mendenhall Glacier visitor center, which is visited by approximately
350,000 people each year.