* 0943627
* Improving Prediction of Subsurface Flow and Transport through Exploratory Data Analysis and Complementary Modeling
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2015
* Eyal Amir, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 04/30/2015
* USD 400,000.00

Abrasion by Bedload and Suspended Load: Experimental Study

River incision into rock plays an important role in diverse problems ranging
from practical to academic. From dam spillway design, to river management
planning including maintenance of suitable aquatic habitats in mountain rivers
and river restoration efforts, to the long-term controls on the slope, width,
and roughness of mountain rivers, a quantitative understanding of the mechanics
of river incision into rock is essential and of broad interest. There has been
substantial progress in the past decade on understanding the interactions among
climate, topography, erosion, and tectonics; recognition of the central role of
river incision into rock has been a key insight. Exploration of the role played
by bedrock channels, however, has been accomplished primarily with simplified
stream power models (generic rule sets for river incision that lump together a
diverse set of erosional mechanisms). Refined, and more realistic, model
predictions require advances in our quantitative understanding of erosion
processes. Field-based investigation of bedrock incision processes is essential,
but does not allow the investigator full control of critical variables.
Controlled laboratory experiments have increasingly been used to explore
fundamental aspects of the physics of river incision, to test existing models,
and to guide their refinement.

This research project at ASU includes flume experiments, data analysis, and
theoretical development. The experiments will be designed to complement and
extend previous flume studies. The primary controlling variables (flux and size
distribution of sediment; channel slope; water discharge; and substrate
hardness) will be varied in a systematic exploration of conditions, including
the transition from bedload to suspended load transport. Bed morphology will be
allowed to evolve naturally, and the critical feedbacks between bed morphology,
fluid dynamics, sediment flux, and local erosion rate will be quantified. Based
on preliminary experiments, field observations, and previous numerical studies,
we formulate quantitative hypotheses that can and will be tested by direct
measurement of erosion rate, bed topography, grain saltation trajectories,
sediment transport rate, and fluid flow conditions, thus allowing refinement of
current theory. The results from this research project will have important
implications for basic science and a number of practical concerns of societal
relevance. Advances in the understanding of the linkages between bedrock
lithology, sediment characteristics and channel morphology are of potentially
great value in solving applied problems of minimizing and mitigating for landuse
impacts and restoring damaged riverine habitat and ecosystems. Engineering
planning and management demand understanding of the processes that govern
channel changes, including bed roughness and alluvial cover characteristics. A
postdoctoral researcher, a graduate student and several undergraduates will
receive invaluable training from this research project. Also, laboratory
demonstrations will be developed for use in undergraduate courses and for public
outreach events.