* 0943286
* Sea Change: What Was/May Be
* EHR,DRL
* 01/15/2010,06/30/2013
* Maureen Raymo, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Welch
* 06/30/2013
* USD 149,971.00

Award Number: 0943286 Title: Sea Change: What Was/May Be Start/End Dates:
November 2009-November 2012 Program Officer: Sandra Welch PI: Maureen Raymo
Institution: Trustees of Boston University Program: Informal Science Education
(ISE)



The purpose of this Communicating Research to Public Audiences project is to
develop a suite of media products to raise awareness about global-warming-
induced sea level rise and how scientists study it. The project will focus on
Dr. Maureen Raymo's NSF funded research which looks to the Pliocene era thought
to be the most recent time in geologic history with a concentration of CO2 in
the atmosphere with levels as high as today. The multimedia materials including
video footage, photographic images, and audio recordings will be widely
distributed on the internet, on kiosks in science centers, and through podcasts.

Collaborations with numerous organizations will ensure widespread dissemination
of the multimedia materials. Some of the collaborators include Climate Central,
a new nonprofit science and media organization; Encyclopedia of Earth, a peer-
review, open access electronic reference about the Earth; and Audubon magazine
among others.

The project will also disseminate its resources through organizations and
websites that reach teachers and students in classrooms.

Rockman Et Al will evaluate the project impacts conducting both formative and
summative evaluations. Focus groups and online surveys will be conducted at
various stages providing feedback to the project team as well as a summative
evaluation of audience impacts.