* 0943962
* Collaborative Research: Study of the Peruvian flat slab and its effects on the continental lithosphere
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2014
* Maureen Long, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 07/31/2014
* USD 160,936.00

This project will install 40 seismometers in southern Peru in order to study the
causes and consequences of flat-slab subduction. Unlike most subduction zones
where one plate descends beneath another plate at a relatively constant dip
angle, flat-slab subduction zones are characterized by a descending plate that
reaches some depth (in this case ~100 km) and then flattens, traveling
horizontally for hundreds of kilometers before resuming its descent into the
mantle. It is this type of unusual subduction geometry that may have caused the
formation of large mountains far from tectonic margins such as the Rocky
Mountains in the western United States or the Sierras Pampeanas in central
Argentina.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;However, very little is known about how this
type of subduction zone forms, or what processes link this geometry to the
formation of large inland mountain ranges. Existing theories generally involve
subducting oceanic plateaus whose thick crust makes them neutrally buoyant at
some depth until the crustal material undergoes a phase change that increases
its density. While horizontal, the flat-lying slab releases its water, but does
not form volcanism as is usually observed in subduction zones because the
temperatures are too low. The released water would instead accumulate between
the two plates until flat-slab subduction ended, at which time the water would
interact with inflowing hot mantle material to create a large flare up of
volcanism at the surface.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Today there are only two flat-
slab subduction zones in the world. One is in central Chile and Argentina, and
has been associated with the Sierras Pampeanas. Several seismic studies have now
been performed in this area, and have found surprising results. There does not
appear to be any evidence for water above the horizontal plate in Chile and
Argentina, but there is evidence that silica has been added. This may help to
explain the formation of early continents which required significant silica
enrichment to maintain their buoyancy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The flat slab in
Chile/Argentina is, however, much narrower than the one that has been postulated
as the cause of the Rocky Mountains in the western United States. The only other
flat slab in existence today, beneath southern Peru, is much broader than it?s
counterpart in Chile, and is therefore a better analogue. We propose to
investigate the structures in the mantle along the southern half of this broad
flat-slab subduction region to see if we find similar structures to those found
in Chile and Argentina, and to better understand whether such a subduction
geometry could be responsible for the formation of the Rocky
Mountains.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will use broadband seismology to
image the crust, mantle lithosphere, downgoing plate, and sub-slab mantle
beneath south-central Peru in order to improve our understanding of flat slab
subduction. Flat slab subduction has become a popular concept used to explain a
wide host of geological observations including the cessation of arc volcanism,
thick-skinned deformation far removed from tectonic plate margins, and the
formation of high plateaus. Its usefulness as an explanation, however, stems in
part from the paucity of details available on both the requirements for its
genesis and the consequences of its existence. Perhaps the best-known invocation
of a paleo-flat-slab is that of the Farallon plate during the Laramide, which
was purportedly responsible for the formation of the Rocky Mountains and
associated ignimbrite flare-up. Some have also attributed the
&lt;br/&gt;formation of the Bolivian Altiplano to flat slab subduction, citing
its width and volcanic history. However, to make these theories truly testable
hypotheses, better constraints on two key questions are required: 1) How do flat
slabs form? and 2) What effects do they have on the continental lithosphere?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Today, both of the truly "flat" slabs lie along the South
American margin: one below central Chile and western Argentina at ~30° S, and
one beneath most of Peru between ~3° S and 15° S. These slabs vary greatly in
size; however, neither is believed to be as wide (along strike) or as broad
(perpendicular to strike) as the suggested Farallon flat slab must have been in
order to have caused all of the associated Laramide-age tectonic features. It is
therefore vital to understand what factors contribute to the formation of a flat
slab and how flat slabs are dynamically supported if we are to comprehend
whether these factors can reasonably be scaled upwards and be applied to the
Laramide flat slab. In order to understand the effect of the flat slab on
continental lithosphere, we need to understand the nature of the "filling"
between the horizontal portion of the downgoing slab and the base of the
overriding crust. Tight constraints on the nature of this material (including
its composition, stress state, and evolution over time) are key to understanding
any coupling between flat slab subduction and inland crustal deformation.
Results from the CHARGE deployment, which studied the central Chilean flat slab,
contradicted some previously held assumptions and raised many additional
questions about the nature of flat slab subduction. Peru represents the widest
flat slab currently in existence, and as such could be argued to be the best
location to study how a possible Laramide age flat slab could have formed, and
what kinds of geologic observables we might expect to be able to find today as a
result. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to provide answers to these fundamental
questions about the structure and dynamics of flat slabs, we propose to deploy
40 broadband seismometers above the Peruvian flat slab in three roughly linear
transects. The instruments will be deployed for approximately two years and the
data set thus obtained will provide an unprecedented look into the workings of a
large, broad flat slab segment. We propose to carry out a variety of analyses on
the data, including body wave and surface wave tomography, receiver function
analysis, shear wave splitting analysis, and a variety of other tools. These
analyses are tied tightly to the investigation of the two fundamental questions
outlined above and will provide tight constraints on the isotropic and
anisotropic structure of the crust, mantle lithosphere, slab, and sub-slab
mantle. In turn, these structural constraints will provide information about
mantle dynamics, the transmission of stress through the crust and mantle
lithosphere, and the processes which have modified the continental
lithosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the Geophysics
Program and the Americas Program of the Office of International Science and
Engineering