* 0943274
* Collaborative Research: Geochemical Transect from Oceanic Adare Basin to Adjacent Continental Adare Peninsula: Implications for the Origin of Intraplate (HIMU-like) Alkaline Magmas
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2014
* Kurt Panter, Bowling Green State University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Kurz
* 05/31/2014
* USD 131,797.00

ntellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;This proposal is for a combined geochronologic,
petrographic, geochemical, and Sr-Nd-Pb-Os-O isotopic investigation of existing
lava samples from the seamounts in the Adare Basin and from the adjacent
continental Hallett Volcanic Province in Northern Victoria Land. A comparative
study of contemporaneous intraplate oceanic and continental alkaline volcanism
will be used to evaluate sources and processes responsible for magma production
and differentiation. The seamount lavas will provide an opportunity to better
characterize the composition of their underlying mantle source whereas the
continental lavas will provide information on any effects of contamination by
continental crust on their source signatures. The cause of Cenozoic magmatism in
West Antarctica has been explained by a variety of models based primarily on
geochemical evidence from continental volcanism. The proposed investigation will
for the first time provide detailed geochronologic and geochemical data for both
continental lavas and adjacent oceanic seamount lavas, thus offering a means by
which to critically assess whether Cenozoic alkaline volcanism is due to plume
or plume-related activities or magmatism unrelated to mantle plumes. The classic
element of this controversy is whether the geochemistry of the magmas represents
melting of mantle asthenosphere or subcontinental lithosphere and whether there
is a degree of contamination as they rise through relatively thick and
chemically heterogeneous continental crust. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts: &lt;br/&gt;This project will support a PhD and MSc student.
Undergraduate students will also be involved in sample preparation, analytical
work and interpretation via honors/senior theses. A post-doctoral associate will
be involved in the oxygen isotopic analysis of the samples. The students will be
involved in a multi-institutional and international collaboration. The
geochemical database generated will be made available to other researchers in
the region and the results will be published in peer-reviewed journals.