* 0943725
* STCI: Integrated Resource Provisioning Across the National Cyberinfrastructure in Support of Scientific Workloads
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Ewa Deelman, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2013
* USD 1,611,038.00

This proposal will be awarded using funds made available by the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5), and meets the
requirements established in Section 2 of the White House Memorandum entitled,
Ensuring Responsible Spending of Recovery Act Funds, dated March 20,
2009.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project ?STCI: Integrated Resource
Provisioning Across the National Cyberinfrastructure in Support of Scientific
Workloads? is to develop a resource provisioning system that will provide a
common job interface to the two national cyberinfrastructures in the US (OSG and
the TeraGrid). The system will provide both a priori and dynamic provisioning
capabilities, where resources can be reserved explicitly before application
execution as well as implicitly as the application jobs enter the job management
system. The effects of such provisioning strategies will be tracked via
monitoring solutions integrated with the system. This work will also extend the
provisioning capabilities to virtual environments such as those delivered by
commercial and science clouds. Service administration capabilities will also be
provided as part of this work. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit
&lt;br/&gt;The proposed system will provide a robust and scalable resource
provisioning capability that will bridge heterogeneous, distributed
cyberinfrastructures, making it easier for scientists with diverse computational
requirements to efficiently leverage the available computing power and improve
their overall productivity. Efficient use of computational resources is also
achieved by the integrated system by occupying resources as they become
available and releasing those resources when they are no longer
needed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact &lt;br/&gt;The integrated and
extended system will support a broad spectrum of applications in the scientific
domain ranging from workflows composed of interdependent tasks to applications
composed of a large number of independent jobs to loosely coupled parallel
applications. In addition to the current users, the proposed system can be
leveraged by applications in astronomy, gravitational-wave physics, fusion, and
many others.