* 0943010
* Collaborative Research: Virtualization of Work Capabilities in Project-Based Design Organizations
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Youngjin Yoo, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2012
* USD 80,238.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). Project-based design organizing is fundamental to the
contemporary relentless pursuit of innovation. Design organizations inevitably
have virtual components and their design processes are deeply affected by
information technologies (ITs) serving as design infrastructures. Past research
on virtual organizations emphasizes how virtuality can improve performance
through substituting traditional ?physical? forms of organizing. As IT becomes
ubiquitous, such a view, however, is neither practical, nor theoretically
sustainable. All organizations are built simultaneously with both bits and atoms
and virtual organizing is always situated in physical materiality. Our goal is
to study: (a) how project-based design organizations virtualize their work
capabilities by entangling both virtual and physical materiality; (b) how design
control and environmental volatility affect the virtualization
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed study addresses these three goals.
First, we will develop and validate a semi-formal notation to describe the
content and scope of the entanglement of virtual and physical materiality in
design processes. Our earlier fieldwork indicates that project-based
organizations virtualize their work capabilities according to their specific,
?received? process logic. Second, using empirically validated chronological
representations of virtualized work capabilities, we will examine the impact of
two critical contingency variables- control and environmental volatility- how
design organizations are likely to virtualize their work. To address these
questions, we conduct longitudinal case studies in four project-based design
organizations- construction design and management, software teams, network
(hardware/software) product design teams, and complex mechanical and process
engineering (fluid controls in aerospace) involving different levels of design
control and environmental volatility. The studies will be organized as four
separate multi-level (involving both organizational units, strategic business
units and design projects) studies that draw upon field-oriented data collection
techniques involving semi-structured interviews, observations, archival
research, surveys, the use of video and images (to address the physical aspects
of material work) and process modeling. Main data analysis techniques are
process oriented event structure studies and pattern matching.