* 0943911
* U.S.-Brazil-Argentina: Biofuel Technologies and their Implications for Water and Land Use, Sao Paulo, Brazil, August 2009.
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2011
* Robert Anex, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 06/30/2011
* USD 47,850.00

This US-Brazil-Argentina award will support a workshop entitled, ?Biofuel
technologies and their implications for water and land use?. The workshop will
be held at the University of São Paulo in August 2009 and will be organized by
Dr. Robert Anex of Iowa State University, Dr. Marcos Buckeridge of the
University of São Paulo in Brazil, and Dr. Miguel Laborde from the University of
Buenos Aires in Argentina. The purpose of this workshop is to promote
collaborative activities in key research areas related to biofuel production,
specifically: cross-boarder impacts on land use; the impact of greenhouse gas
emissions from direct and indirect land use change; and the impact of biofuel
production on water availability and quality.

The workshop will foster communication between a diverse group of senior
researchers, junior researchers, and advanced graduate students from the U.S.,
Brazil, and Argentina. Participants will be from a range of disciplines
including engineering, hydrology, economics, systems theory, sociology, and
environmental science. The interdisciplinary group will work together to
identify research topics related to the land and water use aspects of biofuel
production in the Americas, specifically research that will enable the design
and management of biofuel production that can lead to more sustainable systems
of production to enhance rather than harm the function of natural systems. This
activity will identify new research directions and networks of researchers
capable of tackling such problems.