* 0943215
* Collaborative Research:    Understanding Work-Life Balance Issues of the Globally Distributed Software Development Workforce
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Suprateek Sarker, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Suchman
* 12/31/2012
* USD 262,144.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). In recent years, the use of geographically (and often
globally) distributed teams to accomplish organizational tasks has become
ubiquitous. One arena where the use of such teams is popular is in Information
Systems Development. Interestingly, while the motivation for globally
distributed systems development is often to harness appropriate human capital,
scant attention has been paid toward addressing the human resource issues faced
by the IT professionals involved in this context. One particularly challenging
human resource issue is that of work-life balance of the IT professionals
involved in globally distributed systems development, who routinely experience
overlaps and conflicts between their work and personal life domains. In spite of
these recognized challenges, we know of no empirical examinations and very few
theoretical perspectives informing us about work-life balance issues in this
context. Our research program attempts to fill this gap. Integrating three
theoretical perspectives (Border Theory, Social Exchange Theory, and Dialectical
Theory), this research seeks to develop a theoretical model for work-life
balance in globally distributed systems development settings, and provides a
more complete, credible, and theoretically-informed picture of the work-life
balance phenomenon as it relates to this context. We utilize a multi-stage
multi-method empirical approach involving exploratory interviews and pilot
survey, followed by a full-scale survey, and finally in-depth interviews of
globally distributed systems development workers within a cross-cultural
context. The research will help demonstrate that workers in distributed/virtual
settings face unique challenges. The study will help understand the specific
nature of these challenges, both in terms of factors and processes, and also
facilitate the development of best practices and programs that organizations can
implement beyond the popular family-friendly policies and flexible work
arrangements, to help employees manage their work and personal lives. The
results will also enable us to understand the effect of work-life balance (or
the lack thereof) on worker turnover and organizational commitment, among
others, and thereby lead us to discover ways to ensure a steady supply of
globally distributed systems development -capable professionals, such that the
distributed/virtual form of work in IT and related areas can be sustained over a
longer period of time. Finally, through the cross-cultural analysis, we hope to
uncover the cultural nuances associated with work-life balance -related issues,
and allow us to learn from the best practices in diverse locations. We believe
that the knowledge gained from this research will be of interest to the
scholarly communities in several disciplines, including information systems,
computer supported cooperative work, human resource management, and
international business.