* 0943509
* Enhanced Engagement by Scientists for Broader Societal Impacts
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Steven Lohrenz, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 08/31/2012
* USD 576,332.00

This proposal will be awarded using funds made available by the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal requests funds to develop a series of
twenty engaging, multi-media case studies of ocean scientists addressing the
Broader Impacts activities of their research. This effort will involve
representatives of all Centers for Ocean Sciences Education Excellence (COSEE)
in identifying scientists who have formulated effective methods to convey the
Broader Impacts of their research activities to students, educators, and the
public. These case studies will be available in various electronic media,
including the internet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since 2002, COSEE has worked
collaboratively to become a truly integrated national network for improving
ocean sciences education and outreach. COSEE is establishing communications and
resources to become a leading force in the improvement of ocean sciences
education, with significant partnerships among federal, state, and local
agencies and businesses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Intellectual Merit of
proposed activities lies in the network-wide effort to compile insights and
information regarding existing programs that will identify the most effective
practices by which scientists improve the broader societal impacts of their
work, while possibly developing new methods for engaging scientists. Resulting
electronic resources will broaden awareness of the diversity and success of
COSEE programs and communicate the most effective practices scientists use to
convey the broader societal impacts of their research to students, educators,
and the public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Broader Impacts of these efforts
include recognizing and distributing examples of excellent education and
outreach activities developed within the ocean sciences research community. It
is expected that these high-profile examples will illustrate effective means by
which scientists can develop their own engaging Broader Impacts activities to
serve the public interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;