* 0943710
* Quantifying Lateral Flow of Water in Alpine Snowpacks Using High Resolution Geophysical Techniques
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2014
* James McNamara, Boise State University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 06/30/2014
* USD 228,963.00

Quantifying lateral flow of water in alpine snowpacks using high resolution
geophysical techniques

PROJECT ABSTRACT In addition to inherent variability in falling snow, both wind
redistribution and variations in radiation balance cause large spatial
variability in the timing and location of input of snowmelt to the ground.
However, even when these major drivers are accounted for, physically based
hydrologic modeling is challenging, suggesting that there may be other processes
controlling when and where snowmelt enters the subsurface. Most snowmelt models
treat the snowpack as homogeneous, and assume that all meltwater moves
vertically to the ground. Numerous experiments have shown that snowmelt follows
a complicated path through the snowpack, moving both laterally along
stratigraphic boundaries and vertically in concentrated cylindrical channels.
While theoretical approaches have been developed to account for heterogeneities
such as stratigraphy and vertical preferential flow paths, they are not applied
in practice due to a lack of quantitative field-based measurements. We suggest
that lateral movement of liquid water during melt and rain-on-snow events can be
an important mechanism of water redistribution in steep, snow-dominated
catchments. Flow of water within snowpacks is a complicated and poorly
understood phenomenon. Permeability boundaries cause slope-parallel lateral flow
over large distances, and coupled with cylindrical, vertical melt pathways,
there is a resulting large spatial variability at the slope scale. An improved
understanding of the lateral flow of water in snow will have impacts for a broad
range of problems including: 1) rain-on-snow events which have the potential to
cause flooding and landslides. The snowpack provides a large mass of water to
melt, and may provide a faster route for the rainwater to enter streams. 2) A
quantitative understanding of the timing and location of snowmelt within the
seasonal snowpack is necessary in order to evaluate the importance of lateral
flow on the seasonal hydrograph in snowmelt-dominated basins, and 3) quantifying
lateral flow in snow is important for estimating the travel-time of meltwater
traveling from polar ice caps and glaciers to the ocean which in turn is a basis
for predicting time scales of sea level rise. Understanding the importance of
lateral flow during rain-on-snow is important for forecasting floods, wet snow
avalanches, and landslides, as mid-winter rain may become more common in a
warming climate. This project will leverage state-of-the-art geophysical tools
that already exist in-house at our institution to quantify lateral flow of water
in alpine snowpacks. These include 1) measurements sensitive to microstructure
which controls hydraulic conductivity, 2) rapid, non-destructive methods for
measuring snow stratigraphy, depth, snow water equivalent, and liquid water
content of both snow and the underlying soil, and 3) direct in-situ measurements
of liquid water content. These measurements, combined with tracer experiments,
will be used to characterize the snowpack conditions at the microscale that lead
to lateral flow. The detailed snow and soil characterization will be used to
estimate hydrologic properties for initial model conditions. Field data will be
used to develop hydrologic models (using HYDRUS2D) of the experimental
hillslopes to evaluate the relative importance of lateral flow in snow and soil
in snowmelt-dominated catchments.