* 0943356
* An Application of the Theory of Maximum Entropy Production in Modeling Evapotranspiration
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2010,07/31/2011
* Rafael Bras, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 07/31/2011
* USD 240,059.00

An Application of the Theory of Maximum Entropy Production in
Modeling&lt;br/&gt;Evapotranspiration&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(NSF Proposal
0943356)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PIs: Rafael L. Bras and Jingfeng
Wang&lt;br/&gt;University of California,
Irvine&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims at
developing an innovative model of evapotranspiration (ET) over land surfaces
based on the theory of maximum entropy production (MEP), an emerging theoretical
framework for non-equilibrium systems. The effort is guided by promising
preliminary results that obtained expressions for ground and sensible heat
fluxes over a dry land surface. The research is organized in: (1) theoretical
development and (2) observational validation. The central task of the
theoretical development is to formulate, based on our best understanding of the
turbulent transport in the atmospheric boundary layer (ABL), an expression for
the ?thermal inertia for transferring latent heat? that is the key parameter of
the dissipation function whose extremization leads to the MEP solution of
latent, sensible and ground heat fluxes. We follow three leads in formulating
the ?thermal inertia for latent heat?: (1) the turbulent mixing responsible for
the transport of sensible heat in the ABL is also responsible for the transport
of water vapor, (2) water vapor right above the evaporating surface is in
equilibrium with the soil water, and (3) the surface variables of temperature
and humidity (as well as stomatal conductance over the canopy) are sufficient to
determine the energetics of the evapotranspiration. As a result, the ?thermal
inertia for transferring latent heat? is expected to be a function of surface
temperature and humidity (and stomatal conductance) for the case of bare soil
(canopy). The validation phase of the project has a two-fold objective: (1)
validating the MEP model of ET for bare soil and canopy at local scales, and (2)
exploring a possible application of the MEP model of ET formulated at local
scale (defined as the scales at which the Monin-Obukhov turbulence model
applies) to regional scales. Validation of the MEP model at local scales will
mostly use archived datasets from previous field campaigns supplemented by
additional field measurements whenever needed. Test of the MEP model of ET at
regional scales will compare latent, sensible, and ground heat fluxes predicted
by the MEP model with the reanalysis datasets using other ET models. Depending
on progress, the theoretical development may expand to include the case of water
(oceans, lakes, etc.) and snow surfaces. The project, if successfully carried
out, will provide a new modeling framework for predicting the land surface
energy balance at local scales and hopefully producing improved datasets of
surface heat fluxes with global coverage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful the
results of this effort will provide a completely new method to compute the land
surface energy balance that would be parsimonious and require little
calibration. The method will be implemented in existing land surface models that
are used to make hydro-climatic predictions. Besides engaging doctoral students
in the effort, the project will use an existing undergraduate research
opportunities program to engage at least one undergraduate student, preferably
from a disadvantaged group, in learning energy and hydrologic balances by
performing field experiments that could yield supporting data sets. A complete
set of instruments to measure energy fluxes and temperature, soil moisture and
other hydrologic variables required are available. All students, graduate and
undergraduate, will be engaged in presenting their results in appropriate
scientific meetings and journals. The University publishes a research journal
for undergraduates. The senior investigator is a leader, host and participant of
the MESA and CAMP outreach programs housed at the school of engineering of the
University of California, Irvine. This provides access to underprivileged
students in middle and high schools as well as community colleges. This access
will be used to engage interested participants in issues related to hydrology
and earth sciences. Mechanisms include visits to schools, receiving students at
the university, giving public lectures and sponsoring or supervising project
work.