* 0943427
* RAPID study of economic stimulus on local government energy innovation and collaboration
* SBE,SBE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Richard Feiock, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Julia I. Lane
* 07/31/2011
* USD 97,503.00

The research provides important insights into the role of local governments in
technology development, implementation and diffusion. A substantial share of
ARRA funding is directed to local governments to address specific and applied
local problems such as implementation of renewable energy and alternative fuels,
energy conservation, new transportation technologies, and expansion of smart
grid energy transmission systems. Although an extensive literature exists on the
factors that contribute to the successful transfer of technologies from federal
government or university partnerships with private companies, far less research
exists which examines the role of local governments in these collaborations. The
unprecedented ARRA strategy of directing substantial technology funding to local
governments, rather than directly to firms, institutes and universities, can be
used to shed new light on a relatively unknown area of the science of science
and technology policy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The success of the approach is
likely to depend on the extent to which local governments have the internal
capacity to manage energy programs and the extent to which formal and informal
collaborative relationships emerge. This research examines what factors lead to
the development of those partnerships and collaborative relationships necessary
to develop, promote, and implement new energy technologies. It also examines how
information and technological innovations are transmitted and diffused among a
system of local governments. The PI bases the analysis on a transaction cost
explanation of institutional collective action. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Better
understanding of the way in which science investments spur the creation of
policy networks and other forms of cross-sector collaborations may have
significant and far-reaching consequences for the functioning of local
government. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS:&lt;br/&gt;The project takes
advantage of a unique opportunity to gather baseline data that can be used to
assess the impact of science investments on collaboration and innovation. These
data provide an important foundation for future inquiry on the transmission of
technical knowledge among local governments and other actors. The insights
associated with the investigation of the role of local collaborative networks
within local governments in stimulating collaboration can be used to inform
policy design at the local state and federal levels. In addition, the research
trains post doctoral and graduate students in the research process and prepares
them to contribute to the science of science policy in the future.