* 0943378
* Problem Solvers Conference
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,02/28/2015
* Yolanda George, American Association for the Advancement of Science
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 02/28/2015
* USD 301,687.00

PI: Stern, Virginia W. Proposal Number: 0943378

Intellectual Merit: The American Association for the Advancement of Science
(AAAS) Project on Science, Technology, and Disability (Directorate for Education
and Human Resources) is requesting support from the National Science Foundation
(NSF) Directorate for Engineering to implement a project, 'The Problems Solvers:
Education and Career Paths of Engineers with Disabilities.' The long-term goal
of this project is to engage the engineering community, particularly engineers
and engineering students with disabilities, in activities that will facilitate
the entry and advancement of engineers with disabilities and thus increase the
representation of engineers with disabilities in public and private sector
workforce as well as in academia. To achieve this goal, AAAS is proposing to:
Convene a workshop where a diverse group of engineers and engineering students
can share their unique approaches to succeeding in academic and professional
environments as they overcome physical, sensory, communication, and attitudinal
roadblocks.

Collect the strategies and tools used by successful engineers to navigate the
traditional barriers that discourage and prevent individuals with early onset or
acquired disabilities to enter the engineering profession

Develop and publish workshop findings and recommendations, thus providing a
resource specific to the engineering community.

Disseminate the post-workshop report to students, deans, faculty, employers,
counselors, parents, and engineering societies. Each of these groups has an
important role to play in encouraging or discouraging a person with a disability
to participate in the engineering profession. These stakeholders, gatekeepers,
and gate-openers are significant not only for the middle or high school student
with a disability who cares about 'what works,' but also for the early career
engineer who becomes adventitiously disabled from a road accident or sequelae of
a disability like multiple sclerosis.

Broader Impacts: Outreach to underrepresented groups in engineering has focused
almost exclusively on minorities and women. Except for an occasional token
photograph of a person in a wheelchair, publications and programs designed to
strengthen the pathway to engineering education and careers for precollege and
postsecondary students have not included students or working engineers with
disabilities. This proposed project will expand the work of the NSF focus on
broadening participation in engineering. The typical workshop on persons with
disabilities presents one or very few individuals reporting on their success in
education or employment. The Problem Solvers Workshop will have a completely
different dimension, assembling 60 selected engineers and engineering students,
diverse in gender, ethnicity, geography, current age and age of onset of
disability, field of engineering, and sector of employment. As the title of the
Workshop suggests, engineers with disabilities focus on problem solving in their
professional lives and also in their personal lives. As individuals with
disabilities, each participant has developed his or her unique approach to
overcoming barriers or the limitations presented by their disability. These
insights will add to ongoing research on universal design; it can also
contribute to adaptations of existing assistive technology to fit the dimensions
of the specific engineering field, job requirements, or individual needs.