* 0943203
* VOSS: New Generations of Scientific Knowledge in Collaboratories
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Leslie Paik, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 08/31/2014
* USD 375,710.00

Research scientists have become increasingly dependent on collaborations across
laboratories and organizations to maintain their productivity. While there is a
growing body of research on the co-production of knowledge in collaborative
settings, little is known about how that process happens in collaborations that
are established and maintained through virtual organizations. To better inform
our understanding of how virtual organizations enable scientific innovation,
this project focuses on how virtual organizations change and affect the actual
production of scientific knowledge. Previous research has looked at the role of
virtual organizations in facilitating collaborative work processes, as
scientists can now share data, workload and resources across time and space. One
empirical research question that has not been addressed thoroughly with the rise
of virtual organizations in recent years is: how does greater access to shared
data, new collaborators and information across time and space help improve
scientific production of knowledge, if at all? In previous studies it has been
suggested that this is a double-edged sword: just as scientists in remote labs
can share more of the workload in the data collection process, they can also
generate a "surveillance" type of effect in the lab in which the experiments are
being conducted.

Using a multi-method study of a network of 300 molecular biologists dispersed in
laboratories across the world, this multidisciplinary project explores both the
added sharing and surveillance aspects to virtual organizations and how that
affects the production of scientific knowledge. Specifically, we will carry out
three consecutive studies that build upon one another. First, in year one, we
will conduct a deep qualitative examination, through ethnographic case studies
of four laboratories that are part of an international group of biologists
researching molecular chaperones and stress responses. These labs have undergone
significant institutional transformations in past years, shifting from an
independent investigator-driven research model to a more collaborative model of
doing research through ?collaboratories.? Second, in year two, we will conduct a
social network analysis, using the ethnographic data to generate hypotheses that
will be tested in a survey questionnaire administered to a larger sample of
scientists in the molecular chaperones and stress responses group about their
work processes. Finally, in year three, we will conduct a series of follow-up
interviews with selected scientists in the biology labs to understand how they
choose their collaborators and what configurations of collaboration improve the
outcome of the assigned task. This final interview phase will inform and clarify
the findings from the ethnographic and social network analyses.

Our project builds on and contributes to two bodies of literature: first, the
sociology of scientific knowledge, which views this work as collaborative and
constructed through scientific practice and second, organizational theory, which
views knowledge as a critical competitive resource. The goal of the project is
not just to see how virtual organizations increase productivity or collaboration
among scientists but rather, to see if virtual organizations have changed how
scientific knowledge is generated and produced from data collection to analysis.
As such, this project will inform both literatures as it specifically focuses on
the influence of virtual organizations on the changing nature of scientific
knowledge generation and the enduring social and organizational factors that
potentially limit or hinder that influence. In addition to advancing theory,
this research has important practical implications. By providing a general
understanding of how scientists do their work in virtual organizations, our
project aims at identifying the conditions under which virtual organizations can
enable and enhance scientific production and innovation. We anticipate that
these findings will provide helpful guidelines for creating and maintaining
productive scientific collaborations.