* 0943448
* Collaborative Research: Linking Researchers and Graduate Students through COSEE Tools & Services
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Annette deCharon, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 08/31/2012
* USD 173,621.00

This proposal will be awarded using funds made available by the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).

This award provides funds to conduct workshops aimed at improving the broader
impacts efforts of scientists. Through professional development workshops,
scientist-graduate student teams will produce interactive materials based on the
?Ocean Literacy? and ?Climate Literacy? principles that can be specifically
designed for a variety of audiences. The primary target audiences for this
project are the research scientists and graduate students who participate in the
project workshops. Through team-building and COSEE-facilitated long-term
contact, the project will provide sustained professional development training
opportunities that result in deeper content understanding and/or confidence in
teaching to lay audiences, for researchers and graduate students alike. The
secondary audience is on-line users who will benefit from the project outputs:
namely the interactive ocean-climate content and user-centered data tools
developed as part of this effort. Learning and interaction data of target
audiences will be collected and evaluated by participating COSEE Centers. These
evaluation results will be used to refine the approach, workshop model, and
resulting online products throughout the project.