* 0943774
* The Organization of Middle Sedentary Period Hohokam Ceramic Production in the Gila River Valley, Arizona
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2015
* Sunday Eiselt, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2015
* USD 134,636.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Sunday Eiselt and Dr. Andrew
Darling will undertake a three year study of Hohokam ceramic production along
the middle Gila River Valley just south of metropolitan Phoenix in central
Arizona. Hundreds of years before the establishment of this city Native
Americans had already mastered the art of water management, irrigating the
desert with thousands of miles of hand-dug canals. These inhabitants are known
by archaeologists as the Hohokam and their descendants are the O'odham (Pima)
who occupy the region today. &lt;br/&gt;The Hohokam regional system reached its
apogee during the middle Sedentary Period from A.D. 1000-1070 when it spanned
some 80,000 sq. km of the Sonoran Desert. Pottery specialists along the middle
Gila River supplied this large system with thousands of vessels in return for
agricultural products from surrounding groups. Such large-scale craft production
is typically associated with complex societies, with guilds and mass production
techniques. Yet, the Hohokam were relatively egalitarian, with neither cities,
nor an extensive division of labor, nor marked social stratification. How, then,
in the absence of more complex social systems, was production among the
Sedentary Period Hohokam organized to create greater economies of scale?
&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the current study is to test two competing hypotheses
related to this question. The first proposes that multiple communities acted
independently to produce ceramics. More communities were brought into the
system, but pottery manufacture was dispersed among multiple villages that
traded their products directly to outside consumers. The second proposes that
ceramic manufacturing was highly concentrated in one or a few villages that were
supplied with raw materials by other villages. Both hypotheses may account for
high levels of ceramic yield, but the latter implies a greater level of inter-
village coordination to create greater economies of scale at the expense of
emerging settlement hierarchies. The competing hypotheses will be tested through
geochemical and petrographic examination of raw materials and ceramic artifacts
in order to determine how the Hohokam achieved such great economic and
production success. &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this research rests on
the opportunity to explore the relationships of craft production and economic
intensification in middle range societies like the Hohokam. The study will
provide critical information on whether enhanced production efficiency precedes
(rather than follows from) more complex political developments. Work will take
place on the Gila River Indian Community Reservation under the oversight of
their Cultural Resource Management Program. Collaboration between the Gila River
Indian Community and Southern Methodist University broadens the participation of
underrepresented groups in archaeology while enhancing the infrastructure for
research and education.