* 0943681
* Collaborative Research:  Reducing uncertainty of climatic trends in the Sierra Nevada: an ensemble-based reanalysis via the merger of disparate measurements
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2014
* Steven Margulis, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 08/31/2014
* USD 203,566.00

Abstract The Sierra Nevada system plays an integral role in the hydrologic
cycle, energy cycle, ecological systems, and in water resources supply in
Western North America. Trends toward earlier spring snowmelt runoff and
decreasing springtime observations of snow water equivalent (SWE) from in situ
networks have been observed in the past fifty years. These trends will result in
both increased likelihood of winter floods and decreased water availability. It
is therefore urgent to develop detailed, process-based understanding of the
observed changes. Moreover, it is vital to develop a spatially-continuous
characterization of these trends, spanning the physiographic gradients present
in the Sierra Nevada. Not all available information has been used in the
diagnosis of the trends, viz. spaceborne remote sensing measurements. This means
that trends have only been evaluated where particular stations are located (not
over the entire Sierra Nevada). Moreover, formal estimates of observation
uncertainty have not been taken into account in the assessment of the trends.
Detailed understanding of the physical processes and complex sensitivity to
climatic change across physiographic gradients has not been achieved. We thus
propose a reanalysis utilizing all available datasets, including both in situ
and remote sensing measurements. Our motivation is the unique and complementary
characteristics of each of four primary datastreams: in situ snow measurements,
streamflow, snow-covered area (SCA) derived from visible and near-infrared data,
and passive microwave measurements. We will use ensemble model simulations of
snowpack physical processes to provide a priori estimates of snowpack variables.
Measurement models will be used to relate snowpack states to all four primary
datastreams. The data assimilation analysis step calculates an a posteriori
estimate of snowpack variables that takes into account all four datastreams, as
well as meteorological data and scientific knowledge of snow physics processes.
Estimates of the spatiotemporal uncertainty in each snowpack variable can be
calculated directly from the ensemble. Trends will be assessed using these
posterior estimates of snowpack states. During our two-year project, we will
perform the reanalysis described above for the King River and Kaweah River
basins in the Southern Sierra Nevada. Each of these river basins overlaps
spatially with study areas from the Southern Sierra Critical Zone Observatory
(https://snri.ucmerced.edu/CZO). The Providence CZO in the King River basin and
the Wolverton CZO in the Kaweah River basin represent locations where ongoing
research is leading to a deeper process-level understanding of the snow cover
across elevation gradients, which may provide insight into the long-term trends
that have been observed. We will focus this two-year project on developing solid
methodology that could be applied to the entire Sierra Nevada in follow-on work.
We will focus on development of the statistical and physical models of spatial
variability and uncertainty that form the core of the reanalysis assimilation
scheme. In particular, we will focus on development of models for relating
observing network point measurements of snow water equivalent to grid-based
estimates of snow properties, and on parameterization of the uncertainty models
for the hydrometeorological inputs to the snow physics models. We will integrate
the models, methods, and results from the work into existing undergraduate and
graduate courses at UCLA, and into ongoing outreach work of the Byrd Polar
Research Center. Additionally, the high-resolution modeling framework developed
here could provide a unique testbed for future climate change studies, where
atmospheric model output from regional or global climate models could be used as
forcing to the offline model to add to the existing literature on how the Sierra
snowpack and spring streamflow is expected to change.