* 0943488
* Breath of Life Archival Institute for the Indigenous Languages of the Americas -- A Planning Meeting
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2010
* Leanne Hinton, Advocates for Indigenous California Language Survival
* Standard Grant
* Susan D. Penfield
* 07/31/2010
* USD 3,240.00

This proposal initiates the planning for a National Indigenous Language
Institute based on the model of the Breath of Life Language Workshop for
California Indians. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planned National Indigenous
Language Institute will be based the first year in Washington D.C. and will
orchestrate a partnership for training venues and resources which includes the
National Anthropology Archives of the Smithsonian Institute, the National Museum
of the American Indian and the Library of Congress. The National Indigenous
Language Institute will foster community-linguist relationships which can result
in continued collaborations beyond the institute. The Institute will engage
mentors in the use of language documentation by heritage communities, therefore
training them to produce documentation that is more relevant to and useful for
community efforts. The Institute will support on-going and future community-
based language documentation efforts by teaching participants about the
importance of language documentation and its relevance to on-going cultural
initiatives. Participants (most of whom are language teachers or are otherwise
culturally active) will be more likely to engage in future language
documentation efforts or initiate a new effort in their home community. For both
mentors and Native American participants, this institute will also demonstrate
the critical importance of archiving materials that either linguists or
community people have collected.