* 0943362
* Bioluminescence in Dinoflagellates Triggered by Voltage-gated Proton Channels
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Thomas DeCoursey, Rush-Presbyterian-St Luke's Med Center
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 08/31/2012
* USD 299,999.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nerve impulses and muscle contraction
are triggered by an electrical impulse called an action potential. Proteins
known as voltage gated ion channels allow ions to move across cell membranes,
causing a change in the electrical potential between the two sides of the
membrane, which is then propagated along the membrane as the electrical impulse.
In all biological systems, the only ions known to mediate action potentials are
sodium (Na+), calcium (Ca2+) and chloride (Cl-). This project addresses the
mechanism underlying the bioluminescence of dinoflagellates (single celled
aquatic organisms), some of which emit flashes of light. By making electrical
recordings in dinoflagellate membranes this project will test the hypothesis
that protons (H+) mediate the action potential that sparks this light emission.
The discovery that proton channels trigger bioluminescence in this way would be
unprecedented. The gene that codes the protein that forms the proton channel in
dinoflagellates will be identified, permitting the study of the structural
properties of the channel and providing an understanding of how it performs its
key functions. This project opens several completely new areas, including proton
channels as conductors of action potentials; electrophysiological measurements
of dinoflagellate membranes; and identification of an ion channel gene in
dinoflagellates. This study will expand the range of life forms known to express
voltage gated proton channels, and the discovery of novel functions in
dinoflagellate proton channels could shed new light on their actions in
vertebrates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact. This project will expose
undergraduate students and a postdoctoral fellow to a unique interdisciplinary
investigation, involving dinoflagellate biology and bioluminescence, the
electrophysiology and biochemistry of proton channels, and bioinformatics and
structural biology. The studies to be undertaken range from field work
(collecting dinoflagellates in the Gulf of Mexico) to electrophysiological
measurements and molecular biological experiments in the laboratory. The
students and postdoctoral fellow will be given the opportunity to author
publications and to present their work at scientific conferences.