* 0943705
* STCI: Middleware for Monitoring and Troubleshooting of Large-Scale Applications on National Cyberinfrastructure
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Ewa Deelman, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,875,831.00

This proposal will be awarded using funds made available by the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5), and meets the
requirements established in Section 2 of the White House Memorandum entitled,
Ensuring Responsible Spending of Recovery Act Funds, dated March 20, 2009.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The STCI: Middleware for Monitoring and Troubleshooting of
Large-Scale Applications on National Cyberinfrastructure project aims to provide
robust and scalable workflow monitoring services that can be used to track the
progress of workflow-based applications as they are executing on the distributed
cyberinfrastructure. New anomaly detection and troubleshooting services will
also be developed to alert users to problems with the application and
cyberinfrastructure services and allow them to quickly navigate and mine the
application's execution records. The foundation of this work is the development
of a robust and scalable infrastructure for performance information gathering
and distribution. Information flowing through this infrastructure will be stored
in high-performance archives and distributed to interested entities through
subscription interfaces. Three main services will be developed: 1) an online
monitoring service, 2) an anomaly detection service based on dynamic mining of
application and cyberinfrastructure logs and 3) a troubleshooting service that
will help trace the source of a failure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit
&lt;br/&gt;This work will potentially increase scientists' productivity by
allowing them to quickly identify problems in an application, thus reducing the
time it takes to generate scientifically meaningful results. This work will also
make the performance of complex scientific workflows more transparent, which
will enable the generation of accurate estimates of overall time to completion,
more efficient use of resources, and easier resolution of end-to-end performance
problems in collaboration with network and resource providers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact &lt;br/&gt;Scientific communities in
astronomy, biology, earthquake science, physics, and others will immediately
benefit from the proposed system. Because the approach relies on simple, well-
defined logging formats, this work is applicable to a range of workflow
management systems as well as sub-components of those systems such as job
managers and data transfer tools.