* 0943423
* Early-Concept Grant for Exporatory Research (EAGER): Supporting STEM education by  networking DRL resource networks:  DRLNET
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2009,03/31/2011
* Wendy Pollock, National Opinion Research Center
* Standard Grant
* Janice M. Earle
* 03/31/2011
* USD 299,931.00

The Division of Research on Learning in Formal and Informal Settings (DRL) has
funded five resource centers/networks to provide support to five DRL programs,
to the PIs connected to those programs, and to STEM education communities. (They
are Center for Advancement of Informal Science Education--ISE; Center for
Advancing Research and Communication in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics--REESE; Community for Advancing Discovery Research in Education--
DR-K12; ITEST Learning Resource Center--ITEST; Learning and Youth Research and
Evaluation Center--AYS.) While the activities of each vary, all conduct reviews
of the portfolio, provide technical assistance to projects, and communicate
results of project findings or resources to a broader field.

This EAGER project supports exploratory cross-network collaboration around
accumulating, synthesizing, and communicating evidence generated by the funded
projects and the networks. Specifically, the project enables sharing of data
across programs; creating an online presence across the networks; collaborating
to provide assistance to projects; and sharing expertise to improve network
evaluations. The project will enhance infrastructure to support STEM education,
learning, and education research and will expand dissemination of evidence
generated by DRL projects and programs. The resulting increased coherence and
the identification of productive areas of collaboration should enrich the STEM
education field.