* 0943269
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Programming the rhizosphere through highly integrated genetic, spatio-temporal control systems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Christina Smolke, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 08/31/2012
* USD 300,000.00

The study of gene regulation is central to modern biology. A significant portion
of the nascent field of synthetic biology has revolved around building synthetic
gene networks to recapitulate regulatory mechanisms found in nature or to
engineer novel biological functions. However, artificial gene networks have not
approached the sophistication of their natural counterparts in either design or
performance. There are several technical and scientific challenges that
currently limit the engineering of large-scale integrated synthetic genetic
networks. This research centers on developing a framework for automating the
process of gene network design by a) obtaining various working "parts" of gene
regulatory mechanisms from nature and b) by applying engineering sciences to
learn how to compose them reliably into novel systems which have predictable
behaviors. The value of this project will be demonstrated through the
development of the ?Programmable Rhizosphere?, which is a framework for
engineering mutualism between model plant and soil microbe species. The
Programmable Rhizosphere will allow control of interactions between disparate
organisms, and represents a significant step towards our ability to manipulate
complex ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: This project brings
together researchers from top US institutions as well as establishes a
collaboration with major universities in the UK. Graduate students and
postdoctoral researchers associated with this project will get an opportunity to
participate in a multi-institution, multidisciplinary research project. They
will have the opportunity to train on a wide variety of techniques in
computational and molecular biology. The results of the project will be
disseminated to the broader public including middle and high school students
through the development of informational materials and hands-on demonstrations
designed for educating the public on the technologies and potential impact of
synthetic biology. In addition to the advances in the understanding of
engineering synthetic regulatory systems, the Programmable Rhizosphere
technology has broad implications for sustainability in agriculture. In
particular, these technologies could be used to engineer beneficial phenomena
such as nitrogen fixation in agricultural crops, which would displace petroleum-
based fertilizers currently used in agricultural production.