* 0943788
* SBIR Phase I:  BeZnO UV Detector
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* Yungryel Ryu, MOXtronics Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2010
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will assess new
designs for single-element solid state ultraviolet (UV) detectors based on BeZnO
alloy material with cut-off wavelengths 300 to 370 nm, thereby eliminating
undesired visible and infrared (IR) radiation. Photomultiplier tubes (PMTs) and
silicon photodiodes can be used for selective UV detection in this region. PMTs
are bulky and require high bias voltages (ca. 1000 V), and both PMTs and silicon
possess a broad spectral response. System quantum efficiencies, near 30%, are
reduced by filtering. Wide band gap BeZnO semiconductor materials can now be
grown with optical cutoff wavelengths in the desired UV range. The research
objectives are to develop a new class of high-sensitivity UV detectors featuring
high-speed response, compactness, lightness, low operational voltage, low noise
current, high quantum efficiency, high visible/IR rejection, and high radiation
hardness. The crystallinity, electrical, and optical properties of BeZnO will be
characterized and theoretical simulations performed to optimize layer sequences
and doping profiles for metal-semiconductor-metal (MSM) UV detectors.
Anticipated technical results are 300 to 370 nm cutoff wavelength, greater or
equal than 5 orders of magnitude UV to Visible/IR responsivity, 60% QE, and 0.1
to 1 microsec response time.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be enhancement of
scientific and technological understanding of the crystalline qualities of BeZnO
semiconductor materials and how crystalline defects impact optical responsivity
in the ultraviolet (UV) and in the visible and infrared (IR) spectral regions.
Relating defect types and densities to optical response is of interest in
photodetector development. Detection of UV in the presence of large visible/IR
backgrounds has many commercial and military applications. Commercial
applications include flame and heat sensors, medical sterilization monitoring,
plasma diagnostics, Earth monitoring from look-down space platforms, sniper
location by law enforcement, early stage sparking failure in high voltage
transmission lines/transformers, and combustion engine monitoring. UV detectors
can be used to determine if a flame is associated with a hot object, an
important consideration in fire detection systems. Military applications include
the detection of missile/gun plumes, missile guidance, base perimeter monitoring
and detection of enemy combatants, and detection of biological/chemical agents
for defense and homeland security. The technology can be further developed such
that light-weight, high-resolution, and high-speed 1-D and 2-D imaging systems
can be deployed. The technology area is semiconductor-based optical sensors, and
the market sector is UV radiation monitoring.