* 0943957
* CCI Phase I: Center for Molecular Tools for Conjugated Polymer Analysis and Optimization
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Christopher Bielawski, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 08/31/2012
* USD 1,520,000.00

This Phase I CCI will combine experimental and theoretical approaches to
understanding the relationships between the molecular, mesoscale and bulk
properties of neat conjugated polymers. The CCI team will test the theory that
intra- and inter-polymer chain interactions give rise to macroscopic materials
properties in predictable and systematic ways. The CCI will focus on the
molecular origins of the bulk properties of polythiophene and other conjugated
polymers that may be useful in a variety of electronic and photovoltaic
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center for Molecular Tools for Conjugated
Polymer Analysis and Optimization will offer a unique educational and
professional training environment by integrating spectroscopy, x-ray
diffraction, microscopy, synthesis and theoretical approaches. The Center will
also promote the participation of a diverse group of future scientists and
engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Centers for Chemical Innovation (CCI)
Program supports research centers that can address major, long-term fundamental
chemical research challenges that have a high probability of both producing
transformative research and leading to innovation. These Centers will attract
broad scientific and public interest by sharing the results of their innovative
approach to this challenging question.