* 0943648
* SBIR Phase I:  Ring Contraction Metathesis Reaction for the Generation of Novel Polyene Macrolides
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* steven riesinger, MedChem Partners LLC
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 06/30/2010
* USD 144,579.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a
process for modifying macrolide natural products in general and Rapamycin in
particular using a relatively new chemical transformation called the ring
contraction metathesis reaction. The modified compounds will contain a novel
contracted core that is inaccessible by conventional methods in a cost effective
way. Rapamycin is an immunosuppressant used widely in transplantation,
autoimmune and oncological diseases and drug coated stents. The major draw back
of rapamycin is its extremely long half-life (63h) which leads to tolerability
issues. The novel synthetic transformation outlined in this Phase I Research
will allow for the synthesis of a novel new rapamycin analogs with improved
pharmacological properties, such as shorter half-life. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of this research are the following: First, development of this
reaction into a general synthetic process will allow for the generation of a
variety of new and novel compounds which cannot be prepared in any other way.
The ring contraction process will generate novel natural product structures that
could function as new chemical probes to better understand biological processes.
Furthermore, novel macrolide compounds could advance national health concerns by
providing new drugs with an improved therapeutic profile. Secondly, the
generation of novel Rapamycin analogs will improve the health and quality of
life of organ transplant patients as well as form the basis for ongoing research
in oncology and auto immune diseases. &lt;br/&gt;