* 0943069
* VOSS: Collaborative Proposal: CyberGRID Networks - Cyber-enabled Global Research Infrastructure for Design Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2009,02/29/2012
* John Taylor, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 02/29/2012
* USD 348,582.00

This research entails: (1) CyberGRID Net - developing a research data collection
and analysis tool integrated into an existing global virtual engineering team
working environment, and (2) CyberGRID Networks - utilizing that tool to develop
fundamental insights into how globally distributed engineering teams enact
complex design work together and with affordances in the virtual environment.
The CyberGRID Net will be a research tool that augments an existing virtual
environment developed by the investigators for global design work. It will
extend current pedagogical tool functionality with the following research-
oriented features: (1) the existing TeamWall model-sharing display will detect
and track locations of object referencing actions (e.g., pointing to a feature
in a design) and functionality will be added for participants to self-indicate
when phenomena of research interest occur, (2) virtual environment recordings
will be time-stamped when researcher-specified interactions take place, (3)
avatar-avatar and avatar-object interactions will be detected along with
metadata about the interaction, and (4) functionality will be added for
collaborative discussion, data analysis and annotation across a global virtual
research team.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a series of experiments, the CyberGRID
Net research infrastructure will be used to engage critical organizational
research questions: How are Building Information Models (BIM) in the virtual
environment used as a boundary objects to resolve conflicts in the knowledge
system of global virtual engineering teams? How do conflicts emerge in avatar-
avatar interactions? How are conflicting obligations resolved in virtual teams
by emergent virtual team leaders? How are boundary objects used in a cross-
cultural context? How do leadership styles and community of practice formation
vary when team members come from different countries representing different
cultures and standards of practice? These questions will be explored in three
separate experiments employing a multi-method approach which includes
ethnographic observation, social and interaction network analyses, and user
reflection. They will involve international activities and will include graduate
engineering students in the U.S., India and Finland, as well as industrial
participants utilizing the CyberGRID in an industrial test
case.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will utilize computational thinking to
develop a new research tool to transform the way global virtual teams are
researched, and to link avatar-object interactions into network analyses to
transform approaches to modeling knowledge systems in global virtual teams. The
CyberGRID Net tool will be used in experiments to expand knowledge system
dynamics theory as well as theories of virtual team network formation and
leadership. This research may lead to fundamental transformations in design
pedagogy which, in turn, can provide new exciting engineering career paths. The
research may also improve strategies of engineering firms and policymakers
concerned about the leadership role of U.S. engineers in the global
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;