* 0943851
* EMSW21-RTG:  Laboratory and Mathematical Fluid Dynamics: Experiments, Computation and Modeling
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2010,07/31/2017
* M Forest, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 07/31/2017
* USD 1,283,256.00

This Research Training project involves two postdoctoral fellows for three
years, 3 graduate students for 4 years and 10 undergraduates for 5 years which
will perform research in experimental and theoretical fluid dynamics occurring
in and around the University of North Carolina Joint Fluids Laboratory.
Specifically, the research and training will be focused upon the complicated
interaction between solid bodies and fluids arising in a variety of biologically
and environmentally relevant scenarios including systems with strong and sharp
density stratification such as occurring in the oceans and atmosphere as well as
in highly viscous systems relevant to microbiology. The effort brings together
new experimental phenomena with quantified mathematical
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fluid dynamics is central to understanding the
behavior of many physical systems on a wide range of length and time scales
spanning our atmosphere and oceans down to the smallest swimming micro-
organisms. In particular, understanding how a body moves fluid and in turn how
the fluid can impact a body is fundamental to understanding how our environment
works, which is necessary to even begin to assess human impacts on climate. Our
the large scales, the oceans and atmospheres are complicated fluid systems
possessing strong density variations, and the associated phenomena are complex
and central to building a more quantified understanding of climate. On smaller
scales, biological systems are bathed in fluids with varying viscosities which
are moved via the motion of small hair-like structures called cilia. Developing
quantified analytical and computational models to predict these dynamics has
implications for improved understanding of lung function and disease such as
Cystic Fibrosis. This research training grant is dedicated towards improved
experimental and theoretical understanding of the interaction between solid
bodies and complicated fluid systems.