* 0943934
* Collaborative Research:  Antarctic Ecosystems across the Permian-Triassic Boundary: Integrating Paleobotany, Sedimentology, and Paleoecology
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2014
* Thomas Taylor, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Kurz
* 07/31/2014
* USD 618,348.00

Intellectual Merit: The focus of this proposal is to collect fossil plants and
palynomorphs from Permian-Triassic (P-T) rocks of the central Transantarctic
Mountains (CTM), together with detailed data on sedimentologic and paleoecologic
depositional environments. Fossil plants are important climate proxies that
offer a unique window into the past, and the CTM fossils are an important source
of data on the ways that plants responded to a strongly seasonal, polar light
regime during a time of global change. The proposed project uses paleobotanical
expertise, integrated with detailed sedimentology and stratigraphy, to
reconstruct Permian-Triassic plant communities and their paleoenvironments. This
interdisciplinary approach could uncover details of Antarctica?s complex late
Paleozoic and Mesozoic environmental and climatic history which included: 1)
deglaciation, 2) development and evolution of a post-glacial landscape and
biota, 3) environmental and biotic change associated with the end-Permian mass
extinction, 4) environmental recovery in the earliest Triassic, 5) strong,
possible runaway Triassic greenhouse, and 6) widespread orogenesis and
development of a foreland basin system. The PIs will collect compression floras
both quantitatively and qualitatively to obtain biodiversity and abundance data.
Since silicified wood is also present, the PIs will analyze tree rings and
growth in a warm, high-latitude environment for which there is no modern
analogue. Fossil plants from the CTM can provide biological and environmental
information to: 1) interpret paleoclimate when Gondwana moved from icehouse to
greenhouse conditions; 2) trace floral evolution across the P-T boundary; 3)
reconstruct Antarctic plant life; 4) further understanding of plant adaptations
to high latitudes. The Intellectual Merit of the research includes: 1) tracing
floral evolution after the retreat of glaciers; 2) examining floral composition
and diversity across the PTB; and 3) obtaining data on the recovery of these
ecosystems in the Early Triassic, as well as changes in floral cover and
diversity in the Early-Middle Triassic. Antarctica is the only place on Earth
that includes extensive outcrops of terrestrial rocks, combined with widespread
and well-preserved plant fossils, which spans this crucial time period.

Broader impacts: The broader impacts include public outreach; teaching, and
mentoring of women and underrepresented students; mentoring graduate student,
postdoctoral, and new faculty women; development of an inquiry-based workshop on
Antarctic paleoclimate with the Division of Education, KU Natural History
Museum; continuing support of workshops for middle school girls in science via
the Expanding Your Horizons Program, Emporia State University, and the TRIO
program, KU; exploring Antarctic geosciences through video/computer links from
McMurdo Station and satellite phone conferences from the field with K-12 science
classes in Wisconsin and Kansas, and through participation in the NSF Research
Experiences for Teachers program at the University of Wisconsin.