* 0943480
* Collaborative Research:  Earthquake swarms and aseismic slip in the Salton Trough: High-resolution imaging of the upper frictional stability transition.
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2012
* Jeffrey McGuire, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Raffaella Montelli
* 05/31/2012
* USD 152,479.00

Efforts to understand the build-up and release of stress along active fault
zones require detailed studies of individual faults and placement of those
results in a physical framework consistent with our knowledge about rock
mechanics. One particularly intriguing fault zone behavior that has been
observed with increasing frequency in recent years involves the interplay
between aseismic slip and seismic swarm activity. Slow fault slip has been
observed to trigger earthquake swarms in a variety of tectonic environments
including subduction zones, volcanic systems, and continental strike-slip faults
such as those in close proximity to population centers in Southern
California.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One region that provides a prime environment to
study seismic swarms and aseismic creep is the Imperial Valley/Salton Trough in
Southern California. Seismic swarms, large (Mw&gt;7) earthquakes, and transient
episodes of fault creep are all frequent occurrences along the plate boundary
faults within the Salton Trough. The Salton Trough offers a prime opportunity to
examine the interplay between these varied types of fault activity, since so
many of them are observed within a relatively small geographic area, which also
has had very detailed geologic studies and contains one of the world?s densest
seismic and geodetic station networks. Detailed studies of aseismic and seismic
events offer an opportunity to connect physical properties of the fault-zone
such as rock type, depth, and temperature with rock-mechanical properties such
as frictional stability, and will allow us to better understand the temporal
evolution of seismic hazard associated with individual fault
zones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We propose a combination of an active source seismic
study of the 2005 swarm's primary fault zone, and a more detailed analysis of
the existing seismic and geodetic data. The core of our effort is a one-week
seismic survey using the high-res profiling techniques developed by the USGS-
Menlo Park group that will provide constraints on the details of fault-zone
geometry and rigidity structure. These results will be used to improve our
studies of the 2005 swarm. The combination of these studies will allow us to
study the relations between rock-type, rigidity, thermal structure and
frictional stability. Because shallow creep and earthquake swarms are general
properties of major faults in the Salton Trough, our results will provide inputs
to physics based earthquake hazard models in the region.