* 0943634
* Shipboard Scientific Support Equipment
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* James Sanders, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Hawkins
* 08/31/2013
* USD 210,268.00

ABSTRACT &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;28 July 2009&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
0943634&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Skidaway Institute of Oceanography&lt;br/&gt;PI:
J. Sanders&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposal requests numerous Shipboard Scientific Support (SSSE) items for the
vessel operated by Skidaway Institute of Oceanography; namely the R/V SAVANNAH.
The requests specifically include items that have been recommended from past NSF
inspections, or Post-Cruise Assessments (PCA's) and have been otherwise deferred
by the operators due to cost. All of the items requested will either improve
safety, enhance science support capability, or extend vessel service life. Due
to the nature and timing of these requests, the vendor quotation standards
normally required by the SSSE Program were waived out of necessity with many of
the figures provided as estimates for budgetary purposes and based mainly on
past experience of the vessel operators for similar work.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The R/V SAVANNAH supports federally
funded scientific research in the southeast Atlantic in order to expand human
knowledge of the ocean environment. During operations, the vessel routinely
exposes graduate and undergraduate students to seagoing oceanography. Pubic
outreach is also achieved through open house events and educational cruises
funded by both NSF and the State of Georgia. The SAVANNAH is scheduled to
complete approximately 40 NSF sponsored days in 2009.