* 0943794
* 5th International Liquid Crystal Elastomer Conference; Kent State University; Kent, OH; September 24-26,2009
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Peter Palffy-Muhoray, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 08/31/2010
* USD 8,031.00



TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

Liquid crystal elastomers (LCEs) are emerging soft materials of great scientific
and technological importance. Much of the development of these materials and all
previous conferences on this topic have taken place in Europe. The proposed 5th
International Liquid Crystal Conference (5th ILCEC) will be the first US
Conference on this subject. Its aim is to provide young US researchers with the
opportunity to learn about this exciting and promising field and to become
involved in LCE research. Liquid crystal elastomers are solid liquid crystals;
they are cross-linked rubber networks with orientational order. Their salient
feature is the coupling between orientational order and mechanical strain. This
coupling provides a new way of changing orientational order and hence modifying
the optical and physical properties of samples by mechanical strain. Conversely,
changing the orientational order via fields or temperature gives rise to
mechanical strain and changes in sample shape. The former allows mechanically
tunable devices, such as rubber lasers, while the latter allows the construction
of driven actuators driven by light or vapors and of light driven motors. Unique
aspects of these materials present formidable scientific challenges. Due to
coupling of strain and orientational order, strain without stress, or ?soft
elasticity?, associated with reorientation of the mesogenic constituents of LCEs
has been predicted. Theoretical obstacles to soft elasticity have also been
identified. A rich variety of experimental observations have been made, but
their interpretation is still a topic of debate, and the question of soft
elasticity remains open.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

The proposed 5th International Liquid Crystal Conference (5th ILCEC) will bring
together researchers from different disciplines and different parts of the world
who have made important original contributions, and will facilitate informal and
in-depth discussion of the outstanding issues of science and technology and
future research directions in liquid crystal elastomers (LCEs). The interactions
and collaborations resulting from this Conference are expected to lead to rapid
scientific advances and to opening doors to new discoveries. The proposed
Conference will also have a broader impact via: (i) extensive dissemination of
scientific results; (ii) the development of new sensor, actuator and smart
materials technologies; and (iii) significant impact on the fields of
adaptive/tunable optics and photonics. One speaker will present a public
lecture: Professor and Eminent Ohio Scientist Jonathan Selinger will speak on:
?Liquid Crystals and Rubber: Combining Scientific Fields for New Technologies?.
Research on cutting edge topics will encourage and facilitate workforce training
in physics, chemistry, and applications of new elastomeric LC materials. This
proposal seeks funding to hold the first US Conference on recent developments in
the field of Liquid Crystal Elastomers and identifying future research
directions. The requested NSF funds will be used to support participation of
students and junior scientists and members of underrepresented groups.