* 0943282
* Collaborative Research: Workshop on Confidential Data Collection for Innovation Analysis in Organizations to be held in Microsoft headquarters in September 2009 -- Redmond, WA.
* SBE,SBE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2010
* Maria Cruz, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Julia I. Lane
* 08/31/2010
* USD 12,128.00

Understanding how organizations promote innovation is a key element of advancing
the science of innovation, and hence the science of innovation policy. Data on
innovation inputs, innovation processes, and innovation outputs are increasingly
being captured and stored electronically. A number of fundamental bottlenecks to
using these data to advance social science research exist due to unsolved issues
of privacy, data integration, and data quality. The core scientific challenge is
how to make such real-world, large-scale data available to researchers to
nurture innovation and perform valid experimentation, while maintaining data
privacy. Fortunately, computer scientists have been developing a variety of
techniques and building new tools that manage large data sets in ways that can
potentially help in supporting and measuring innovation
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop brings together social
scientists, the users of data on innovation, together with computer scientists,
the creators of new tools for collecting data while protecting privacy concerns.
The workshop includes leading computer scientists with specialties in data
management, data mining, security/privacy and social networks as well as
social/organizational scientists, such as economists, sociologists,
psychologists and anthropologists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of the
workshop is to identify emerging major challenges in
this&lt;br/&gt;interdisciplinary area. Three different types of data critical to
the study of innovation are the focus of study: third party data, such as U.S.
Census data, patendt databases, NSF funding data or citation databases; detailed
insider data such as internal communications, team video, or team documentation;
and broader insider data such as cross-firm surveys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact of the workshop is substantial. First, an enhanced empirical
basis for studying innovation is necessary to guide policy decisions. Second,
the workshop participants represent a broad variety of disciplines, which
creates a broader interdisciplinary network of study. Finally, the attendance of
graduate students advances the goal of training a new cohort of researchers in
the field.&lt;br/&gt;