* 0943383
* Collaborative Research: Engineering Genetically Augmented Polymers (GAPS)
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Andrew Ellington, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Susanne von Bodman
* 07/31/2014
* USD 565,779.00

Synthetic biology is an emerging field that involves the design or re-design and
manufacture of new biologically-inspired parts, modules, devices and systems.
This has two major outputs. First, it tests scientific understanding of how life
works and how it can be re-engineered at the most fundamental level. Second, it
promises to put biological systems on a more modular and rational footing for
subsequent engineering efforts. Foundational technologies need to be developed
to make synthetic biology modular, scalable, and programmable. This project
seeks to address this challenge by expanding biological space with Genetically
Augmented PolymerS (GAPS) that will enable the design and manufacture of
programmable networks and novel chemical function. Nucleobase amino acids (NAAs)
will be synthesized and incorporated into natural polymers, proteins (pGAPS),
and chemical polymers, polyvinyl nucleobases (cGAPS). In essence, by giving
proteins and cells the ability to 'talk' with one another using the same code
that DNA and RNA uses this proposal seeks to create a programmable ur-cell for
biomedical engineering. This work will catalyze a new paradigm for engineering
both chemical and biological systems. By melding the complexity and diversity of
Biology with the predictability and high scalability of Chemistry, GAPS will
pioneer new directions in synthetic biology. The addition of genetic information
to proteins and cells will in general make biology more modular, scalable, and
programmable. This should in turn enable the rational design and re-design of
biological systems for compelling applications, such as controlling the wiring
of interactomes and rationally modulating and programming cell function. For
example, it should be possible to re-wire signaling pathways on a protein-by-
protein basis, and to engineer tissues in a way that allows the precise,
genetically-encoded placement of individual cells. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impact: In addition to creating a wholly new ur-cell platform for synthetic
biology applications, the formation of a strong a UK-US team will have a
considerable impact on the global leadership by these two countries in synthetic
biology. The readily grasped goals of this project (programmable cells,
replicating plastic) will provide opportunities for showing the public that
synthetic biology is a field that yields translational technologies that can
impact their own lives. Following up on the goals of the Sandpit, the
international research team will establish and maintain a valuable network that
provides for competitive, interdisciplinary, and globally-engaged research. This
network will directly reach out to and involve students in synthetic biology
(via iGEM, the Freshman Research Initiative, and "Current Protocols in Synthetic
Biology"), and will begin to train a new generation of engineers who are
comfortable operating between disciplines, labs, and continents. Moreover, the
network will be of great use in engaging public interest and educating policy
makers about the threats and benefits of synthetic biology, overall raising
awareness of the ethical, legal and social impacts of synthetic
biology.&lt;br/&gt;