* 0943639
* CCI Phase I: Center for Energetic Non-Equilibrium Chemistry at Interfaces (CENECI)
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Steven Sibener, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 08/31/2012
* USD 1,520,000.00

This Phase-I Center for Chemical Innovation will seek to discover, characterize
and subsequently utilize a wide range of highly energetic and non-equilibrium
chemical processes at interfaces. This will enable transformative advances in
catalysis, materials growth and processing, and condensed state environmental
chemistry. Scientific opportunities include the preparation of new classes of
metastable interfaces with enhanced catalytic function, chemistry carried out
with different reagent and substrate temperatures leading to enhanced process
selectivity, new concepts in carbon dioxide management, and the creation of new
or refined functional materials based on growth and processing under energetic
and non-equilibrium conditions. The CCI brings a wide range of tools to bear on
this grand challenge, including supersonic and hyperthermal molecular beams, in
situ and ex situ scanning probe and electron microscopy, a complete suite of
surface science and optical analytical spectroscopies, quantum chemical and
materials computation, and molecular dynamics, molecular mechanics and Monte
Carlo simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center for Energetic Non-Equilibrium
Chemistry at Interfaces (CENECI) will support collaborative and team-based
discovery that integrates researchers at the University of Chicago,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Montana
State University and Northwestern University. Postdoctoral fellows as well as
students at the high school, undergraduate, and graduate levels will participate
in research activities in more than one CENECI laboratory, thus significantly
broadening their training and introducing them to team-based discovery. These
activities will be enabled by cyberinfrastructure links among all of the groups
and a CENECI website, allowing ready participation in meetings, seminars,
computation, and experiments from afar. A comprehensive outreach program will
accompany activities at all institutions, with the focus during Phase-I being on
chemistry education enrichment to the local underrepresented Hispanic and
African-American K-12 populations in Chicago, Madison, and Boston, as well the
Native American communities of Montana.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Centers for
Chemical Innovation (CCI) Program supports research centers that can address
major, long-term fundamental chemical research challenges that have a high
probability of both producing transformative research and leading to innovation.
These Centers will attract broad scientific and public interest by sharing the
results of their innovative approach to this challenging question.