* 0943995
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: International:  Fueling of Faint Active Galactic Nuclei:  Obscured or Intrinsically Weak
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Christopher Impey, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* R.  Clive Woods
* 07/31/2011
* USD 12,450.00

This program continues the collaboration between University of Arizona graduate
student Jonathan Trump and Ehime University (Japan) Professor Yoshiaki
Taniguchi. Their research centers on supermassive black holes (SMBHs), which are
found in the centers of all galaxies and are millions to billions of times more
massive than our sun. SMBHs in the distant universe are bright because they
rapidly accrete nearby stars and gas, while most local SMBHs (such as the one at
the center of the Milky Way galaxy) are passive and extremely faint. Trump and
the PI have led COSMOS spectroscopy using the US-operated Magellan telescope,
while Professor Taniguchi has led the optical photometry using the Japan-
operated Subaru telescope. Their previous work has suggested the first evidence
for a transition phase between highly accreting distant SMBHs and local passive
SMBHs. This program will use the optical photometry to identify more weakly
accreting SMBHs that were too faint for spectroscopy, with the goal of
connecting the increase in accretion to a change in galaxy evolution and fueling
history. The program will also use spectropolarimetry with an instrument
available only on the Japan-operated Subaru telescope, looking for signatures of
obscuration and hidden fueling in the weakly accreting SMBHs. The broader
impacts of the proposed research center on the preparation by the PI of a
popular article on the evolution of black holes down to modest mass examples,
and the outreach work of Jonathan Trump at Ehime University, where he will coach
local graduate students on skills in giving presentations in English and on
surveying research literature through the use of journal club
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;