* 0943168
* Socio-technical ecosystems for scientific software development
* CSE,OAC
* 11/01/2009,09/30/2013
* James Herbsleb, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2013
* USD 400,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). This research examines practices of software development,
co-creation and sharing in collaborative scientific research based on a sample
of multiple virtual organizations using the Open Science Grid. Almost every
workflow that generates scientific results involves software, from configuration
and control of instruments, to statistical analysis, simulation and
visualization. Creating and maintaining software is a significant activity in
scientific laboratories, including science and engineering virtual
organizations. Success depends upon overcoming both the challenges of
collaboration and the complex coordination problems of distributed software
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key challenge is that while science is
collaborative, it is not selfless; scientists face competitive pressures
throughout their careers and maintaining ongoing control over the software they
write may be related to their career success. Consequently, common software
development models like traditional open source projects may be less appropriate
for scientific software as alternative models drawn from open software
ecosystems, such as Eclipse, that support collaboration between groups that are
also competitors. Without adequate understanding of the complex issues of both
coordination and incentive challenges, scientific funding agencies cannot
provide clear guidance on appropriate policy to promote and sustain effective
software development in collaborative science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research extends theories of architectural alignment in distributed software
development and hypothesizes a central role for technical architectures in
establishing the framework within which coordination, cooperation, and
competition take place. In particular we hypothesize an enabling role for
architectures that are appropriately aligned to support collaboration,
particularly as incentives change over time. To examine existing practices and
these hypotheses the research team will collect data through interviews, the
Open Science Grid's software usage data, software source code and development
repositories over three years. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results will build
understanding of how scientists create and share their software. Such
understanding will help to improve collaboration practices in scientific
research as well as helping science-funding bodies support scientists through
policy, guidelines and education on software development in funded scientific
research.