* 0943320
* International Study of Arctic Change: Program Implementation Phase 2
* GEO,OPP
* 12/01/2009,11/30/2013
* Maribeth Murray, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Erica L. Key
* 11/30/2013
* USD 585,428.00

The International Study of Arctic Change (ISAC) project office, located in
Stockholm, Sweden, is dedicated to the coordination of international efforts
complementary to the themes of the US SEARCH program. It offers a venue for
continuing and emerging national science efforts to exchange ideas and visions
for an Arctic Observing System, integrated pan-Arctic modeling, and climate
change mitigation strategies. It also includes amongst its broad scientific
goals free and open sharing of datasets and translation of natural scientific
results into a social context through outreach to Arctic communities and
networks of social scientists. It has produced an internationally-reviewed
science plan outlining ISAC objectives and is now moving into an implementation
phase based on that plan. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the next three years, ISAC
will expands its role in the Arctic, developing memoranda of understanding with
Asian Arctic countries while strengthening collaborative agreements amongst
American, Canadian, and European partners. ISAC will host several workshops
dedicated to observing, modeling, and responding to Arctic change, including the
assimilation and distribution of socio-economic datasets. The ISAC executive
director will have a visible presence at several international conferences,
where Arctic indigenous communities and early career researchers will be
engaged, as well as participate in meetings of other high-level international
Arctic groups, such as the Arctic Ocean Science Board and International Arctic
Science Committee. Relevant news and activities related to these efforts will be
disseminated on the ISAC project office website through a newsletter to the
broader Arctic research community. &lt;br/&gt;