* 0943425
* Effect of Wing Deformation and Flexibility on the Aerodynamics of Insect Flight
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Rajat Mittal, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Horst Henning Winter
* 08/31/2011
* USD 207,915.00

0828147 Mittal

Flapping flight with flexible wings that twist, bend and morph is a hallmark of
aerial locomotion in animals, but achieving biological levels of aerial
performance in micro-aerial vehicles (MAVs) with human-designed wings has proven
elusive. The PIs will study the role of wing deformation and flexibility on the
aerodynamics and flight characteristics of insects using butterflies as the
insect models to study the impact of wing deformation and flexibility on insect
flight aerodynamics. Butterflies are large insects with highly deformable wings
that show a variety of flight behaviors and as such, are good models for this
study. The proposed research has three main components. The first is Insect
flight studies using high-speed, high resolution digital videogrammetry
techniques to extract the detailed wing and body kinematics, motions and
accelerations of butterflies in free flight. The second is parameterization of
butterfly wing structure and development of validated wing finite-element models
coupled to a computational fluid dynamics solver. Finally, computational
modeling and analysis of butterfly flight including analysis of level and
climbing flight, flight maneuvers as well as active and passive deformation of
the wings are planned. This study will significantly advance our understanding
of subtle aerodynamic effects related to wing deformation and flexibility in
insects that are not addressed to date. The PIs also expect to advance
computational modeling of these complex flows using high fidelity computational
modeling in tight coordination with biological investigations to extract
fundamental insight into flapping flight. A significant portion of the research
relating to insect flight studies and structural parameterization will be
carried out by undergraduate students. These students will have a chance to work
in a multidisciplinary team addressing issues in biology, fluid mechanics,
structural dynamics, experimental testing and computational modeling. The topic
of insect flight is one that easily catches the interest of students of all
levels, and the PIs will leverage this to conduct annual outreach activities
with area magnet high schools and schools in the District of Columbia.