* 0943997
* EAGER: A DNA-Based, Cellar and Self-Organizing Approach to Adaptive System Development
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2011
* Yan Jin, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Christina L. Bloebaum
* 08/31/2011
* USD 75,041.00

The research objective of this EAGER award is to develop a synthetic DNA based,
cellular and self-organizing framework for conceptualizing and designing
adaptive systems. This represents a new design methodology for adaptive systems
development. Such systems are needed in space exploration, performing tasks in
hazardous situations, and for extending utility and lifetime of engineered
systems. Following nature's biological synthesis approach to the formation of
biological systems, this research will develop a DNA based product
representation that maps biological concepts and processes into mechanical
products and processes. It will also investigate DNA based cellular system
configuration design and self-organizing based construction mechanisms. Computer
simulation based case studies will be carried out to verify and demonstrate the
effectiveness of the new methodology. The research will result in insights and a
research program for a transformative approach to designing complex and adaptive
engineered systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this
research will provide insights and initial design methods for applying a biology
inspired system design and construction process to adaptive systems development.
The research has the potential of opening a new field of design research that
takes advantage of the knowledge of biology, complexity and complex systems. The
adaptive systems developed using the resulting methodology of this research will
significantly enhance human being's exploration capability to reach deeper
spaces and oceans by eliminating the needs for having human beings involved in
unreachable and dangerous situations. The knowledge gained from this research
will be incorporated in workshops and design curricula. Graduate students from
underrepresented groups will be involved. A research open house will be held for
K-12 students to participate. The results, methods, and tools developed through
this research will be available to the research community for future
explorations.