* 0943671
* Moving Beyond the Basics An Ocean Science Lecture Series to Increase Ocean Literacy
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Christine Hoekenga, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 09/30/2013
* USD 144,371.00

This proposal will be awarded using funds made available by the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).

The Smithsonian's National Museum of Natural History (NMNH) and the National
COSEE (Centers for Ocean Sciences Education Excellence) Network propose an ocean
science education program to promote public understanding of current issues in
ocean science. The centerpiece is a lecture series that will bring top ocean
scientists to DC to increase public awareness of ocean science research and how
humans interact with and are connected to the ocean. Topics include climate
change and the ocean, ocean biodiversity loss, the ocean and human health and
coastal hazards. The lectures will be webcast and archived on the Smithsonian
Ocean Portal (scheduled to launch in September 2009). The scientists will also
participate in the "The Scientist Is In" program in the Sant Ocean Hall at the
NMNH. This provides NMNH visitors an opportunity to meet with and learn from top
ocean scientists in a casual setting. The final element to this program will be
the incorporation of related COSEE education materials for NMNH use. The goals
of this program are to increase public awareness of ocean science research and
foster a deeper public understanding of how our actions and choices impact the
ocean.

This project's broader impacts are advancing understanding of ocean sciences and
promoting learning and decision-making based on sound science. The lecture
series allows scientists to expand their research's impact by: 1) being part of
a prominent lecture series at the Smithsonian; 2) having the lectures and "The
Scientist Is In" programs recorded and archived on the Ocean Portal where they
can be used beyond the initial presentations. The project's intellectual merit
is in the science content provided to the public in terms that they can
understand. The Smithsonian Institution and the National COSEE Network propose
this project to promote an ocean-literate society able to make informed
decisions regarding the health of the ocean.