* 0943892
* Exploring Deep Fault Mechanics by Identifying Non-Volcanic Tremor on Southern California Faults
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2014
* David Oglesby, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 01/31/2014
* USD 160,000.00

The investigator will undertake a study of non-volcanic tremor in southern
California using continuous seismic data made available by the Southern
California Seismic Network (SCSN). Initially, they will focus our search for
tremor near Anza, California in a densely instrumented region of southern
California that has both surface and borehole continuous seismic data. These
high-quality data will be used to determine the frequency content and duration
of tremor that occurs near Anza allowing for tuning of future searches to these
features. An automatic tremor detection scheme will then be used to search for
tremor across all SCSN stations over a 5-year time period. These efforts provide
the foundation to address fundamental questions about physical conditions
necessary for non-volcanic tremor in California. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;They will
also determine whether tremor is correlated with local earthquakes, teleseismic
wave arrivals, Earth tides, or observations of slow slip or aseismic creep. And,
they will determine whether tremor occurrence correlates with known fault
geometries or material properties. The major questions to be addressed in this
proposal are: 1) Does tremor occur primarily along well-developed, through-going
faults such as the San Andreas or San Jacinto fault zones?; 2) Does non-
subduction zone tremor occur primarily in regions of a fault that are likely to
be in conditionally stable such as: a) at depths less than 5 km in shallow
sediments and/or b) deep (&gt;15 -20 km) on crustal faults beneath the
seismogenic zone?, and 3) Is timing of tremor in California controlled by
stressing events such as the passage of teleseismic waves, changes in local
seismicity rates, or tidal forces? If so, what is the stress amplitude and
period required to trigger tremor?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tremor are low
amplitude, long duration seismic signals that have been only recently discovered
in seismic data recorded continuously. The first observations of tremor were
made in Japan and found to occur deep on the subducting plate interface. Tremor
has since been observed at multiple plate boundaries around the globe, most
recently along several faults in California. Tremor typically occurs deep on
faults, below the portion of the crust that ruptures during an earthquake. It
turns out that tremor is part of a suite of seismic and geodetic phenomena
likely associated with deep slip on faults. By studying the details of tremor
occurrence, including when and where tremor is typically observed, under what
conditions tremor can be triggered, and the relationship between tremor and
regular earthquakes, we can investigate the frictional properties of faults to
greater depths than was previously possible using seismic data.