* 0943023
* VOSS:  Designing Effective Virtual Organizations
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2009,09/30/2013
* John Carroll, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Crowston
* 09/30/2013
* USD 397,913.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). Virtual organizations - work organizations that rely
fundamentally on the Internet rather than physical proximity for conducting
their operations - promise to better leverage resources of all kinds throughout
the world, and to improve the processes and the outcomes of collaborative
knowledge work involving mutually remote partners. Their emergence as an
increasingly standard paradigm for work has been meteoric, but has attracted
relatively little empirical study. Much of the best empirical work on virtual
organizations has documented modest (or worse) success, and primarily focuses on
describing risks and failure patterns. Our project complements this body of
research by investigating what effectiveness means for virtual organizations,
how virtual organizations can achieve effectiveness, and how they can support
knowledge work in new and distinctive ways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The core of
this project is an in-depth interpretive study of three established virtual
organizations directed at developing a preliminary conceptual and empirical
analysis of how they are effective. All of these organizations have been
continually operating and growing for more than five years, and are recognized
as successful by their stakeholders and members. These organizations have
produced a variety of successful knowledge products and services, and exemplify
three distinct types of virtual organizations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We will use
participation action research to engage and observe the domain expertise of our
partners in real activity contexts, and to assure that our partners have
appropriate input in shaping research activities. Our project will use
qualitative, field-study methods to empirically characterize the ways in which
the partner organizations are effective. We will use interview and content
analysis methods to identify strategies the organizations use. We will codify
these strategies as design patterns: standard solutions to typical problems. We
will apply this patterns-based knowledge in three ways: (1) We will use member
checking and participatory design with key informants of the three partner
organizations to investigate how the design patterns are useful to our partners.
(2) We will publish our patterns on the Web to gather critical reactions from a
broader community of virtual organizations with respect to their prima facie
validity and utility for understanding and designing virtual organizations. (3)
We will incorporate and evaluate features and sociotechnical affordances from
the patterns in a prototype virtual organization
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the growing importance of virtual
organizations as a standard paradigm for knowledge work, it is vital better
understand how they can be designed to be effective. One way to do this is to
investigate how longstanding and successful virtual organizations function, and
to try to refine that understanding into actionable design guidance for future
virtual organizations.