* 0943148
* VOSS: Coordination in Virtual Organizations
* CSE,OAC
* 12/01/2009,11/30/2013
* Robert Kraut, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Crowston
* 11/30/2013
* USD 423,613.00

Virtual organizations are becoming increasingly important in driving production
and innovation. Online production groups have the potential to transform the way
that knowledge is produced and disseminated, but are often plagued with
coordination problems that exceed those encountered by comparable co-located
groups. Coordination is especially challenging for organizations engaged in
complex, interdependent tasks typical of science and engineering. These groups
often involve large numbers of contributors with tenuous and poorly defined
relationships to the virtual organization and each other, who must coordinate to
create coherent knowledge artifacts. For example, the volunteer editors who
write Wikipedia, the online encyclopedia, must produce a collection of articles
that are complete, accurate, coherent and readable. To solve these coordination
challenges groups use a variety of mechanisms, including market bidding,
standardization, strong leadership, and direct
communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to understand the
effectiveness of particular coordination mechanisms for solving the coordination
challenges faced by online production groups. The research will examine how
online production groups use a variety of coordination mechanisms to solve
problems of task assignment, temporal dependencies and fit between work outputs.
It will examine the conditions under which these coordination mechanisms are
successful in existing online knowledge production communities, such as
Wikipedia and the thousands of other wikis that use a similar infrastructure.
The effectiveness of these coordination mechanisms will then be tested in
controlled online experiments, using artificial production groups recruited to
synthesize information into coherent knowledge. This research extends theories
of coordination to large scale virtual organizations, providing a greater
understanding of how large groups of individuals can effectively work together
online. The results will help virtual organizations to more effectively
coordinate, engage participants in tasks that are important to the group, and
coherently synthesize knowledge.