* 0943491
* Ground Water Seepage and Piping Mechanisms of Streambank Erosion and Failure
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2014
* Garey Fox, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 05/31/2014
* USD 310,000.00

Ground Water Seepage and Piping Mechanisms of Streambank Erosion and
Failure&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Excessive sediment is one of the most common
surface water pollutants across the world with a majority of sediment originated
from streambanks in many watersheds. In predicting sediment transport, the
interacting role between surface water and shallow ground water is not well
understood. The importance of ground water seepage and piping is unknown with
respect to other fundamental processes of river erosion, although seepage and
piping features are observed on streambanks throughout the world that span a
range of geomorphologic conditions. Specific seepage and piping mechanisms that
cause bank failure may never manifest themselves as transparent features on
unstable banks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research hypothesizes that multiple
ground water flow mechanisms, combined with fluvial processes, affect the
occurrence and timing of streambank erosion and failure. Ground water forces can
act over extended periods to destabilize banks between flow events. Specific
seepage mechanisms become prevalent under certain predictable streambank
stratigraphy and hydrologic conditions. This research is currently conducting
three-dimensional soil column experiments to accomplish the following
objectives: (1) determine the occurrence and prevalence of different seepage
erosion mechanisms (i.e., seepage gradient forces and undercutting); (2) derive
a sediment transport equation for seepage erosion across a range of soil
textures and cohesions; (3) identify typical undercut formations when seepage
undercutting occurs; and (4) determine the sequence of erosion steps leading to
failure by ground water flow through soil pipes. Laboratory experiments
combining three-dimensional soil columns and small-scale, recirculating, indoor
flumes are quantifying the impact of seepage on a bank?s resistance to fluvial
erosion and determining the role of vegetation in preventing bank weakening by
subsurface/fluvial processes. The hypotheses affirmed/falsified by the
laboratory experiments are being examined at the field scale through innovative
field experiments. Two field sites in Oklahoma are being instrumented to monitor
natural fluvial shear stresses, pore-water pressures, and gradient forces over
several months prior to a controlled seepage induced failure experiment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has implications for understanding and
implementing successful riparian management programs and erosion mitigation
policies in the United States and abroad. Issues such as streambank stability
and sediment load to streams have been major concerns for decades and billions
of dollars have been spent on streambank protection and restoration. This
sediment loading must be addressed through riparian management. However, the
range of possible solutions remains limited until we better understand the
surface/ground water interactions. This project aims to strengthen student
research and mentoring skills as well as build faculty and student experience,
publications, and networks in the United States and abroad. A primary strength
of this proposal is the continuation of established partnerships between an
academic institution (Oklahoma State University) and a federal government agency
(USDA-ARS National Sedimentation Laboratory). This research is being
disseminated to high school students across Oklahoma, including typically
underrepresented students in engineering (i.e., rural, women, and Native
American students), through a unique soil erosion contest associated with the
Future Farmers of America (FFA) Career Development Events.&lt;br/&gt;