* 0943658
* Research Workshop in the Poyang Lake Region, China on Environmental Science, Engineering and Sustainable Development
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,07/31/2010
* Shaw Yu, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 07/31/2010
* USD 34,920.00

0943658 Smith

This grant is for partial support of a U.S.-China "Research Workshop in the
Poyang Lake Region, China on Environmental Science, Engineering and Sustainable
Development." The funds will be used primarily to support the travel and lodging
of invited U.S. scientists to participate in the workshop, to be held in China,
tentatively Nov. 1-7, 2009 at Nanchang Common University. In China, rapid urban
growth in many areas (such as Nanchang, the capital city of Jiangxi Province)
has put heavy strain on the water and ecological systems such as Poyang Lake,
the largest freshwater lake in China and an important ecosystem in the world. At
the present time, Poyang Lake is still relatively clean compared to some other
major lakes in China, such as Lake Tai, but it is being threatened by erosion,
pollution (such as heavy metals), and eutrophication. With China's rapid
economic growth, the pressure for industrial and other urban development is very
intense. The supported U.S. participants in the workshop will meet with Chinese
colleagues to exchange expertise and experience with regard to potential and
probable development of the Poyang Lake region. Workshop topics include: water
and watershed pollution control-strategy and techniques, ecosystem protection
and restoration, source water protection, eutrophication control-experiences and
new strategies, and water pollution control-economic aspects. It is an explicit
goal for international collaborative research projects to evolve from this
workshop.

This grant is supported jointly by OISE and ENG.