* 0943445
* MARGINS Successor Planning Workshop
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2010
* Geoffrey Abers, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 08/31/2010
* USD 179,544.00

Funds are provided for a marine geosciences community-wide workshop to consider
and discuss the future of the MARGINS Program. In the aftermath of a positive
Decadal Review of the program in February 2009, the MARGINS Steering Committee
(MSC) was asked to convene a community-wide workshop, intended to identify and
elucidate key scientific challenges that a potential successor program would
address, and to map out its structure. A draft Science Plan would emerge based
upon that meeting?s result, which would then be used by NSF as a basis for
deciding whether a successor program will be authorized. The workshop is planned
for February 2010 in San Antonio, TX. It is envisioned by the MSC that a
successor to MARGINS that will investigate the coupled geodynamic, surficial,
and climatic processes that build and modify continental margins over a wide
range of timescales. Such a program will have applications to margin evolution
and dynamics, construction of stratigraphic architecture, and implications for
accumulation of economic resources, associated geologic hazards, climate change
and environmental management. Addressing such complex coupled systems requires
an integrated approach, and we envision a broad range of studies combining field
research in structure and tectonics, geochemistry, geophysics, sedimentology and
stratigraphy, but also incorporating experimental, analytical and numerical
modeling investigations. The program will involve large amphibious field
programs and smaller focused field and lab-based studies. In order for the
program to succeed, a clear and focused Science Plan should be formed, with
broad community support. The workshop hopes to lay the groundwork for such a
plan.

Broader Impacts. Active continental margins are the sources of some of the most
dramatic geologic phenomena, including earthquakes, landslides, and volcanic
eruptions. The growing populations on continental margins are also subject to
longer-term environmental impacts, such as land-use changes induced by coastal
submergence, erosion, or storm effects. Continental margins are also the
repository of abundant economic resources, and an integrated understanding of
the origin and distribution of these deposits is necessary for accessing them in
the future. An important outcome of the workshop will be a structure for
scientific investigations that can address such topical issues, and convey
coherent information about continental margin processes and hazards to the
general public. It will also provide structure for a coherent Education Program
to complement a successor program, based on the undergraduate-based program in
place currently.