* 0943559
* STCI: OptIPlanet Cyber-Mashup: Persistent Visualization and Collaboration Services for Global Cyber Infrastructure
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Jason Leigh, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Irene Qualters
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,933,337.00

This proposal will be awarded using funds made available by the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5), and meets the
requirements established in Section 2 of the White House Memorandum entitled,
Ensuring Responsible Spending of Recovery Act Funds, dated March 20, 2009.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As globally distributed research teams work
more closely to solve complex problems utilizing high-performance
cyberinfrastructure, from petascale computers to specialized instrumentation
generating massive amounts of data, the need for high-resolution visualization
is becoming more critical for analysis, and is propelling the worldwide adoption
of "OptIPortals". An OptIPortal is an ultra-resolution visualization display
instrument interconnected by optical networks that enables the creation of
"cyber-mashups," or juxtapositions, of data visualizations, enabling greater
insight. SAGE, the Scalable Adaptive Graphics Environment, is cross-platform
middleware that enables users worldwide to have a common operating environment,
or framework, for accessing, streaming and juxtaposing high-resolution
visualizations on one or more OptIPortals. This project will transition SAGE
from a transformative research prototype to a hardened technology that provides
production-quality, community-driven open services for visualization and
collaboration utilizing shared national and international cyberinfrastructure,
for the advancement of scientific research and
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;Coping with
complexity and scale in data is a problem that spans all of e-science. Using
OptIPortals and SAGE, scientists can create visualization pipelines from
multiple sources - whether supercomputers, data storage systems and/or
instruments (such as high-definition cameras), as well as laptop screens and the
Web - to access and share a variety of information, in a variety of resolutions
and formats, and create giant Cyber-Mashups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;Our Nation already invests in network-connected, middleware-
enabled cyberinfrastructure to generate and disseminate petabytes (ultimately
exabytes) of data among researchers worldwide. What is missing, however, is a
globally integrated collaborative work environment to facilitate data analysis
and high productivity. Funding to provide a production-quality SAGE will make
cyberinfrastructure more accessible to broader communities of scientists and
students, and help maintain US leadership in high-performance computing.