* 0943994
* Improving subduction zone thermal models by including hydrothermal circulation in subducting crust
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2013
* Glenn Spinelli, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Raffaella Montelli
* 04/30/2013
* USD 134,772.00

Subduction zones, where one tectonic plate moves under another, are the
locations of the Earth's largest earthquakes. The physical and chemical
conditions along a fault separating two tectonic plates in a subduction zone are
controlled largely by temperature; fault temperatures increase with depth below
the surface of the Earth. Studies of friction between rocks suggest that
earthquakes can be generated only where fault temperatures are between 150 and
350 C. These temperature limits have been combined with site-specific estimates
of fault temperatures to outline potential areas of subduction zone earthquakes.
These potential earthquake areas are used to estimate the ground-shaking and
tsunami hazards for coastal regions overlying subduction zones (for example,
Washington, Oregon, and northern California).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most existing
subduction zone temperature estimates do not include the thermal effects of
water flowing through an aquifer in the ocean crust. This flowing water can move
large amounts of heat from one part of a subduction zone to another, affecting
fault zone temperatures. The proposed study will improve temperature estimates
in subduction zones by accounting for the effects of fluid flow. Results of this
research will be used to improve seismic hazard estimates for subduction zones
(including the U.S. Pacific Northwest) - a direct societal
benefit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Accurate subduction zone thermal models are
necessary to understand key metamorphic and seismogenic processes. A recent
study of the Nankai margin (southern Japan) shows that previous thermal models
had neglected a process that dramatically influences subduction zone
temperatures - hydrothermal circulation within the basaltic basement aquifer of
subducting crust. For the Nankai margin, hydrothermal circulation explains
longstanding, large, enigmatic thermal anomalies and reduces seismogenic zone
temperatures by up to 100 C relative to a case without hydrothermal circulation.
This study will test the hypothesis that similar fluid circulation in subducting
crust is an important control on subduction zone temperatures for four margins
capable of producing M9+ earthquakes: Cascadia, Alaska, Chile, and Sumatra. We
will develop thermal models for these subduction zones using a conductive proxy
to simulate the effects of vigorous fluid circulation in an ocean crust aquifer
[e.g., Spinelli and Wang, 2008; 2009]. The numerical models will be constrained
by surface heat flux observations and the location of major slab
alteration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will result in improved thermal
models for subduction zones. This will allow us to test the hypothesis that the
seismogenic zone of the plate boundary fault extends from ~150-350 C. The
coincidence of the seismogenic zone with temperatures of ~150-350 C has been
demonstrated for the Nankai margin, where thermal models include the effects of
fluid circulation. Determining if this relationship applies to numerous
subduction zones will either advance the concept of a thermally defined
seismogenic zone beyond conjecture or demonstrate the inability to delineate a
seismogenic zone based on subduction zone temperatures. The proposed research
has the potential to transform a number of avenues of subduction zone research,
as the predictions of metamorphic reaction progress and interpretation of fault
zone processes that followed from earlier thermal models that did not account
for fluid circulation in subducting crust may need to be
revisited.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was supported by the Geophysics
Program and EPSCoR.