* 0943198
* VOSS: Transforming Loose Networks into Sustainable Interdisciplinary Virtual Organizations
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2012
* Johannes Strobel, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Crowston
* 12/31/2012
* USD 374,769.00

Proposal: 0943198&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: VOSS: Transforming Loose Networks
into Sustainable &lt;br/&gt;Interdisciplinary Virtual
Organizations&lt;br/&gt;PI: Strobel &lt;br/&gt;Institution: Purdue
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). This project examines the
importance of intermediate physical organizations in the transformation of loose
networks of researchers into sustainable cyber-based virtual organizations in
emerging fields of interdisciplinary science and engineering work. Unlike much
previous research, this project specifically investigates the emergence of
virtual organizations that did not emanate from major existing physical
organizations. Critical case studies of networks and organizations within
Engineering Education Research will be studied from a symbolic interactionist
perspective to understand precursors, pivotal moments, and the growth and
strengthening of relationships amongst their members. Social/organizational
network analysis and oral histories will be used to develop an understanding of
the evolution and success of loose networks and virtual
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Investigating the emergence of new virtual
organizations is a crucial step in learning how to identify, catalyze and
provide the cyberinfrastructure required to support the nascent teams that will
be central to future advances in science and engineering. This will be helpful
to funding agencies, and other public and private research institutions.
Research in the evolution and emergence of new interdisciplinary communities and
virtual organization focused on discovery and learning can help eliminate
potential barriers to access and enable increased participation by
underrepresented groups.