* 0943057
* EAGER:  Collaborative Research: Motivation and Serious Gaming
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Brian Magerko, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2012
* USD 159,003.00

When people play games for entertainment, they are free to choose whether to
play at all and which games to play. So-called 'serious games' employ a media
form players are accustomed to enjoying as entertainment for serious goals such
as learning, health, and persuasion. Rather than voluntary and for fun, a
serious game may in fact be a mandatory class assignment, a required part of
corporate training, or a prescribed activity to improve brain health. Serious
games may not be fun. Even games which are fun for many people (e.g., the
Civilization series of games are some of the best selling games ever and are
widely used as educational games), may not be "fun," "engaging," "motivating,"
or whatever other words may be used to describe the rationale for using games by
academics or designers for a distinct subset of the target audience. Motivation
is known to be important for school learning yet motivation for serious games
has not been studied. In the same way that learners hold different underlying
affinities for intrinsic and extrinsic rewards associated with learning, it is
posited in this project that gamers develop unique gaming motivation affinities
and mindsets throughout their lifetime of gaming experiences. Player typologies
classify players as achievers, explorers, socializers, or killers, but these
typologies only consider voluntary play of a particular game or game genre. It
is not yet known whether players easily and enthusiastically embrace games which
do not fit their preferred gaming motivations, or if such mismatches interfere
with engagement and learning. By definition, serious games piggyback on players'
entertainment gaming experiences, yet they do so with no consideration of why
and how different people play entertainment games, nor what the implications of
those individual lifetime gaming motivation and experience differences are for
how a serious game will be received. This project will develop and test drive
the idea of a Gaming Motivation Profile (GMP), parallel to motivation and
mindset theories. The project is risky, because GMP may turn out not to exist,
or to be unimportant. The project is worthwhile because if indeed GMP mediates
the impact of serious games, there are myriad implications for game design and
for how serious games are introduced to improve their effectiveness. The
proposed Phase 1 exploratory research seeks 1.) to articulate, explore, and
collect normative data about the construct of gaming motivation profile (GMP) as
an individual trait, 2.) to discover whether the way individuals play particular
games is consistent with their GMP, 3.) to study what happens as far enacted
play style and enjoyment when GMP is not available within a game. The proposed
Phase 2 rresearch be a first step in examining the "so what" of GMP and serious
gaming. Researchers will study how a learning game's and a brain game's intended
outcomes (e.g., learning and brain training) are impacted when players' GMP (and
therefore, their preferred play patterns) are or are not available in the game.
The Phase 2 experiment will test the efficacy of manipulating regulatory fit
(introducing task goals which are or are not consistent with the game) for
improving the intended outcomes of a brain game and a learning game.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the impact of GMP on serious gaming intended
outcomes holds promise to inform serious game design and to better serve diverse
audiences for serious games. It is reasonable to expect, based on large gender
differences in the quantity and quality of gaming, that GMP will vary by gender,
age, and other demographics, with implications for more universal serious game
design.