* 0943278
* EAGER:  Did Oxygenic Photosynthesis Cause Marine Group 1 Crenarchaeota to Take a Dive?
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* James Hollibaugh, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 07/31/2012
* USD 95,987.00

The presence of hydrogen peroxide in surface seawater is tied to solar radiation
and its concentration varies seasonally as well as diurnally. H2O2
concentrations in the environment are low relative to those tolerated by many
Bacteria, but relative to Bacteria, marine group 1 Crenarchaeota (MG1C) appear
to lack defenses against it. Thus, photic zone concentrations of H2O2 may be
sufficient to inhibit MG1C metabolism if they have not developed alternative
strategies for mitigating H2O2 toxicity, for example by eliminating, replacing
or protecting sensitive targets in the cell with structures that are less
susceptible to H2O2 poisoning. Given that only 2 MG1C genomes have been
sequenced and that these sequences have not been fully annotated, let alone had
the annotations verified experimentally, it is difficult to infer from genomic
evidence whether MG1C have other adaptations for dealing with H2O2 in the
environment. Thus, this project will to address this question directly by
testing MG1C sensitivity to H2O2 by combining toxicity bioassays of mesopelagic
plankton assemblages with MicroAutoRadiography-Fluorescent In Situ Hybridization
(MAR-FISH) to identify target groups. If the proposed experiments verify that
MG1C are sensitive to H2O2, this property of MG1C could answer a number of
questions. 1) The global and seasonal distributions of MG1C - why they do not
live in the surface layer; their seasonal distribution at high latitudes; and
their distributions relative to Euryarchaeota, which have more catalases and
peroxidases and are more common in surface waters and nearshore environments. 2)
Substrate utilization and metabolism patterns - if they are sensitive to it,
MG1C can only use substrates or metabolize via pathways that do not generate
H2O2. 3) Lack of Archaeal pathogens - a burst of reactive oxygen species (ROS)
is an animal host's first line of defense against pathogens. 4) Why MG1C are
hard to culture - many standard lab practices generate ROS; this may apply to
Bacteria that have proven hard to culture as well, as not all Bacteria have
catalase or peroxidase genes. 5) The divergence between Bacteria and Archaea -
peroxide sensitivity may result from a "frozen metabolic accident" that was a
fundamental property of Archaeal biochemistry at about the time that oxygenic
photosynthesis evolved. 6) Some of the biochemical and compositional differences
between Bacteria and Archaea - one way some Bacteria have adapted to high-ROS
lifestyles has been to eliminate or protect ROS targets in their cellular
machinery.

This is a pilot project of limited scope and budget. Nonetheless it will
contribute directly to graduate and undergraduate education. Results will be
disseminated via publications and presentations at meetings and in the
classroom, and data will be made publicly available in accordance with NSF's
data release policy. Although the problem is important and that the arguments
and evidence in favor of the hypothesis are provocative and convincing, they are
circumstantial, speculative and would not pass the test of peer-review. The
implications of the hypothesis are transformative, however, and this project
would allow a limited test of this hypothesis.