* 0943835
* Geoscience Programs at Community Colleges: Models for Success and Innovation
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,02/28/2011
* Frank Granshaw, Portland Community College
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 02/28/2011
* USD 29,097.00

This award is supporting the travel and conference related expenses for 12
faculty-undergraduate student teams from community colleges, who will present
papers in a technical session titled, "Geoscience Programs at Community
Colleges: Models for Success and Innovation" (session T104), during the 2009
Geological Society of America (GSA) national conference in Portland, Oregon. In
addition, these attendees will be participating in a special focus group to
discuss some of the issues and needs faced by geoscience faculty and students
working within a 2-year college or community college setting. Discussions in the
technical session and focus group will help advance NSF/GEO's understanding of
how to better serve geoscientists working in the community college environment,
where they are commonly isolated and lacking research infrastructure. The
conference will provide valuable professional development for the participating
faculty and help them forge new partnerships with 4-year colleges, larger
research institutions, and employers within the private sector. It will expose
the participating undergraduate students, who will be largely recruited from
underrepresented minorities in STEM fields, to a sampling of education,
mentoring, networking opportunities and the broad array of career pathways in
the geosciences.