* 0943595
* Global Distributions of Ultra-Low Frequency (ULF) Wave Power in the Quiet Magnetosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2013
* David Berube, Loyola Marymount University
* Standard Grant
* Rachel Walker-Kulzick
* 07/31/2013
* USD 191,198.00

Ultra-Low Frequency (ULF) waves are a common feature in Earth's magnetosphere.
They are thought to play important roles in the formation of the radiation belts
and the formation of the magnetospheric ring current that causes strong
suppression of the magnetic field on the ground during magnetic storms. The
waves may also play a role in such phenomena as magnetospheric substorms,
sawtooth events, and steady magnetospheric convection. A key to understanding
the variability of the intensities and types of ULF waves is understanding the
baseline condition of the magnetosphere during magnetically quiet times. In
addition to enhancing our understanding of the baseline state of the
magnetosphere this project will also have significant educational benefits. The
research will include a number of undergraduate students and the work will
closely integrate the research being done with the education of the students.

The most recent sunspot minimum was an unusually quiet period that was marked by
extended intervals during which the magnetosphere was in a quiet, steady state.
While much prior research has been done on ULF waves during magnetically
disturbed times, surprisingly little is known about the distribution of ULF
waves during quiet times. This project will investigate the role the solar wind
plays in the generation of ULF waves during the recent sunspot minimum when the
magnetosphere was unusually quiet. It will develop statistical maps of the
compressional and toroidal wave power in various frequency bands as a function
of location in the magnetosphere and the solar wind and interplanetary magnetic
field parameters. The statistical maps will be developed using ground-based
magnetometers as well as data from the European Cluster satellite mission and
the NASA THEMIS mission.