* 0943440
* International Drought Symposium: Integrating Science and Policy
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2011
* Ariel Dinar, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 01/31/2011
* USD 45,000.00

Prolonged and recurring droughts in many regions of the world strike with
increased frequency, indicating what could be expected when climate change hits
at full force. There is already an understanding among researchers that various
environmental problems have to be approached locally at the watershed/river-
basin level, allowing incorporation of physical, biological, and other
scientific considerations at the lowest decision-making level (Kemper et al.,
2007). Furthermore, a comprehensive-multidisciplinary approach at the
watershed/river-basin level is fundamental in understanding interactions between
physical impacts of drought and the effectiveness of mitigation policies on the
economic consequences of droughts (Wilhite, 2005).&lt;br/&gt;Facing very similar
climatic and other physical conditions, Spain, Australia, South Africa, Mexico,
and parts of the United States all contain drought stricken regions where water
may become a constraint to economic growth and ecological sustainability and its
impacts will likely be pervasive across natural, economic, cultural, and
political systems. Interestingly, each of these countries addresses its
complicated water issues and recurring droughts using different technological,
economic, institutional, and policy measures.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
international drought symposium will allow experts (researchers, policymakers,
and water managers) from various countries facing water scarcity and drought
conditions present and exchange scientific approaches and experiences, and
discuss synergies and uniqueness of drought impacts and mitigation in specific
regions. Recent droughts within each country will be analyzed from different
disciplinary angles, leading to identification of both successful and
problematic approaches used to cope with various aspects of the droughts. The
symposium will be followed by a workshop allowing the team to initiate a
research proposal for a comparative study of water management under drought and
variable water supply conditions.&lt;br/&gt;A cross-country interdisciplinary
approach would be a much more expedient to understanding the relative merits of
various policy instruments than waiting for each country to explore such options
and drawing conclusions from those experiences. It is this nature of the
symposium that will make a difference in the intellectual merit of this
symposium.&lt;br/&gt;The main objective of the symposium is to address drought
from both an interdisciplinary and spatial (international) angles. The
multidisciplinary, multi-country approach is expected to lead to a much more
comprehensive understanding of the impacts and responses to drought, and to set
the basis for more specific and detailed future interdisciplinary research
project. In particular, the symposium will (i) provide a forum for exchange of
drought related policy experiences among scientists, policy makers and water
managers, (ii) allow public input and engagement in the process, and (iii)
publish a volume of the papers presented in the symposium in an academic outlet.
(iv) allow the country team to initiate the process of preparing a full research
proposal of a comparative multi-country study to be submitted for funding both
nationally and internationally. These 4 components will ensure a broader impact
of the proposed activity.