* 0943855
* EMSW21-MCTP: Institute for Mathematics at North Carolina State University. (I'M at State)
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2015
* Michael Singer, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 04/30/2015
* USD 1,200,000.00

This proposal aims to improve the retention of graduate students in the first
two years and increase the number of students going to graduate school. We do
this by incorporating students in research and the mathematical community
earlier and providing support programs for pre-graduate students. The main
component is a set of interconnected summer programs involving research
experiences and short courses for students. These are designed to engage them
and encourage them to continue in mathematics. Several parts of this proposal
are directly aimed at underrepresented students. The major programs include the
following. (1) Research for Early Graduate Students (REG), designed to sustain
the enthusiasm for collaborative original research that attracts students to
Ph.D. programs by providing them with research experiences during the early
years of graduate work. (2) Research and enrichment experiences for under-
represented undergraduate students (REU+), designed to provide a supportive REU
experience for underrepresented students who may not usually consider an REU
program. An important feature is the inclusion of established mentors of
underrepresented students to work with the program and us. (3) Enhanced Research
Program for Early Graduates (REG+), a one-year program for students who have
graduated from college and are not quite prepared for graduate studies in
mathematics. This program targets underrepresented groups. The program includes
a summer research experience, a year of remedial course work and significant
mentoring. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Four important groups are included:
underrepresented undergraduate students, post-baccalaureate students considering
returning to mathematics, under-prepared graduate students, and early graduate
students. In particular, this grant features a collaborative effort between
faculty at NCSU, and the Mathematics Departments of 6 Historically Black
Colleges and Universities. We aim to increase the number of underrepresented
students who get graduate degrees in Mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;