* 0943594
* Evolution Symposium Celebrating the 150th Anniversary of On the Origin of Species
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2010
* Brad Ericson, University of Nebraska at Kearney
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 07/31/2010
* USD 26,000.00

This proposal requests partial funding to support the participation of plenary
speakers, college and high school educators, a diverse group of students
(graduate, undergraduate, high school) and the general public in an Evolution
Symposium and a Teaching Evolution Workshop. The symposium will bring together
leading researchers in evolutionary biology with Midwestern educators and
students to broaden their exposure to current topics in evolutionary biology and
to assist in teaching evolution in the classroom. Speakers will present evidence
for evolution from disciplines ranging from genetics to anatomy to paleontology.
Three poster sessions open to all participants will further increase interaction
between our presenters, established faculty, students and the public. The
symposium will conclude with a workshop for
educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this workshop are enormous.
The University of Nebraska at Kearney faces a constant struggle to teach
evolution to its own students, to future educators, and to the general public.
The list of invited speakers includes some of the nation's most persuasive
lecturers on evolution (Michael Purugganan, New York University; Shannon
Williamson, J. Craig Venter Institute; Rob Knight, University of Colorado; Scott
Gilbert, Swarthmore College). The associated workshop for teachers will provide
expert advice on how to teach topics ranging from fossil evidence for evolution
to molecular evidence for evolution to natural selection. Teachers and students
will have abundant opportunities to talk directly with all
participants.&lt;br/&gt;