* 0943314
* The Taj: A New Model for Global Federated Network Infrastructure for Science and Education
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Greg Cole, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 07/31/2012
* USD 2,293,378.00

This proposal will be awarded using funds made available by the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5), and meets the
requirements established in Section 2 of the White House Memorandum entitled,
Ensuring Responsible Spending of Recovery Act Funds, dated March 20, 2009.

Abstract - The Taj: A New Model for Global Federated Network Infrastructure for
Science and Education Greg Cole, University of Tennessee Jerry Sobieski,
NORDUnet Jun Li, CSTnet, Chinese Academy of Sciences

This two-year $2.3M project will leverage ~$11M in funding and gratis
contributions to broadly support the U.S. research, engineering, and educational
community and its international collaborators. The project is named the Taj in
honor of the significant contributions from the Tata Corporation in India. By
dramatically improving network infrastructure around the northern hemisphere,
the Taj program promises far-reaching and sustainable benefits in global
research and education (R&E) collaboration. The Taj will serve nearly every
science discipline and offer a user-focused, performance-based network
responsive to demands of a globally integrated, infrastructure aware community
of scientists, engineers, teachers, and students. It will enable global open
science collaboration in an era of constrained resources via carefully organized
collaboration and co-funding with public and private sectors in Europe and Asia.
The Taj program is new, yet it efficiently builds on the GLORIAD network
infrastructure which connects U.S., China, and Russia, as well as Korea, Canada,
Netherlands and the five Nordic countries.

The Taj will connect the exchange points in Hong Kong, Singapore, Mumbai,
Alexandria (Egypt), and Europe, extending U.S. access to India, Egypt, & SE
Asia, including likely connections to Vietnam and possibly North & East Africa.
It expands U.S.-China connection through the Pacific by a factor of 4, to 10
Gbps, offering greater capacity for U.S. collaborations with India and across SE
Asia, and providing new equipment to enable better deployment of hybrid services
for more advanced science applications. The Taj will deploy a new high-capacity
circuit connecting the U.S. with Greenland and the 5 Nordic countries, serving
polar, climate change, cyberinfrastructure and other research, and expand
U.S.-Russia capacity through a proposed Nordic infrastructure to St. Petersburg.
This network promises a new model of distributed, decentralized network
measurement, security and management tools, and software for newly-connected
India & SE Asia, and for existing communities in U.S., Asia, and Europe. This
model enables easy sharing of global network management tasks and focuses on
user-level performance. Intellectual Merit: The Taj program advances global
cyberinfrastructure services and metrics, broadens the global community working
on measuring and mitigating customer-based infrastructure performance, and
introduces a new model of distributed, decentralized management of
cyberinfrastructure resources. The additional connectivity and bandwidth will
allow greater access to cutting edge research in India and SE Asia, and will
advance research in pragmatic network deployments and operations. The
performance tools that will be deployed are extensible and novel in approach,
and have the possibility to strongly impact R&E network deployments.

Broader Impacts: Taj's greatest impact lies in its contributions to
Infrastructure for Research and Education. India and SE Asia alone will
dramatically expand the current user base of 9 million R&E host systems logged
by GLORIAD, and significant user growth worldwide. The Taj expansion will
benefit U.S. and global research by bringing some of the world's brightest minds
into the advanced networks R&E arena. The decentralized model for managing
global cyber-infrastructure resources is Taj's most important legacy. Taj is
built upon a long track record of fostering global partnerships between public-
private entities that address major science problems such as Climate Change,
Cybersecurity, Early Warning Systems, Global Public Health, Renewable and
Alternative Energy.

Overarching goals: strengthen cyberinfrastructure in the northern hemisphere;
broaden U.S. access to under-served science communities; promote distributed,
decentralized, secure approach to network management; improve operations and
user experience through solid metrics for utilization, performance and security;
improve cyberinfrastructure awareness and proficiency of end-users.

This project is jointly supported by the NSF's Office of Cyberinfrastructure and
Office of International Science and Engineering, the Tata Communications, the
Chinese Academy of Sciences, and the Nordic Research Council.

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).