* 0943793
* Travel Support for the 9th US National and 10th Canadian Conference on Earthquake Engineering: Reaching Beyond Borders; held July 25-29, 2010 in Toronto, Cananda.
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2010
* Susan Tubbesing, Earthquake Engineering Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2010
* USD 50,000.00

This award provides partial travel support for approximately fifty U.S. graduate
students and early career faculty to participate in the 9th U.S. National and
10th Canadian Conference on Earthquake Engineering: Reaching Beyond Borders,
July 25-29, 2010, in Toronto, Ontario, Canada (http://2010eqconf.org/). This
joint conference is sponsored by the Earthquake Engineering Research Institute
(EERI) and the Canadian Association for Earthquake Engineering (CAEE). This is
the first time these two major earthquake engineering associations have joined
forces to hold a bi-national conference. It is critically important that
graduate students and early career faculty have an opportunity to present the
results of their current research in this important international forum, and be
exposed to cutting edge research being conducted by scientists and engineers on
both sides of the border, at this formative stage in their careers. EERI will
administer the travel grant, advertise broadly the availability of travel
support, convene a blue-ribbon review panel to evaluate applications, coordinate
travel arrangements, and handle all administrative procedures involved in
ensuring the participation of early career, earthquake engineering researchers.
The intellectual merit of this proposal is reflected in the access the
conference provides these early career researchers to the leading researchers
and professionals from the United States, Canada, and other countries involved
in earthquake hazard mitigation. As in previous national conferences, this joint
conference will stimulate new collaborative research efforts and conference
participants will be exposed to exciting new ideas and concepts that expand
their intellectual curiosity far beyond their current intellectual borders. This
conference will have substantial broader impacts. The conference will host
approximately 1,000 papers, addressing all aspects and disciplines that
contribute to earthquake engineering and earthquake risk reduction, for
inclusion in the electronic conference proceedings, which will be made available
via the World Wide Web following the conference.