* 0943939
* The Role of Fault Strands and Roughness in Fault and Earthquake Mechanics
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2012
* Bruce Shaw, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2012
* USD 144,000.00

The observation that faults are nonplanar, rough rather than flat surfaces,poses
a number of challenges in trying to understand how they move. First, modeling
such surfaces is difficult numerically. Second, as slip accumulates on a single
rough surface, normal stress builds up and the fault soon locks, unable to
overcome friction. A standard approach has been to circumvent this lock-up by
the method of ``backslipping'', whereby slip is prescribed, and the resulting
heterogeneous loading stresses which would allow such prescribed slip to occur
are then applied. Unfortunately, the resulting behaviors appear in many ways
much closer to how planar faults behave, and thus some of the intrinsic impacts
of the geometry appear to be canceled out by this purposefully constructed
heterogeneous loading. This project seeks to develop a new approach to the
problem, based on the observation that faults occur not as an individual fault
surface, but as a system of fault surfaces in a fault zone. In particular, this
work will examine fault strands, modeling faults not as one rough surface, but a
set of rough surfaces. In this way, the proposal aims to find dynamically
consistent fault zones which are both made of rough faults and when loaded
uniformly do not lock up. To achieve this goal, take advantage of its
anticipated success, and test its implications, three broad research elements
would be carried out.

First, testing the hypothesis that a system of rough fault strands can slip
under uniform loading without locking up. Continued development and application
of a new numerical approach which does not require faults to align with an
underlying mesh will open up new realms of study of potential geometry.
Constructing and testing correlated sets of rough faults with this numerical
approach would then occur. Demonstrating success would be a significant step in
understanding and modeling the mechanics of faults. Second, applying the model
fault zone to questions relevant to fault and earthquake mechanics. How is slip
partitioned in the system? Are there a minimum number of active strands? Does
partitioning change as the static coefficient of friction changes? Examining
sequences of dynamic ruptures, questions of importance to earthquake mechanics
could be asked. Is the distribution of sizes of events on rough faults more
Gutenberg-Richter like than on planar faults? Do individual events tend to
propagate down one strand, or jump from strand to strand? How often do ruptures
break simultaneously multiple strands along-strike? How is slip along-strike
related to fault roughness? Third, comparing the model system with geological
and seismological observations. Two new measurements quantifying geological
observables would be carried out. One measurement concerns quantifying
correlations in bends and curvature between neighboring strands. A second
measurement concerns measuring the distribution of lateral surface slip strains
in large earthquakes. Preliminary work on this shows interesting potential
relationships of typical values of surface slip strain with previous
measurements by others of fault roughness. This measurement could provide
fundamental constraints on the physics of earthquakes from direct geological
observations.

Earthquakes pose a number of challenges to society in terms of hazards to public
safety and property. Understanding the origins of earthquake behaviors will help
us better understand these hazards. This project aims to tackle one of the
fundamental questions in earthquake dynamics, and the dynamics of the fault
systems on which earthquakes occur, namely, what is the role of the complicated
geometry in the problem. Traditional ways of looking at the problem in terms of
individual faults, or collections of faults, have run into problems dealing with
how to accommodate accumulating slip on nonflat irregular geometries. The PI
will examine the role that an observed property of faults, that they occur as
fault strands-- multiple surfaces within faults--plays in allowing for slip to
accumulate on the nonplanar structures.