* 0943603
* EMSW21-MCTP: Penn State MASS Program
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2015
* Svetlana Katok, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 06/30/2015
* USD 1,251,456.00

Penn State's MASS program (Mathematics Advanced Study Semesters) is an
intensive, semester-long activity for undergraduates recruited from around the
country, integrated with summer REU program (Research Experience for
Undergraduates). MASS consists of three custom-made core courses in topics
chosen from algebra, analysis and geometry with oral final examinations for each
course, a weekly MASS interdisciplinary Seminar and MASS Colloquium, a weekly
lecture series by visiting mathematicians. The program totals 16 honors credits.
MASS is aimed primarily at juniors and seniors and is run every fall semester.
PMASS (Preparatory Mathematics Advanced Study Semesters) will take place in the
spring semester and serve mostly sophomores or advanced freshmen passing through
the transition-to-proofs stage. PMASS will consist of three core courses in
discrete mathematics or algebra, analysis and geometry, a problem solving
seminar and a biweekly lecture series. REU consists of individual or small-group
research projects, a weekly seminar, topics 2-week mini-courses and MASS Fest
conference at the end of the program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MASS
program provides a unique and mutually reinforcing blend of learning and
research activities for its participants. Its goal is to guarantee the
successful transition of its students from undergraduate to graduate study in
mathematics. MASS participants often enter the program with limited prior
exposure to advanced mathematics, and they exit with the experience and
confidence they need to succeed in graduate school. The MASS program very
effectively increases the number of students choosing careers in mathematics and
related fields. The target audience for PMASS are students with basic
mathematical literacy and whose intended major is in exact sciences,
engineering, education. PMASS will engage these students with core mathematical
topics and ways of thinking, teach them to understand, communicate and apply
basic mathematical concepts, and encourage some of them to choose a mathematical
career path. The original MASS course material was published by the American
Mathematical Society in the Student Mathematical LIbrary (5 books published, 3
in various stages of preparation); this dissemination effort will continue to
benefit the broader mathematical community. &lt;br/&gt;