* 0943159
* VOSS: Building Social Attachment in Virtual Groups
* CSE,OAC
* 12/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Robert Kraut, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Crowston
* 09/30/2013
* USD 399,189.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). Science and engineering work is increasingly accomplished by
teams of interdependent people performing at different times and places within
and across organizations. Prior research shows that it is particularly difficult
for members of these ?virtual? teams to become attached or committed to their
group. Lack of commitment in turn can lead to conflict, decreased information
sharing and contribution, higher rates of turnover and poor team performance.
The goal of this research is to better understand how to foster attachment to a
group in a virtual setting. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We propose that one can design
virtual groups to enhance members? bond-based or identity-based attachment. With
bond-based attachment members are connected to the group through interpersonal
relationships with other members while with identity-based attachment group
members incorporate the group mission, theme or defining characteristics into
their sense of who they are. We will examine attachment in a virtual setting by
conducting a series of online experiments, creating numerous game groups on
Facebook. These experiments will vary features of the groups that theory
predicts will promote bond-based and identity-based attachment, and examine the
impact on turnover, contributions, member-to-member support, task performance
within the group, friendship ties, communication outside the group, and self-
reported attachment to the group and its members. These parametric, experimental
studies will be complemented with a series of field experiments conducted in
citizen-scientist communities like ?eBird.org,? an online community in which
bird watchers report on the geographic and temporal distribution of bird
species. In these field experiments we will introduce features that the Facebook
experiments showed successfully promoted attachment in order to determine how to
combine and hone a set of community-design features to increase attachment and
contribution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will extend our understanding
of social dynamics in virtual teams, contributing to the fields of
organizational behavior and information systems. In addition, it will result in
practical recommendations for designing virtual teams will improve them, leading
to advances in the field of human-computer interaction. Overall, this research
will improve the effectiveness of virtual organizations.