* 0943346
* U.S. - Panama EAGER:  THE CLIMATE 1-STOP:  A GEOPORTAL FOR CLIMATE CHANGE SCIENCE, ANALYSIS, ASSESSMENT, AND INFORMATION FOR DECISION MAKING
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Justin Hnilo, Cayuga County Community College
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 07/31/2012
* USD 299,853.00

This U.S.-Panama EArly-Concept Grants for Exploratory Research (EAGER) award,
funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5), under the direction of Ms. Jessica Coughlin from the Institute for the
Application of Geospatial Technology (IAGT), at Cayuga Community College, will
develop a publicly accessible geoportal, Climate 1-Stop, to search, view,
download, model, and monitor existing climate and environmental data and
projects worldwide. The Climate 1-Stop will be a joint NSF-USAID-NASA initiative
with collaborations between researchers, IT specialists, educators, and students
from IAGT, University of Alabama-Huntsville (UAH), NASA Marshall Space Flight
Center, and The Water Center for the Humid Tropics of Latin America and The
Caribbean (CATHALAC) in Panama. This geoportal will be a "one stop shop" for
climate and environmental experts to stay informed and share information with
climate and environmental researchers, decision-makers, and other interested
governments and organizations. The geoportal concept grew from NASA's and
USAID?s SERVIR initiative, which integrates satellite observations, ground-based
data and forecast models to monitor and forecast environmental changes and to
improve response to natural disasters. The Climate 1-Stop will use all datasets
and model outputs previously incorporated into SERVIR and additional datasets
and model outputs will be added throughout the course of the project. The
specific datasets and projections will be selected through surveying archive
datasets, working with focus groups of climate scientists, and integrating
datasets from collaborative partners, including NASA and USAID. The Climate
1-Stop portal will allow various ways to survey climate sites that are not
limited, as in other climate sites, by scale, geographic location, targeted end-
user, organization, data coverage, data type, site ease-of-use, specific climate
change domain or theme. By expanding the data surveying capabilities, the
project will open up the development and implementation process to a wide
variety of organizations and end users. In addition, the Climate 1-Stop will
build on previous experiences and leverage tools and datasets already accepted
by the community, but are not easily accessible.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Additionally, this project will provide international
research opportunities at CATHALAC for undergraduate students at Cayuga
Community College and the University of Alabama-Huntsville. Students will be
provided with hands-on experience with environmental problems and solutions
through participation in research and development activities. The project
activities will also promote and develop multi-disciplinary, multi-national
partnerships through broad participation in the resulting geoportal. The Climate
1-Stop will have a specific area within the geoportal geared towards compiling,
recording and locating mitigation and adaptation projects and researchers
worldwide. This innovative capacity will allow participants to register
adaptation and climate change projects, thereby allowing researchers with
similar interests and goals easy access to potential collaborators. These new
capacities resulting from the Climate 1-Stop geoportal project will quickly
advance the knowledge and understanding of climate science and related impacts
in a unique, engaging, and clearly-understood format to an unlimited, and in
many cases entirely new, audience.