* 0943210
* VOSS: Collaborative Research: Virtual teams, knowledge management, and team performance
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Amy Edmondson, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Crowston
* 08/31/2013
* USD 376,264.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). Many knowledge-based organizations depend on virtual teams,
whose membership is neither co-located nor stable, to complete the work of the
organization. Team dispersion creates unique operational challenges. This
project will implement a longitudinal field study to examine virtual team
functioning in a demanding, knowledge-intensive organization. The empirical
analysis will include five years of development projects (over 1,500 projects)
completed by virtual teams (consisting of over 15,000 individuals). The analysis
will examine how various team and project factors (e.g., team size, familiarity
with other members, project complexity) and degree of team virtuality (e.g.,
team geographic dispersion, team temporal dispersion, and team member turnover)
either directly affect or interact to affect multiple team outcomes (on time, on
budget, quality, customer satisfaction). Qualitative interviews will be
conducted to add depth and detail to the empirical analysis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to examining virtual team functioning, this
research project will also explore how the use of a dynamic knowledge management
system may resolve the knowledge coordination problems that virtual teams face.
The benefits afforded by a knowledge management system are known to be limited
by a complex interaction of social and technological factors. Combining team
performance data with data captured from the organization?s knowledge management
system, we will examine social factors that predict system usage. We will also
examine whether system usage by team members addresses the mutual knowledge
problem and thus results in improved team performance. Finally, we will
implement a field experiment to examine social factors that contribute to
knowledge management system adoption and habit formation (i.e., ongoing usage of
the system).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organizational work is growing increasingly
dependent on output from virtual teams. When functioning effectively, virtual
teams afford immense benefit by providing opportunity to strategically select
team members to maximize team knowledge or skill, or to minimize personnel cost.
Yet virtual teams often fail to live up to their potential or fail completely
because of the coordination challenges and process difficulties that virtuality
can create. This project will advance the theory of virtual team functioning,
thereby aiding organizations in better structuring and managing virtual teams in
order to improve team performance.