* 0943992
* EAGER:  Collaborative Research: Collaborative Investigations of Isotopic Fractionation by Thermal Diffusion and Thermal Migration
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2011
* Gry Barfod, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 07/31/2011
* USD 60,000.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) represents an
interdisciplinary effort to address the geochemical processes that could be
responsible for recent observations of stable isotope variations for "non-
traditional stable isotopes" in igneous rocks (NTSI). Significant fractionations
in the isotopes of Mg and Si are difficult to explain in terms of equilibrium
between minerals and their melts during common igneous differentiation
processes. The exciting new discovery that large isotopic fractionations occur
in melts held within a temperature gradient offers a possible explanation for
the observed isotope variations. The fractionation by thermal diffusion is so
large that it may provide the basis for a unique tool to discern the role of
thermal-gradient-driven processes for magmatic differentiation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project represents a synergistic and novel
collaboration that brings experimental, analytical, and theoretical approaches
to the study of this NTSI fractionation phenomenon. Three complementary efforts
will be undertaken that include: 1) Laboratory silicate Soret (fully molten)
experiments using both natural compositions and selected simple systems; 2)
Analysis of major and trace element behavior and NTSI fractionation in thermal
migration (partially molten) experiments on basalt to rhyolite bulk compositions
and determination of BetaT for Mg, Si and Fe; and 3) Molecular dynamics
simulations of isotope fractionation within a temperature gradient in the MgO-
SiO2 system to investigate the physical basis for the effects of thermal
diffusion on NTSI fractionation. The proposed science plan brings together three
groups of researchers with different expertises in petrology/geochemistry
research from field petrology to experimental petrology to molecular dynamics
simulation.