* 0943184
* VOSS:   Voluntary Virtual Organizations:  Problem Solving through Collective Storytelling in MMOGs
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Wayne Lutters, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Crowston
* 08/31/2013
* USD 269,976.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). In highly dynamic information environments, how can
spontaneous, self-organizing teams solve ill-defined problems? Networked
individuals and affinity groups are increasingly engaged in voluntary and
collective problem solving. Their voluntary virtual organizations have learned
to harness the collective problem solving abilities of diverse groups. This
study deeply examines voluntary teaming behavior in a subset of Massively
Multiplayer Online Games (MMOGs) called Alternate Reality Games to discover the
life cycle dynamics and characteristics of sustainable, results-oriented online
teams. Because online teams, especially in Alternate Reality Games, depend upon
far-flung volunteers working together through technology, the negotiation of
group dynamics, problem definition and problem resolution is an ongoing,
transparent process. Their reliance on technology renders the process of
collective problem solving visible and available for study.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the lens of collective storytelling, this project
identifies inflection points and obstacles to problem solving. Collective
storytelling is the co-construction of a story by a group to make sense of
ambiguous information. Since the collective story is constantly negotiated,
analysis provides insight into how players work together and choose how to solve
problems. The project?s first aim will be to assess the relationship between
teaming and collective storytelling through content analysis of critical gaming
episodes. The second aim will be to create case studies comparing problem-
solving instances to identify principles of teaming and characteristics of
sustainable teams. This includes investigations into how teams handle disruptive
behavior and conflicting information, thus unifying the spontaneous and
potentially volatile efforts of diverse individuals. The third aim is to
characterize and describe the life cycle of voluntary virtual teams. This study
provides a deep understanding of collective problem solving in voluntary virtual
organizations, a critical step for technology developers, decision-makers, and
individuals to succeed in a world increasingly dependent on networked volunteers
solving real problems together.