* 0943208
* VOSS: Creating Functionally Collaborative Infrastructure in Virtual Organizations
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2009,12/31/2011
* Eduardo Salas, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Mark Suchman
* 12/31/2011
* USD 400,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). Organizations are restructuring into collaborative systems
in order to address complex problems by combining expertise distributed across
business functions, knowledge specialties, and geographic locations. Often times
these systems face complex and multifaceted goals requiring distinct teams to
coordinate their efforts and compile crucial information distributed across a
network of teams (i.e., multiteam system). This project will render an
understanding of the requisite motivational, cognitive, affective, and
behavioral dynamics that enable virtual organizations to function
effectively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research tests components of a
theoretically-based model of virtual organizational effectiveness grounded in
multiteam systems theory and network theory. Methods include meta-analytic
integration, field research on emergency response systems, and laboratory
experimentation. Meta-analysis will be used to identify core principles linking
virtuality features (e.g, synchronicity) and structural characteristics (e.g,
nature of distribution) to essential behavioral (e.g., information sharing),
motivational (e.g, efficacy), affective (e.g, cross-team trust), and cognitive
(e.g, transactive memory) dynamics. Field methods will be used to examine the
most pressing practical problems, and their relation to network features, in
multiagency coordination structures operating in highly complex virtual
settings. Laboratory experimentation will evaluate standardization of
communication norms and pre-disaster network formation in enabling the coherent
functioning of virtual organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Findings from this
multidisciplinary, multimethod investigation will contribute insights to the
literatures on virtual teams and multiteam systems (e.g., intra-organizational
and interorganizational level). These findings will ultimately improve the
functioning of a variety of virtual organizations operating in emergency
response and recovery, military, and academic research. In particular, this
knowledge will inform needed alterations to the design, leadership, training,
policy, and feedback systems in such organizations.