* 0943343
* Collaborative Research: Cyberplasm - An autonomous micro-robot constructed using synthetic biology
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Vladimir Parpura, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Rajakkannu Mutharasan
* 08/31/2014
* USD 767,488.00

Scientific Impact The aim of this research is to construct Cyberplasm, a micro-
scale robot using principles of synthetic biology. This will be accomplished
using a combination of cellular device integration, advanced microelectronics
and biomimicry; an approach that mimics animal models; in the latter we will
imitate some of the behavior of the marine animal the sea lamprey. Synthetic
muscle will generate undulatory movements to propel the robot through the water.
Synthetic sensors derived from yeast cells will be reporting signals from the
immediate environment. These signals will be processed by an electronic nervous
system. The electronic brain will, in turn, generate signals to drive the muscle
cells that will use glucose for energy. All electronic components will be
powered by a microbial fuel cell integrated into the robot body. This research
aims to harness the power of synthetic biology at the cellular level by
integrating specific gene ?parts? into bacteria, yeast and mammalian cells to
carry out device like functions. Moreover this approach will allow the
cells/bacteria to be "simplified" so that the input/output (I/O) requirements of
device integration can be addressed. In particular we plan to use visual
receptors to couple electronics to both sensation and actuation through light
signals. In addition synthetic biology will be carried out at the systems level
by interfacing multiple cellular /bacterial devices together, connecting to an
electronic brain and in effect creating a multi-cellular biohybrid micro-robot,
we named Cyberplasm. Motile function will be achieved by engineering muscle
cells to have the minimal cellular machinery required for excitation/contraction
coupling and contractile function. The muscle will be powered by mitochondrial
conversion of glucose to ATP, an energetic currency in biological cells, hence
combining power generation with actuation.

Broader Aspects The development of Cyberplasm will impact the imagination of the
general public, the private sector, and education in general. The robotics
industry (in terms of biotech, healthcare, agriculture and healthcare) is worth
billions of dollars annually. A hybrid bio/synthetic robot would completely
revolutionize aspects of this industry allowing robots to operate with a whole
new level of control and functionality. Amongst the fundamental issues that this
research addresses is the integration of bacteria into fuel cells, as well as
yeast and mammalian cells into engineered devices such as sensors and actuators,
respectively. Moreover, we will address the I/O problem by developing mechanisms
for these engineered cells to communicate with electronics. The knowledge to be
gained (namely at the biology-electronics interface) will not only contribute to
advance the field as such by laying a solid ground upon which novel concepts and
developments can be built, but could have a far-reaching, longer term industrial
impact in industries such as those healthcare, where biosensors and drug
delivery systems could be vastly improved by harnessing the sensing capabilities
and efficiency of such cellular machines. Owing to its ?cybernetic? nature, the
project can be effectively used as a vehicle to foster the enthusiasm and
interest of lay public and, specifically, for the teaching of science in general
and synthetic biology to students, ranging from primary to secondary/high
schools.