* 0943971
* EAGER: Electrically Conducting Zeoate Frameworks: Synthesis, Characterization and Energy Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Victoria Soghomonian, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2013
* USD 125,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: This project addresses the exploration and
development of a new materials system, electrically conducting zeolite-like or
zeoate frameworks, targeted for improved electrical energy storage. Zeolites and
zeoates are characterized by the presence of nanoscale channels and pores in
their crystalline framework, and occur naturally or can be synthesized by
inorganic methods. The work pursues the synthesis of zeoate frameworks and their
structural and electrical characterization. The motivation for studying the
materials for energy applications lies in the critical need to improve
electrical energy storage capabilities by increasing both the energy density and
the power density provided by existing solutions, such as batteries and
ultracapacitors. Conducting framework materials have a large and possibly
disruptive role to play in electrical energy storage. Yet, insight is needed in
the materials factors that control ionic and electronic conductivity in zeoate
materials, in combination with wide electrochemical, chemical, and thermal
stability. Based on fundamental science, novel energy storage and conversion
mechanisms can be predicted and designed into new materials for many electrical
energy applications, from transportation to power-consuming electronics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The exploratory research bridges two
established areas, microporous materials and electrically conducting materials,
to study an as yet largely unexplored but transformative subject, namely
electronically and ionically conducting microporous zeoate materials. The
materials can be harnessed for electrical energy storage. The project addresses
fundamental materials questions related to the origin of electrical conductivity
in zeoates, and evaluates the use of electrically conducting zeoates for energy
applications, by a combination of structural characterization methods,
spectroscopies, and charge transport experiments. The research develops new
insights and new avenues in zeoates, to tackle timely and pressing technological
concerns in energy applications. The research under this EAGER grant is
exploratory, and yet can be leveraged to important scientific, societal and
economic benefits. Furthermore, graduate and undergraduate students are trained
in the growing field of materials for energy applications. Outreach activities
include collaborations with middle and high school students and their teachers
in economically disadvantaged communities, through the introduction of timely
and relevant themes in the science curriculum. &lt;br/&gt;