* 0943885
* Long-Period Strong Ground Motion Prediction Using the Ambient Seismic Field
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2010,12/31/2014
* Gregory Beroza, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 12/31/2014
* USD 282,426.00

We will use the ambient seismic field to predict linear wave propagation effects
in strong ground motion at long periods. The ambient field consists of diffuse
seismic waves that can be used to extract the response, including relative
amplification, of the earth to a concentrated source. Due to limitations in the
frequency bandwidth, the depth of excitation, and the force system behind the
excitation, this is similar to an earthquake. The ambient-field response
represents a new tool for ground motion prediction, and this proposal seeks to
develop and exploit this tool in two earthquake-prone regions: California and
Japan. Our rationale for choosing these locations is that there already exist
ground motion simulations that show strong basin effects for large cities, such
as Los Angeles and Tokyo, in both countries. There are also ample continuous
seismic data available for ambient-field analysis in both cases, as well as a
distribution of moderate earthquakes against which to validate the method. Japan
- surrounded as it is by sources of micro-seismic noise, instrumented with dense
networks, and subject to ~5 times the rate of earthquakes as California - may be
the best place in the world to test and develop ambient noise for ground motion
prediction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the most important tasks of seismology
is to predict the intensity of shaking in large earthquakes. This provides the
information engineers need in order to design earthquake-resistant structures,
and policymakers need in order to develop effective response strategies. Current
practice in ground motion prediction is based primarily on experience, that is,
on records of ground motion in past earthquakes. It fails to take advantage of
all that we know about the factors that control earthquake shaking. Basin
amplification is a key source of discrepancies in ground motion prediction for
large urban centers. Basins trap and amplify earthquake waves and thereby
increase the vulnerability of cities to earthquakes. Basin effects are often
neglected, or at best are crudely approximated, in existing attenuation
relations. This means that ground motion simulations are urgently needed to
understand urban earthquake hazards for cities built on basins, such as LA,
Seattle, Tokyo, and Osaka. Such simulations are being carried out, but if they
are to be useful, they must be shown to be correct. Our research pioneers a new
way to test, and to improve, such calculations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research is international, and an important broader impact of this
research will be to widen and deepen the collaborative ties between earthquake
scientists in the US and Japan. The proposal will fund the Ph.D. research of
Marine Denolle, a female graduate student in seismology. Developing this method
would have the broader impact of validating ground motion simulations and
rendering them acceptable for use for earthquake engineers. This should have a
particularly important impact in the design and retrofitting of long-period
structures (bridges and high-rises).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work is co-funded
by the Geophysics Program and the Office of International Science and
Engineering.