* 0943292
* Collaborative Research: Centers for Ocean Sciences Education Excellence - National Network Partnerships
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Annette deCharon, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 08/31/2013
* USD 305,603.00

This proposal will be awarded using funds made available by the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).

This award provides funds to support the Centers for Ocean Sciences Education
Excellence (COSEE) Central Coordinating Office (CCO) in a set of projects that
will focus on identifying best practices in ocean science education and develop
internal and external Network partnerships. Specifically, this award provides
funds for the development of an online COSEE Community Center to network
teachers, ocean researchers and the public.

The COSEE program, now in its seventh year, has a mission to bridge the gap
between the ocean science research enterprise and science education, both in the
formal and informal sectors. This is accomplished through activities at
individual COSEE Centers, each a consortium of up to 30 several diverse ocean
science institutions and education partners. Center activities include the
development of catalytic partnerships among these diverse institutions, the
integration of ocean science research into high-quality educational materials,
and the establishment of pathways that enable ocean scientists to interact with
educators. The National COSEE Network is comprised of 12 Centers and a Central
Coordinating Office (CCO).

The PI's propose funding to develop a program for creating new COSEE
partnerships among institutions and organizations that are not currently
partners in COSEE. In addition, they propose to coordinate the identification of
best practices within the COSEE community by holding a series of workshops
focused on issues common to most Centers (e.g. teacher workshops), to develop a
speakers series, and to develop an online COSEE Community Center.

The need for improved ocean science literacy is related to the need for improved
overall science literacy. Ocean science education is not only important in
itself, but it can also provide a motivating context for learning about many
aspects of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics. Through COSEE
initiatives, inquiry-based ocean science activities can integrate current
scientific research and meet a critical educational need for the nation.