* 0943857
* Evidence for Geomagnetic Field Excursions Recorded in Postglacial (9-15,000 Calendar YBP) Carbonates of the Tahiti Coral Reef
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2012
* Steven Lund, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 12/31/2012
* USD 213,273.00

Integrated Ocean Drilling Program (IODP) Expedition #310 recently recovered 37
cores of coral-reef sediments from the current reef tract surrounding the island
of Tahiti. The overall scientific goal of this expedition is to understand how
the Tahiti coral reef has developed over the last ~18,000 years as global sea
level has risen more than 150 meters since the ocean low-stand associated with
the last global glaciation. Paleomagnetic samples were recovered from 651
horizons within these cores to help date and correlate the cores. The coral reef
sediments record the orientation of the local magnetic field as the coral reef
grows; known variations in the magnetic field provide a time record of how the
Tahiti coral reef grew. The magnetic directions recorded in the corals also
provide a way to correlate the cores and reconstruct what the reef looked like
at different times in the last 18,000 years. The focus of this study is the
unexpected observation that 18 samples from three different times show clear
evidence for local magnetic field reversals at 10,700±200 cal. YBP, 12,900±200
cal. YBP, and 14,200±200 cal. YBP. The age estimates come from more than 250
radiocarbon dates from the same cores. The three possible local reversals
(excursions) have never before been recorded. This study is collecting new
paleomagnetic samples from all cores in intervals with possible reversals
(excursions) to verify these results. This study is helping to understand how
coral reefs grow/develop as sea level increases. This is important for
understanding how the Tahiti coral reef (and other tropical reefs) will change
as sea level rise continues associated with future global warming. Understanding
the evidence for anomalous magnetic field behavior is also important to develop
a better understanding of the Earth's magnetic-field dynamo source process in
the Earth's outer core (one of the Grand Challenges in geophysics). The Earth's
magnetic field acts as important filter/buffer for Solar variability (Solar
Wind, Magnetic Storms); it is important to evaluate how the Earth's magnetic
field filter operated in the past and whether it may have been a factor in
global climate change. In addition to the scientific goals of the project, the
award is contributing to the support of a soft-money researcher who is a member
of an underrepresented group in the earth sciences. The project is also
providing training for an undergraduate student and a high school student.
Research results are being disseminated through professional presentations,
contributions to the peer-reviewed scientific literature, and the datasets
generated by the study are being disseminated via web-based database
initiatives.