* 0943382
* Collaborative Research: Intelligent Interactions with Risk Communication for Risk Mitigation
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2011
* Linda Camp, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Fussell
* 09/30/2011
* USD 114,932.00

This research project will enable nontechnical individuals to easily manage
their online risks. The current information infrastructure is profoundly
insecure in no small part due to the oblivious risk-seeking behaviors of
nontechnical individuals online. The methods in this research are a combination
of risk communication with intelligent interaction design. While the theory of
risk communication has been embraced in computer security, its use is embryonic.
The tools of intelligent interaction have not been adopted to assist individuals
in making risk decisions appropriate to their contexts. By combining these
approaches to specific online risks the research will enable individuals to make
informed security choices. Note that this work specifically focuses work on the
identified human individual as opposed to the commonly abstracted rational self-
optimizing user. The core elements of the research are: 1) understanding the
individual?s risk perception, 2) using that perception for effective risk
communication, 3) ensuring the interruptions and communications are appropriate
to the workflow at hand, and 4) providing risk mitigation that is automated and
seamless. The innovative methods carry a high risk, but also a high payoff in
potentially enabling the wide use of many discrete security tools. In this
research, the knowledge-based approach to identification of technical risk will
be integrated with a human-centered approach to the perception of risk to enable
mitigation that is automated and contextually aware.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using
the results of our research, individuals will choose to take informed risks
based on their on tasks, workflows and context. In contrast, today individuals
are interrupted with decontextualized, narrative-free, inappropriately timed,
and often technologically incomprehensible suggestions for risk mitigation.
Consequently, people innocently take risks they have no way of knowing how to
avoid. To enable the nontechnical individual, this research project will embed a
novel approach to simplifying the use of security measures. The proposed
translucent design is enabled by this combination of reasoning about risk to
interrupt the individual only when necessary, using workflow to build a coherent
narrative that focuses on the risks and how to mitigate them in context, and
combining the appropriate mitigating actions into simple customized macros.