* 0943415
* Improved parameterization of groundwater flow models using interferograms and adjoint sensitivity analysis
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2010,04/30/2014
* S. Sharp, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 04/30/2014
* USD 267,830.00

Improved Parameterization of Groundwater Flow Models using Interferograms and
Adjoint Sensitivity Analysis&lt;br/&gt;NSF #0943415&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Radar
interferometry provides for the acquisition of basin wide high precision
vertical deformation data that reveal the spatially complex and structurally
dependent nature of land subsidence in heavily pumped sedimentary basins. In Las
Vegas Valley, for example, InSAR interferograms portray compartmentalized
subsidence bowls bounded by basin-fill faults. Earth fissures are known to occur
adjacent to many such faults where differential subsidence is observed from
interferograms. Recovering water levels associated with reduced groundwater
pumping during summer months and a rigorous ASR program during winter months
have resulted in seasonal patterns of subsidence and rebound that are reflected
in the InSAR time-series data. A new modeling strategy is proposed whereby these
seasonal deformation patterns are coupled with observed water-level data to
quantify the storage characteristics of the aquifer and confining units at a
pixel resolution of the interferogram, or about 40m. Inverse models that use
these observations are hindered by the fact that parameter zone distributions
for storage and hydraulic conductivity are typically user defined and often
formulated in an ad-hoc fashion. The objective of this proposed research is to
develop an adjoint-based parameter estimation model that systematically produces
the optimal storage and conductivity zone distributions that leads to a superior
conceptual model and yields not only the best parameter distribution, but
provides the details necessary to reflect the intricacies of the fault-bounded
storage bowls observed in Las Vegas Valley. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of this proposed research are significant because they address the
socioeconomic and hydrogeologic problems facing Las Vegas Valley using a multi-
disciplinary approach. The economic well being of Las Vegas Valley is dependent
on long-term growth and management of developable land. This research will
provide a high-resolution groundwater and subsidence model that can be used as a
water-management tool well into the future. The adjoint-based parameter
estimation model (APE) developed in this research automates zones used in
inverse modeling. This new model provides a distinct advantage over techniques
requiring analysis of numerous alternative models. This new modeling package
will be made available to all modeling practitioners. An Outreach Coordinator
will use the VT Museum of Geosciences to provide groundwater and water resources
education to audiences that include pK-12 students, teachers, undergraduates and
the general public. A physical groundwater model will be used during planned
workshops to instruct teachers and demonstrate safe water practices. A poster
and worksheet will be developed for high school classrooms and for the Museum to
highlight Virginia Tech groundwater research in an effort to attract more future
groundwater scientists.