* 0943538
* Shipboard Scientific Support Equipment
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2009,09/30/2013
* Thomas Althouse, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Hawkins
* 09/30/2013
* USD 2,418,745.00

ABSTRACT

09 July 2009 Proposal Number: 0943538 Institution: Scripps Institute of
Oceanography PI: B. Appelgate Co-PI: T. Althouse

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The proposal requests numerous Shipboard Scientific Support (SSSE) items for the
vessels operated by Scripps Institute of Oceanography; namely the R/V REVELLE,
MELVILLE, NEW HORIZON, and SRPOUL. The requests specifically include items that
have been recommended from past NSF inspections, Navy INSURV's, or Post-Cruise
Assessments (PCA's) and have been otherwise deferred by the operator due to
cost. All of the items requested will either improve safety, enhance science
support capability, or extend vessel service life. Due to the nature and timing
of these requests, the vendor quotation standards normally required by the SSSE
Program were waived out of necessity with many of the figures provided as
estimates for budgetary purposes and based mainly on past experience of the
vessel operators for similar work.

Broader Impacts: Scripps vessels support federally funded scientific research
throughout the world's oceans and routinely expose graduate and undergraduate
students to seagoing oceanography. Scripps participates in a large number of
outreach programs including open house events, student tours, and hosting of
government officials, dignitaries, and science communities while in foreign
ports. All told, Scripps vessels are scheduled to complete over 420 NSF
sponsored days in 2009.