* 0943597
* EMSW21-MCTP:  The Carleton College Summer Mathematics Program for Women
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2017
* Stephen Kennedy, Carleton College
* Continuing Grant
* Nandini Kannan
* 04/30/2017
* USD 1,000,000.00

The Carleton College Summer Mathematics Program (SMP) has operated since 1995.
It is designed to support, encourage and mentor the female participants through
all the intellectual, professional, and personal transitions from early
undergraduate math major through early career as a practicing professional
mathematician. The literature on increasing female and underrepresented minority
participation in mathematics suggests that among the most effective techniques
for increasing confidence and success are: emphasizing effort over ability,
providing exposure to role models, normalizing struggle (i.e., show that
everyone struggles), and employing group work that builds interdependence. The
SMP consciously and deliberately uses all these techniques. The instructors and
directors design the program and the courses so that every participant is deeply
challenged and maximally supported so that her efforts lead to success. The
large SMP community ---consisting of approximately three hundred female
mathematicians ranging from undergraduate mathematics majors, to graduate
students, to young PhDs and mid-career professionals--- provides a rich resource
of ready and willing mentors and role models. SMP participants self-report in
post-program evaluations increased knowledge of graduate school and the
mathematical community, increased confidence in their ability to earn a PhD, and
increased likelihood of doing so. SMP alumnae surveyed post-PhD report that SMP
was an important source of inspiration, knowledge and confidence building.

This proposal will fund i) a four-week intensive program of mathematical
immersion for undergraduate female mathematics majors held at Carleton each
summer from 2010 to 2014, ii) an annual summer reunion conference for program
alumnae who subsequently earned PhDs in mathematics, and iii) an annual winter
workshop for advising and mentoring program alumnae in graduate school working
towards the PhD. These activities are designed with the goal of increasing the
number of female mathematical scientists in the US. The summer undergraduate
program does an exceptional job at helping our student participants make the
transition from a computational view of mathematics to a more theoretical
understanding. We advise and assist our alumnae in finding an appropriate
experience for the summer between the junior and senior undergraduate years. And
we provide counsel and support as they choose graduate programs and,
increasingly in recent years, extensive advice and counsel to our PhD alumnae as
they enter the academic job market. The winter workshop for graduate students, a
new feature with this proposal, is designed to renew our contacts with alumnae
and aid them as they choose an advisor, make the transition from coursework to
research and later from student to young professional. By 2014, the end of the
period of support sought under this proposal, we expect that SMP alumnae will
have earned approximately 140 Masters degrees and at least 70 PhDs, with another
50-60 SMP alumnae in or entering graduate programs in mathematical sciences.
Ultimately the community of PhD alumnae of SMP supported under this and previous
grants should number approximately 140. (There is a seven- to ten-year lag in
completing a PhD after completing SMP since program participants are women in
their first two years of undergraduate study.) These women will not only have
PhDs, they will have productive careers and the inclination to give back in the
form of mentoring and encouraging other young women.