* 0943180
* EAGER:  Early Detection of Ovarian Cancer with Polarized Light Scattering Spectroscopy
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Lev Perelman, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 07/31/2011
* USD 300,000.00

0943180 Perelman

The purpose of this EAGER proposal is to provide the gynecologic oncologist with
a light scattering spectroscopy (LSS) based diagnostic screening tool which will
enable physicians to survey ovaries in patients with high levels of CA-125
and/or a family history of ovarian cancer in a minimally invasive fashion, and
determine with high probability the presence of dysplasia or early cancer. It
will perform measurements on most of the surface of the ovary in about one
minute and present the information in real time. Suspicious areas can then be
biopsied and the diagnosis verified. This approach should be vastly superior to
the present strategies of performing a CA-125 test and ultrasound examination.
It will also significantly improve the probability of locating early cancer
during the significantly more invasive random biopsies. Thus it will provide a
powerful tool for screening the population of patients with high ovarian cancer
risk factors for early precancerous changes. The investigators will collect LSS
spectra from both malignant and benign ex vivo ovarian tissue in order to
confirm the light scattering spectral signatures of dysplasia and early cancer
and design the diagnostic algorithm. They will also design and build the
prototype clinical instrument with an ultrasound guided polarized LSS (PLSS)
minimally invasive probe.