* 0943679
* Development of biopores in the subsurface by burrowing organisms and their impacts on infiltration, runoff, and contaminant transport characteristics
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2010,05/31/2014
* Prabhakar Clement, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 05/31/2014
* USD 300,000.00

DEVELOPMENT OF BIOPORES IN THE SUBSURFACE BY BURROWING ORGANISMS AND THEIR
IMPACTS ON INFILTRATION, RUNOFF, AND CONTAMINANT TRANSPORT
CHARACTERISTICS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major agent that can develop an
extensive network of macropores in the subsurface is burrowing organisms that
may include both vertebrates and invertebrates. Biopores created by burrowing
animals and invertebrates could have a significant influence on hydrological
processes. Understanding the burrowing process evokes interest among other
disciplines such as soil morphology and entomology. Among the burrowing
invertebrates, a species that has garnered significant attention in the U.S is
the mole cricket. The project would be the first multi-disciplinary project to
study biopore development by mole crickets and their effects on storage,
transport, infiltration and runoff processes. The project will synergistically
study biopore development from both hydrologic and entomological perspectives.
The influence of biopores on infiltration, contaminant transport and runoff
processes will be studied as a function &lt;br/&gt;of their age, as the pores
are developed by mole crickets. We will also study the effects of biological
coatings of the biopores on soil hydraulics using micro-morphological
techniques. The project includes laboratory/ field-scale experiments as well as
modeling work, which will shed new light on the evolution of biopores due to
burrowing mole crickets at different scales. The biopores created by mole
crickets will also be compared with similar-sized artificial macropores for
their effects on infiltration and contaminant transport. The results from the
project will be characterized using appropriate mathematical models to simulate
effects of biopores on hydrologic processes. Specifically, we will develop
modeling methods to describe how and why the biopores are different from
artificial macropores, in terms of anisotropy in their flow
characteristics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will have broader impacts on
our knowledge of macropores from both hydrologic as well as entomological
perspectives. The project will improve our basic understanding of the biopore
development and their effects on infiltration and runoff processes. New
information will be available on the differences between biopores encountered in
soils and the artificial macropores typically used in laboratory studies. From
an entomological perspective, the study will shed light on the burrowing
behavior of mole crickets, the most important pest of recreational and pasture
turfgrass in the southeastern U.S. This project will provide new insights into
the behavior of this pest and for developing more efficient pesticide delivery
strategies for controlling mole crickets.