* 0943319
* RAPID: Synechococcus diversity and Fe stress and the relationship to dissolved metals in the Eastern Tropical South Pacific
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Eric Webb, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2010
* USD 59,719.00

The unicellular cyanobacterium Synechococcus is one of the most widespread and
abundant photosynthetic organisms in the ocean, contributing substantially to
marine primary production. It is also extremely diverse, with 16 clades
identified so far. This diversity, however, has yet to be correlated with
specific, well-defined ecological niches. It is important to define what these
ecological niches are in order to determine the significance of Synechococcus
diversity, i.e., does the clade present in a certain regime have a large impact
on biogeochemical cycling in that area? In parallel, the distribution of the
clades must also be defined, to able to understand more clearly the role of
Synechococcus in the ocean, and how it might change in the future. In a the
funded project, "The role of iron (Fe) in controlling in situ distributions and
activities of marine Synechococcus OCE-0825922" investigators Jill A Sohm
(J.A.S.) and Eric Webb have been mapping the distribution of Synechococcus
clades in the western Pacific, the North and South Atlantic, and off the coast
of Los Angeles, in order to better define the ecological niches of the many
clades of Synechococcus. In this project, Webb and Sohm will participate in a
research cruise occurring in February 2010 in the Eastern Tropical South Pacific
(ETSP), a data poor region with little known about the ecology of its
picocyanobacteria. While it has been shown the Synechococcus from clade four
dominate the upwelling region farther south of the proposed cruise, the
diversity of the population farther offshore is much less well defined. This
cruise would allow expansion of the current database of Synechococcus clade
distribution to an area where there is little to no data, and add experimental
field work to an existing project, testing the specific affects of Fe, light,
temperature and nutrients on the diversity of field populations. These data
combined with concurrent lab research will provide insight into the potential of
oceanic change to affect the distribution and the activity of
Synechococcus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to defining the role and impact
of Fe limitation on marine Synechococcus activity and diversity in the field,
this project will develop field incubation-tested, quantitative PCR-based Fe
stress diagnostics that will be available to the community. Furthermore, the
investigators will attempt to isolate and make available Synechococcus strains
from the region; as such representatives are not in existence. The upkeep and
addition to the culture collection in the Webb lab is an important service for
the oceanographic community, as these strains are sent to any researcher that
requests them without charge. Metadata obtained on this cruise will be shared
with the oceanographic community by depositing them in a national database.
Lastly this project will provide valuable research cruise experience and career
development for one post-doctoral fellow, J.A.S., and one graduate student.