* 0943799
* Impact of Recent Climate Warming on Active-Layer Dynamics, Permafrost, and Soil Properties on the Western Antarctic Peninsula
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2015
* James Bockheim, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 08/31/2015
* USD 592,315.00

Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;The seasonal thaw layer, permafrost distribution
and temperature, and soil properties are key indicators of climate change that
have been under-utilized in Antarctica. The PI proposes to install two
Circumpolar Active Layer Monitoring (CALM-S) stations and permafrost boreholes
on Anvers (64.7°S) and Brabant Islands (64.25°S) to link with existing stations
maintained by Portugal, Spain, and Italy on Adelaide (67.57°S), Deception
(63.0°S), Livingston (62.50°S), King George (62.18°S), and Signy (60.70°S)
Islands. In addition, they propose to examine soils along this
latitudinal/climatic gradient to construct a carbon budget for the Antarctic
Peninsula. The working hypothesis is that permafrost distribution and
temperatures on the West Antarctic Peninsula are strongly influenced by the
spatial extent of sea ice in the Southern Ocean, and that the active-layer
thickness and permafrost temperatures are increasing at a measurable rate in the
study areas. The PIs predict that although soils of the Antarctic Peninsula and
offshore islands comprise only 20% of the ice-free area of Antarctica, they will
account for more than 80% of the soil organic carbon. Continued warming could
stimulate a positive feedback mechanism whereby additional CO2 will be released
to the atmosphere as soil organic carbon exposed by thickening of the active
layer decomposes. The project will construct and test a mechanistic model that
includes ground temperature and climate data, snow cover, a digital elevation
model in conjunction with the multi-national PERMANTAR group, slope angle and
aspect, and net radiation for predicting the occurrence and the fate of
permafrost along the WAP.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: &lt;br/&gt;This
project will foster international research among six countries. The project has
direct links with the pole-to-pole CALM network, the Global Terrestrial Network
for Permafrost (GTN-P), and the SCAR- supported Antarctic Permafrost and
Periglacial Environments (ANTPAS) group, and WILL formalize a latitudinal
gradient in the most climatically sensitive zone of Antarctica. The research
could provide information to help better understand potential rapid climatic
changes. The study not only will provide baseline terrestrial data in an area
where the focus of U.S. activities has been predominantly on marine ecosystems,
but will also take advantage of the extensive Palmer LTER dataset on sea-ice
dynamics. The study will train two graduate students and several undergraduates.
Outreach activities will focus on school children and will include ?Diary from
Antarctic Permafrost Scientists? on the Internet, videoconferencing from the
field, and a ?scientist goes to school? initiative for Dane County, WI.