* 0943760
* EMSW21-RTG: Enhanced Training and Recruitment in Mathematical Biology
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2017
* Harold Layton, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 08/31/2017
* USD 2,104,702.00

This Research and Training Grant will use the mathematical biology program of
the Mathematics Department at Duke University to enhance the recruitment of
American nationals into the mathematical sciences. The goals are to attract more
excellent undergraduates into mathematical biology, to provide excellent and
expanded training of mathematical biologists at the graduate level, and to
increase the diversity of research experiences of young post-Ph.D. mathematical
biologists. The undergraduates, graduate students and postdoctoral fellows will
be integrated into one or more of the six vertically integrated
interdisciplinary research groups in the Mathematics Department: (1) Kidney
physiology (Harold and Anita Layton); (2) Electrophysiology of the heart (David
Schaeffer); (3) Systems biology and genomics (John Harer); (4) Image
segmentation and dorsal closure (Stephanos Venakides); (5) Mathematical models
of cell metabolism (Michael Reed); (6) Data driven inference and biological
structure (Jonathan Mattingly). The faculty members in the six research groups
have very good track records in successful mentoring of undergraduate, graduate,
and postdoctoral research projects, as well as recruiting and training women and
other under-represented groups. The success of these mentoring and recruitment
activities is an important priority for these faculty members and is the central
goal of this Research Training Grant. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve the goals
of the program, the undergraduates will conduct research in the summers mentored
by program faculty, more graduate students will be recruited and trained in new
graduate courses, and postdoctoral fellows will conduct research with program
faculty. In addition, each year there will be a summer workshop that targets
students at small colleges in the Southeast who may have little knowledge about
graduate degrees and few opportunities to study mathematical biology. A
particular goal of the program is to recruit women and other under-represented
groups into the mathematical sciences. Because of the many faculty members
conducting research in mathematical biology, and the proximity of the Duke
Medical Center and the Duke School of the Environment, the Mathematics
Department at Duke is an excellent location to study mathematical biology and to
achieve the goal of attracting American nationals into the mathematical
sciences. &lt;br/&gt;