* 0943906
* Collaborative Research:  Earthquake swarms and aseismic slip in the Salton Trough: High-resolution imaging of the upper frictional stability transition.
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2013
* Rowena Lohman, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Raffaella Montelli
* 05/31/2013
* USD 114,343.00

Efforts to understand the build-up and release of stress along active fault
zones require detailed studies of individual faults and placement of those
results in a physical framework consistent with our knowledge about rock
mechanics. One particularly intriguing fault zone behavior that has been
observed with increasing frequency in recent years involves the interplay
between aseismic slip and seismic swarm activity. Slow fault slip has been
observed to trigger earthquake swarms in a variety of tectonic environments
including subduction zones, volcanic systems, and continental strike-slip faults
such as those in close proximity to population centers in Southern California.

One region that provides a prime environment to study seismic swarms and
aseismic creep is the Imperial Valley/Salton Trough in Southern California.
Seismic swarms, large (Mw>7) earthquakes, and transient episodes of fault creep
are all frequent occurrences along the plate boundary faults within the Salton
Trough. The Salton Trough offers a prime opportunity to examine the interplay
between these varied types of fault activity, since so many of them are observed
within a relatively small geographic area, which also has had very detailed
geologic studies and contains one of the world?s densest seismic and geodetic
station networks. Detailed studies of aseismic and seismic events offer an
opportunity to connect physical properties of the fault-zone such as rock type,
depth, and temperature with rock-mechanical properties such as frictional
stability, and will allow us to better understand the temporal evolution of
seismic hazard associated with individual fault zones.

We propose a combination of an active source seismic study of the 2005 swarm's
primary fault zone, and a more detailed analysis of the existing seismic and
geodetic data. The core of our effort is a one-week seismic survey using the
high-res profiling techniques developed by the USGS-Menlo Park group that will
provide constraints on the details of fault-zone geometry and rigidity
structure. These results will be used to improve our studies of the 2005 swarm.
The combination of these studies will allow us to study the relations between
rock-type, rigidity, thermal structure and frictional stability. Because shallow
creep and earthquake swarms are general properties of major faults in the Salton
Trough, our results will provide inputs to physics based earthquake hazard
models in the region.