* 0943783
* Collaborative Research: Electronic Delivery and Criterion Referencing of Assessment Materials for Chemistry
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/2009,01/31/2012
* Thomas Holme, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Grabowski
* 01/31/2012
* USD 154,893.00

Chemistry 12

The project is completing several tasks that will improve assessment practices
for chemistry education. Testing programs that have existed via the American
Chemical Sociey (ACS) Exams Institute have long allowed chemistry instructors to
compare students to national norms. This project is augmenting this level of
information by also analyzing the content of ACS Exams against a mapping of the
content domain of the subject using a template of anchoring concepts that recur
throughout the undergraduate curriculum. Alignment research then uses this
analysis to provide instructors with enhanced information about what chemistry
students know about such topics as chemical bonding, chemical reactions,
molecular structures and chemical equilibrium and several others. Both the
process of mapping the content domain and aligning test questions to this mapped
domain provide significant research challenges and advance the intellectual
merit of this project. The ACS Exams Institute provides exams used by over
100,000 students annually, and the Chemistry Pathway of the National Science
Digital Library, ChemED DL, is also a partner on this project, so the broad
impact includes not only ACS Exams but also test questions available via ChemED
DL. The other key component is the porting of ACS Exams materials to an
electronic delivery platform. This process provides more than enhanced access
because the instant data collection afforded by electronically delivered exams
improves all facets of the data analysis, including the traditional norm-
referenced information and the criterion-referenced information relating test
questions to the anchoring concepts of the content domain.