* 0943879
* SSWAP:   Simple Semantic Web Architecture and Protocol
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Damian Gessler, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2012
* USD 761,422.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Arizona is awarded a
grant to develop tools that enable biologists to better integrate web data and
services. The project has three specific goals. First, it will develop
ontologies as the "currency" of semantic web services. Ontologies were
historically built as static categorizations of knowledge, yet now need to be
re-factored in order to use them effectively for data and service integration.
Second, it will advance semantic searching as a method to transform discovery
and service engagement in biology. This is achieved by extending semantic
searching from explicit ontology subsumption assertions to full implicit
subsumption relations. Semantic searching?the most innovative and powerful
contribution of this work?unites data and services using ontologies into a
searchable knowledge base complete with logical inference. Finally, it will
integrate education, outreach, and training as an integral part of development
in semantic web services. The project will carry out these activities in
collaboration with St. John's College and the National Center for Genome
Resources. Particularly for developers at major information resources, this
training component introduces practitioners to the use and implementation of
semantic web services. Access to the products of this grant will be available at
http://sswap.info. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach is to recognize that for
much of biology the information medium for data discovery, access, and
assimilation is the World Wide Web. The World Wide Web means that data and
algorithms?services?are, and will continue to be, distributed, heterogeneous,
and often persistent, yet also dynamic and sometimes ephemeral; that integration
on top of this informatics landscape means that we need to address fundamental
issues in common syntaxes, shared semantics, and on-demand discovery. Semantic
web services, and the ability to semantically search for resources and engage
them have value beyond biology. In this manner, the work moves the web towards a
distributed, logical network amenable to machine reasoning.