* 0943507
* Teachers Are Key: Partnering With and Supporting Quality Computer Science Teachers Within the Second Largest School Districts in the Country
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Jane Margolis, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 08/31/2012
* USD 2,500,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The PIs from University of California Los Angeles (UCLA) propose a project:
Teachers are Key to address a central aspect of the crisis in secondary school
computer science (CS) education: the need for quality high school CS teachers.
Teachers are Key builds upon a long-time collaboration between UCLA researchers
and the Los Angeles Unified School District (LAUSD). This collaboration has
resulted in the development of a comprehensive introductory computer science
curriculum and a summer professional development program to instruct teachers on
the curriculum concepts and content.

For this project the PIs will build effective supports and a professional
development system at a local and national level for computer science teachers.
Many of these teachers are new to computer science and are the lone teacher at
their schools making professional development and support networks a necessity.
This comprehensive support network will offer 1) continuous in-classroom teacher
professional development supported by a district-wide CS coaching / peer-to-peer
mentoring system, 2) on-going professional development workshops throughout the
school year and 3) an on-line learning community. The programs designed and
corresponding lessons learned will be disseminated nationwide as a guide and
assistance for other school districts and universities.

Teachers are Key's initiatives will build upon the expertise of the PIs
(university faculty/researchers and K-12 leaders with an established partnership
around these issues) and their partners: 1) UCLA Center X, a leading urban
teacher professional development center with a long history of reform efforts
and working with teachers within LAUSD and the 2) Computer Science Teachers
Association, the national professional organization of computer science
teachers. The PIs of this grant are university researchers and K-12 District
leaders who are uniquely positioned to leverage and scale up successful programs
and to create a model for institutional change.

Intellectual Merit: Improving STEM education and guaranteeing equal access to
quality education for all students is one of our country?s most pressing
challenges. Teachers are Key sits at the crux of this national challenge. This
project will provide essential knowledge about two important subjects: 1)
increasing rigorous learning of computer science opportunities in schools,
especially in schools with high numbers of minority students, and 2) effective
methods of professional development for computer science teachers. This
knowledge has the potential to shed light on similar challenges in other STEM
disciplines.

Broader Impacts: Teachers are Key will provide a model of what has to be done at
the school, district, state, and national levels to improve quality computer
science education for all students. The models of professional development that
will be designed and implemented in the second largest and one of the most
diverse school districts in the country will contribute to local and national
efforts underway to broaden participation in computing. This project will
provide insight on three important things 1) Recruiting and training a very
large number of new high school teachers who can impart to students the magic
and "computational thinking" of computer science, 2) re-positioning CS at the
high school level as an academic subject, and 3) redesigning the high school
curriculum so that it is rigorous and engaging for a broad segment of our
student population. In order to develop a 21st Century economy, we must train
students in 21st century skills including making rigorous computational training
available to all students.