* 0943977
* 2009 Shipboard Scientific Support Equipment
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Alexander Shor, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Hawkins
* 08/31/2012
* USD 861,092.00

ABSTRACT

09 July 2009 Proposal Number: 0943977 Institution: University of Hawaii PI: A.
Shor Co-PI: S. Winslow

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The proposal requests numerous Shipboard Scientific Support (SSSE) items for the
vessels operated by the University of Hawaii; namely the R/V KILO MOANA. The
requests specifically include items that have been recommended from past NSF
inspections, Navy INSURV's, or Post-Cruise Assessments (PCA's) and have been
otherwise deferred by the operators due to cost. All of the items requested will
either improve safety, enhance science support capability, or extend vessel
service life. Due to the nature and timing of these requests, the vendor
quotation standards normally required by the SSSE Program were waived out of
necessity with many of the figures provided as estimates for budgetary purposes
and based mainly on past experience of the vessel operators for similar work.

Broader Impacts: The University of Hawaii vessels support federally funded
scientific research throughout the world's oceans to expand human knowledge of
the ocean environment. During operations, the vessels routinely expose graduate
and undergraduate students to seagoing oceanography through real-time satellite
connectivity from ship to shore, and University open house events. All told, the
KILO MOANA is scheduled to complete approximately 85 NSF sponsored days in 2009.