* 0943958
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  REVSYS:  Tackling Schefflera:  Initiating the Re-circumscription of the Largest Genus in Araliaceae
* BIO,DEB
* 03/10/2009,02/28/2011
* Gregory Plunkett, New York Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* Charles Lydeard
* 02/28/2011
* USD 124,139.00

Tackling Schefflera: Initiating the Re-circumscription of the Largest Genus in
Araliaceae&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gregory M. Plunkett &amp; Porter P. Lowry
II&lt;br/&gt;NSF 0613728 &amp; 0614152&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Near two-thirds of
the species in the ginseng family, Araliaceae, belong to the tropical genus
Schefflera (about 1100 species, including &gt;500 that have not been formally
named). However, the investigators' research on Araliaceae has demonstrated that
Schefflera is not a natural group, comprising instead five unrelated lineages
concentrated in four different parts of the world. This project will begin to
untangle the confusion surrounding Schefflera by focusing on two of these
groups, one centered in Madagascar and another in New Caledonia. The
investigators will (1) refine species limits by examining specimens and
conducting field work, (2) evaluate evolutionary relationships and geographic
history using DNA sequences, and (3) assess the conservation importance of the
rarest and most threatened species.&lt;br/&gt;The need to preserve biodiversity
is universally recognized, but progress lags far behind international goals, and
taxonomists have a major role to play by defining the basic unit of conservation
(species), assessing threats, and providing an evolutionary context for making
informed decisions that maximize biodiversity conservation. This study provides
an explicit approach for meeting these goals for a set of model species
(Schefflera) from two globally-important biodiversity hotspots, and delivering
these results to the scientific community, relevant governmental agencies, and
the general public through both technical and user-friendly outlets. The project
also serves as a bridge between three generations of scientists by involving the
principle investigators, an emeritus-level botanist, and students.&lt;br/&gt;