* 0944243
* SBIR Phase I:  Near Infrared Substrates for Imaging Autotaxin Activity In Vivo
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Damian Madan, Echelon Biosciences, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 12/31/2010
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to
synthesize ATXRed, an in vivo imaging agent that is specifically activated by
the enzymatic activity of autotaxin. Autotaxin is an extracellular enzyme that
generates the phospholipid growth factor lysophophatidic acid (LPA). LPA is
involved in a variety of biological functions, such as angiogenesis, wound
healing, brain development, immunological competence and the regulation of blood
pressure. Both LPA and autotaxin have also been implicated in numerous diseases,
especially metastatic cancer. Autotaxin was identified as one of the 40 most
induced genes in aggressive breast cancer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of this research are the discovery and commercialization of tools that
easily highlight specific biological pathways in living organisms. ATXRed will
be welcomed by basic researchers in many fields associated with autotaxin and
LPA. However, the utility extends beyond the basic research sphere. ATXRed smart
probes could also aid pharmaceutical researchers searching for pharmacological
inhibitors of autotaxin and LPA receptor agonists and antagonists. ATXRed would
be a powerful tool in many rodent models of human cancer. In vivo autotaxin
imaging probes could also aid in the clinic by helping to identify and monitor
disease progression and treatment. Ultimately, ATXRed could help guide surgical
resection of tumors?tumors previously identified by the smart probe to have
elevated autotaxin activity. In total, ATXRed probes have the potential to
impact basic research, drug discovery and the clinic as a prime example of
molecular medicine applied from bench to bedside.