* 0944227
* 2009 Multi Agency Coordination Committee for Combustion Research (MACCCR) Fuels Summit in Los Angeles, CA: September 15-17, 2009
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2009,10/31/2009
* Fokion Egolfopoulos, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Arvind Atreyae Atreya
* 10/31/2009
* USD 11,000.00

0944227 &lt;br/&gt;Egolfopoulos&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the
second MACCCR Fuels Summit meeting taking place on September 15-17, 2009, at the
University of Southern California (USC) in Los Angeles, California. The 2009
MACCCR meeting follows a very successful meeting that took place in September of
2008 at the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST). The Multi-
Agency Coordinating Committee on Combustion Research (MACCCR) is an informal
group of program managers within the Federal Government. It serves to coordinate
joint initiatives and to inform the group members of each other's activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Fuels Summit focuses attention on scientific
understanding of conventional fuels, surrogates, and their property-performance
characteristics. The intellectual merit of this activity arises from the
participation of fuel-science and combustion-science experts from across the
United States and from various countries, dissemination of their technical
findings, their communications with each other, and their visions of future
research directions. Invited speakers will present research activities and
results that relate to the development of science that controls the burning of
single-component as well as practical fuels. Two components are Department of
Defense Multi-University Research Initiative (MURI) teams, who are focused on
characterization of combustion properties of petroleum-derived and synthetic jet
fuels and their surrogates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Societal and technological
needs will be addressed by the outcomes of the conference, especially timely
because of the ongoing energy challenges and the need of the country to move
forward with new energy conversion technologies that are more scientifically
based more on science. The conference will also promote international, multi-
disciplinary collaboration and communication. Outcomes of this meeting will also
serve as a useful guide for setting priorities of the NSF Combustion, Fire, and
Plasma Systems Program.