* 0944528
* EAGER: Molecular Rare-Earth Clusters in Reduced Oxidation States
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Bryan Eichhorn, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 07/31/2012
* USD 295,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award, as submitted to the
Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic (IBO) program, supports work by
Professor Bryan Eichhorn at the University of Maryland to carry out fundamental
studies on the preparation of molecular clusters containing rare-earth atoms
(i.e., La, Y, Gd) with direct, covalent metal-metal bonds. As there are no
previous examples of such compounds known to date and the development of this
chemistry will represent a major breakthrough in inorganic and cluster science,
this award is made through the EArly-concept Grants for Exploratory Research
(EAGER) Program. Professor Eichhorn and his group employ a unique, reduced metal
halide synthesis device (the Schnockel reactor) to prepare solutions of the rare
earth monohalides and dihalides. Sterically-encumbered amido and carboxylato
ligands are incorporated to promote the formation of low-nuclearity clusters,
i.e., La2 and La4 clusters. Controlled disproportionation reactions at higher
temperatures are being used to generate larger "metalloid" clusters with high
nuclearity La cores. The targeted f-block elements (i.e., Gd, Nd) are used to
produce highly magnetic clusters resulting from direct coupling of f-electrons.
Such magnetic nanoclusters provide fundamental insight into the nature of direct
metal-metal bonding for rare-earth elements and could be directly applicable as
magnetic storage components, magnetic imaging agents, and catalysts for organic
transformations.