* 0944067
* Collaborative Research: An Evaluation of Ash Flow Tuffs as Geomagnetic Paleointensity Recorders
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2010,01/31/2013
* Michael Jackson, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 01/31/2013
* USD 53,930.00

The Earth's magnetic field varies on a variety of time scales, with perhaps the
best known example being the significant changes in the direction of local
magnetic north documented in historic times. In addition to these short term
variations, there are many documented reversals of the polarity of the field
during geologic history. The change in polarity through recent geologic time has
been well documented and provides a key method of dating geological events and
establishing the past motions of tectonic plates. The Earth's magnetic field
also exhibits profound variations in intensity. For example, the intensity of
the field has decreased by approximately 10% in historic time and five-fold
variations in intensity have been documented over longer time scales. A
comprehensive description of magnetic field variations, in direction and
intensity and over a wide range of time scales, is desirable as these
fluctuations can provide critical constraints on how the magnetic field is
generated as well as several other deep Earth processes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Compared with directional variations, documenting past
intensity fluctuations of the Earth's magnetic field is much more difficult and,
consequently, relatively few reliable determinations of absolute intensity
(paleointensity) are available. This scarcity of paleointensity information is
primarily the result of the difficulty in identifying geological materials that
contain dominantly the very fine and stable magnetic particles that are required
for determining paleointensity. We are investigating the potential of ash flow
tuffs, generated by explosive volcanic eruptions, as a potential new material
for paleointensity information. Although such deposits have the requisite fine
magnetic particles, a variety of post-emplacement processes may potentially
affect the ability to recover ancient field intensity information. As a test of
this material, we are documenting the post-emplacement thermal history and
determining paleointensity for samples from two historical ash flows. The 1980
ash flows at Mt. St. Helens, Washington, and the 1912 flows from Mt. Katmai in
the Valley of Ten Thousand Smokes, Alaska provide a natural laboratory for
testing measured paleointensities against known field values. Direct temperature
measurements at both localities constrain the emplacement temperature, and
significant information is available on the conditions of post-emplacement
fumarolic activity. Combined with focused studies in the older (0.76 Ma),
better-exposed Bishop Tuff, our sampling strategy will allow us to evaluate the
suitability of ash flows for paleointensity analysis, as well as the feasibility
of identifying (in the field or lab) samples most likely to provide reliable
results. The proposed work will provide valuable information to to guide future
workers in both the field and the laboratory in the selection of suitable
materials for paleointensity analysis. Ash flows (many with high quality
radiometric ages) are common worldwide and commonly can be isotopically dated
with high precision. Thus, if absolute paleointensities can be determined from
ash flows, it may be possible to compile a much more comprehensive database of
past field intensity fluctuations of the geomagnetic field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the scientific goals of this project, the
research is providing training for a graduate student at Scripps Institute of
Oceanography and training of two undergraduate students at the University of
Minnesota. Additional undergraduate student participation is being encouraged by
participation of students from the University of Minnesota?s NSF-Research
Experience of Undergraduates (REU) program. &lt;br/&gt;