* 0944137
* Collaborative Research: Levantine geomagnetic field spike: How high, how fast, how far?
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2012
* Lisa Tauxe, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 04/30/2012
* USD 192,177.00

Mining activity has left enormous piles of material in numerous places around
Europe and Asia spanning the last seven millennia. Because copper smelting
requires melting of ore at high temperatures in furnaces, there is abundant
charcoal intimately associated with the copper slag, enabling the direct dating
of the archaeological debris. It turns out that metallurgical debris can retain
an excellent record of the ancient geomagnetic field strength. This, combined
with unprecedented ability to date the material, means that high resolution
records of changes in field strength are now available to us. We have already
documented a period of time in Jordan (10th century BCE) of extraordinarily high
magnetic field strengths, nearly three times the present field. This geomagnetic
field "spike" must have happened very quickly. Comparison of these data with
those from nearby studies in Greece suggest that there is a significant
discrepancy between the Grecian master curve and the data from Jordan. To assess
the various possible causes for this discrepancy (e.g., extremely short
wavelength features in the geomagnetic field, extremely high frequency temporal
changes in the geomagnetic field missed, etc.), we are excavating a second site
near to and co-eval with the site containing the "spike" and a co-eval site in
Cyprus that has comparable material.

The combination of archaeology and the study of the ancient geomagnetic field
(paleomagnetism) is inherently interdisciplinary, with broad impacts in both
disciplines. Interdisciplinary research is difficult in practice because
graduate students need to become expert in their own fields and run the risk of
becoming too broad at the expense of depth. We are handling this problem in our
research by having two graduate students work closely together, each firmly
rooted in one discipline but learning a great deal about the other discipline
from the other student. The benefits of such interdisciplinary efforts are wide
ranging. From the point of view of studying the geomagnetic field, an accurate
picture of intensity changes on a global scale (a goal to which this project
contributes but does not solve by itself) is essential for such different
endeavors as "ground truthing" numerical models and understanding variations in
the production of radiocarbon and the calibration of the radiocarbon time scale.
From the archaeological perspective, placing archaeological materials in a tight
temporal framework is always a challenge and our work is already being put to
use to solve dating puzzles in archaeometallurgy.