* 0944877
* SBIR Phase I: Bioresorbable Polyurethane Scaffold Materials for Regenerative Applications in Advanced Wound Healing
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Balakrishna Haridas, Biomerix Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 12/31/2010
* USD 200,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop a
bioresorbable scaffold material for applications in advanced wound healing,
i.e., diabetic ulcers and pressure sores. The specific goal is to develop a
highly porous biomaterial that is bifunctional, i.e., used as a dressing
material for wounds treated with vacuum therapy (Negative Pressure Wound
Therapy-NPWT), and also serve as a scaffold for tissue regeneration. Research
shows that patients treated with NPWT have to undergo several painful dressing
changes due to the tissue ingrowth that occurs into current dressings. Further,
this repeated injury during dressing changes further delays healing. The project
will address this important unmet need by developing a resorbable dressing-
scaffold material that will allow ingrowth during NPWT, and then degrade at a
desired rate to allow normal tissue to be regenerated and organized within the
wounds. The technology addresses major clinical unmet needs in advanced wound
healing and will produce significant reductions in treatment costs while
improving the quality of life for patients who suffer from these debilitating
wounds.

The broader impacts of this research are in a variety of applications in tissue
regeneration and repair for general, cardiothoracic, and plastic surgery;
trauma, sportsmedicine, and fracture healing. This novel scaffold technology
will be developed within the framework of large scale foam manufacturing methods
using industrial foaming and thermal reticulation techniques. This will also
reduce the cost of the biomaterial and substantially impact healthcare spending
across a broad range of clinical application areas in the US.