* 0944662
* Collaborative Research:Application of Detrital Zircon Isotope Characteristics and Sandstone Analysis of Beacon Strata  to the Tectonic Evolution of the Antarctic Sector of Gondwana
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2015
* David Elliot, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* thomas wilch
* 06/30/2015
* USD 331,028.00

Intellectual Merit: The goal of this project is to address relationships between
foreland basins and their tectonic settings by combining detrital zircon isotope
characteristics and sedimentological data. To accomplish this goal the PIs will
develop a detailed geochronology and analyze Hf- and O-isotopes of detrital
zircons in sandstones of the Devonian Taylor Group and the Permian-Triassic
Victoria Group. These data will allow them to better determine provenance and
basin fill, and to understand the nature of the now ice covered source regions
in East and West Antarctica. The PIs will document possible unexposed/unknown
crustal terrains in West Antarctica, investigate sub-glacial terrains of East
Antarctica that were exposed to erosion during Devonian to Triassic time, and
determine the evolving provenance and tectonic history of the Devonian to
Triassic Gondwana basins in the central Transantarctic Mountains. Detrital
zircon data will be interpreted in the context of fluvial dispersal/drainage
patterns, sandstone petrology, and sequence stratigraphy. This interpretation
will identify source terrains and evolving sediment provenances. Paleocurrent
analysis and sequence stratigraphy will determine the timing and nature of
changing tectonic conditions associated with development of the depositional
basins and document the tectonic history of the Antarctic sector of Gondwana.
Results from this study will answer questions about the Panthalassan margin of
Gondwana, the Antarctic craton, and the Beacon depositional basin and their
respective roles in global tectonics and the geologic and biotic history of
Antarctica. The Beacon basin and adjacent uplands played an important role in
the development and demise of Gondwanan glaciation through modification of polar
climates, development of peat-forming mires, colonization of the landscape by
plants, and were a migration route for Mesozoic vertebrates into Antarctica.

Broader impacts: This proposal includes support for two graduate students who
will participate in the fieldwork, and also support for other students to
participate in laboratory studies. Results of the research will be incorporated
in classroom teaching at the undergraduate and graduate levels and will help
train the next generation of field geologists. Interactions with K-12 science
classes will be achieved by video/computer conferencing and satellite phone
connections from Antarctica. Another outreach effort is the developing
cooperation between the Byrd Polar Research Center and the Center of Science and
Industry in Columbus.