* 0944019
* Conference: From Stars to Galaxies - Connecting our Understanding of Star and Galaxy Formation; April 2010; Gainesville, Florida
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2010
* Jonathan Tan, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Donald M. Terndrup
* 09/30/2010
* USD 30,000.00

This award will provide travel grants for graduate students and invited speakers
to participate in the international conference "From Stars to Galaxies -
Connecting our Understanding of Star and Galaxy Formation", to be hosted by the
University of Florida (UF) in Gainesville, Florida on April 7 - 10, 2010. The
goal of this conference is to bring together researchers from the often separate
star and galaxy formation communities to share recent research results and help
motivate future projects to improve our understanding of these processes. The
meeting comes at a time when many exciting results are appearing from large,
high resolution surveys of our Galaxy's star-forming regions. Properties of
individual stars and protostars can be determined to build up an accurate census
of the star formation activity in entire giant molecular clouds (GMCs) and GMC
populations, thus probing the questions: what drives star formation and how does
it proceed in different environments such as the local solar neighborhood, dense
stellar clusters, and the Galactic center region? At the same time a large
number of nearby galaxies have now had their star formation activity and gas
content resolved down to sub-kiloparsec scales, providing a wealth of
information to test theories of star formation on these larger scales. With
increasing computational resources, theoretical and numerical models are
catching up to try to explain these observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a part
of the conference program, there will be a public event, "Starry Night: Building
the Galaxies" to be held at the Florida Museum of Natural History on the UF
campus, featuring a few public lectures by selected conference participants,
star viewing, and planetarium tours. This event will follow the same format as
the successful Starry Night events organized previously by Dr. Jonathan Tan (UF)
and his collaborators, involving the Florida Museum of Natural History, the
Museum Nights student organization and the Alachua Astronomy Club, with
attendances surpassing 600 people, including many school children. In addition,
the presentations of the conference speakers will be posted on the conference
web site, which will provide a valuable electronic resource for the attendees
and other astrophysicists unable to attend the meeting in person.