* 0944440
* SBIR Phase I: Innovations in Nanoscale Manufacturing: Assembly of Nanomaterial Components via Electrostatic Forces and Production of Composites for Bio-Medical Implants.
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Joseph Bringley, TRANSPARENT MATERIALS, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2010
* USD 185,612.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project seeks to develop
nanomanufacturing methods for producing metal-oxide composites for biomedical
implants. Homogeneous, mixed metal-oxide composites are extremely difficult to
prepare by existing processes, and although of great utility, mixed-oxides have
found limited applications in markets outside of biomedicine due to cost
constraints. We have obtained preliminary data demonstrating a new, highly-
efficient and low-cost approach to the manufacture of these materials which uses
precise flow and mixing control to assemble the individual components of the
mixed-oxides at the nanoscale. The process utilizes inexpensive nanomaterial
components (e.g., colloids) that are readily available. The process produces
complex "core-shell" nanomaterials that are then further processed to produce a
mixed-oxide with greatly increased functionality. We anticipate that these
materials will exhibit the commercially important properties of radiopacity
(aiding diagnostic capabilities) and bioactivity (for better implant
integration).

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to provide bio-
medical implants that better integrate into the human body, speed the healing
process, improve durability, extend the use-life and aid diagnosis. This will
ultimately reduce the rate of revision surgery and improve patient outcomes. The
process has many significant advantages over existing methods of manufacturing,
including increased functionality, dramatically improved product yield (leading
to lower cost), and significantly improved performance. This process provides a
significant manufacturing cost advantage over existing materials and can be
further leveraged to expand market opportunities into adjacent segments where
cost constraints have limited the adoption of advanced composites.