* 0944529
* SBIR Phase I:  Method of Disinfecting Precursor Materials using Plant Essential Oils for a new Material Technology
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Gavin McIntyre, Ecovative Design LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2010
* USD 180,581.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project seeks to further reduce
the economic and environmental costs associated with sterilization of precursor
materials for the Mycobond platform. Mycobond is a revolutionary material that
is grown from agricultural byproducts and a vegetative growth of a filamentous
fungus (basidiomycete mycelium). To ensure adequate growth all raw materials are
either sterilized or pasteurized, which represents up to 24 hours of process
time and 50% of the material cost. This research intends to use an emulsion
comprised of phenolic compounds from plant essential oils (PEOs) to inactivate
competitive organisms on all feedstocks while reducing manufacturing costs.
Preliminary trails have yielded favorable results, indicating a potential
reduction of the disinfection costs by 88%. Furthermore, this procedure can
significantly reduce both the capital expense associated with production and the
environmental footprint by removing high entropy processes. Achieving successful
disinfection with PEOs, and later inoculation with the desired mycelium, will
allow the Mycobond? technology to retail at prices below those of expanded
polystyrene (EPS), granting a competitive advantage that would aid in gaining
rapid market adoption. The technology benchmarks well against EPS, and has
interested early adopters in the protective packaging and rigid board insulation
industries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of
this project is the development of sustainable, high-performance composite
materials for the packaging and insulation industries. 10% of the petroleum
imported into the United States is allocated to the production of inherently
unsustainable materials. The Mycobond platform is a direct replacement for many
these materials, applicable for products from protective packaging to structural
cores. The use of a PEO emulsion seeks to further reduce the energy consumption
of material production by closely emulating nature. The biological composites
and related processes can reduce energy consumption fivefold and greenhouse gas
emissions by tenfold when compared to an identical volume of EPS. Furthermore,
since the raw materials used are byproducts from American industries, a new
revenue stream will result, bolstering local economies. The plants and related
compounds utilized in the procedure are rapidly renewable and the proposed
disinfection platform is an open system which reduces dependence on a solitary
feedstock. The use of PEO emulsions to disinfect materials has value beyond
composites production, and will find applications in agriculture industry and
commercial cultivation of mushrooms. The effective replacement of high-embodied
energy processes will support local manufacturing by increasing the feasibility
of low-cost, regional production.&lt;br/&gt;