* 0944517
* Microtubule Function, Protein Folding, and Embryogenesis in Antarctic Fishes: An Integrative Approach
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2013
* Harry Detrich, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Amsler
* 08/31/2013
* USD 638,866.00

Since the advent of Antarctic continental glaciation, the opening of the Drake
Passage between South America and the Antarctic Peninsula, and the onset of
cooling of the Southern Ocean ~40-25 million years ago, evolution of the
Antarctic marine biota has been driven by the development of extreme cold
temperatures. The biochemical and physiological challenges facing ectotherms
living in the Southern Ocean include the reduction of reaction rates and
metabolic fluxes and a pervasive weakening of macromolecular interactions. Yet,
Southern Ocean ectotherms are now threatened by warming over periods measured in
centuries or less. The proposed research seeks to understand the molecular
mechanisms of cold adaptation in Antarctic marine fishes and to assess the
physiological capacity of these organisms to resist or compensate for rapid
oceanic warming. The P.I. will characterize two important and interacting
protein systems, the tubulins that form microtubules and the chaperonin CCT
(cytoplasmic chaperonin-containing TCP-1, a family of proteins that assists the
folding of the tubulins). Higher-level, integrative responses to global
temperature change will be analyzed by studying the thermal dependence of
cleavage in Antarctic fish embryos (a microtubule-dependent process). The
objectives are (1) to determine the contributions of five novel amino acid
substitutions found in Antarctic fish beta-tubulins to microtubule assembly at
cold temperature. (2) to compare the functional properties of CCT from testis
tissues of Antarctic fishes and mammals. (3) to evaluate the effects of
increased temperature on embryogenesis in Antarctic fishes. The research will
introduce graduate and REU undergraduate students to state-of-the-art
biochemical, cellular, and molecular-biological research relevant to ecological
and environmental issues of the Antarctic marine ecosystem. The proposed work
also will benefit society by developing a cold-functioning chaperonin protein
folding system, of great value to the biopharmaceutical and biotechnological
industries for use in folding insoluble proteins.