* 0944685
* SBIR Phase I:  High-efficiency, high-power, lightweight elliptic-beam traveling-wave-tube amplifier for satellite communications
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* Thomas Bemis, Beam Power Technology, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2010
* USD 146,618.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
research and develop a novel, broadband, high-efficiency, high-power elliptic-
beam helix traveling-wave-tube amplifier (TWTA). The proposed project addresses
the problem and opportunity in satellite communication, i.e. the need of
broadband amplifiers that are efficient, high-power, highly reliable, and above
all small and lightweight. The Phase I research objective is to determine the
scientific, mechanical and manufacturing feasibility of the proposed elliptic-
beam helix TWTA. The Phase I research includes: 1. Optimization of the gain and
efficiency of the proposed elliptic-beam helix TWTA; 2. Concept design of a
suitable elliptic electron beam system; 3. Preliminary electrical design of an
elliptic helix rf structure; and 4. Preliminary mechanical design of the
proposed elliptic-beam helix TWTA. The proposed elliptic-beam helix TWTA is
anticipated to significantly improve the efficiency, power output, reliability,
size and weight over the conventional circular-beam helix traveling wave tube
amplifiers (TWTAs) which are currently the technology of choice for satellite
communications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of
this project is as follows. First, the proposed project will enhance the
scientific and technological understanding of the mechanism of vacuum electronic
amplification in a novel elliptic-beam helix TWTA. Second, the vacuum electronic
amplification mechanism supported by the interaction of radio-frequency signals
with the elliptic electron beam via an elliptic helix is anticipated to be a
significantly improvement over the conventional one, thereby representing a
significant advance in vacuum electron device technology. Third, if successful,
this project will lead to commercially deployable, space qualified elliptic-beam
helix TWTAs that will perform at new levels beyond what has been achievable to
date. The initial market focus will be the high margin, high priced, onboard
satellite market including ground station deployments. The next market focus
will be high-frequency, high-power broadband amplifiers for point-to-point
wireless communications. The third market focus will be broadband amplifiers for
military radar and communication systems.