* 0944707
* SBIR Phase I:  Faradayic ElectroCell
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* Holly Garich, FARADAY TECHNOLOGY, INC
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl F. Albus
* 06/30/2010
* USD 149,992.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project addresses the
need for faster, lighter, more powerful electronic devices with increased
capability. The manufacture of advanced printed circuit boards, a key component
of electronic devices, utilizing high density interconnect technology are
generally limited by the electroplating process in printed circuit board shops.
Specifically, the design and manufacture of printed circuit boards with finer
pitch transmission lines, smaller diameter through holes and vias, and thicker
boards with higher layer counts to provide increased circuit densities. The
objective of the Phase I project is to demonstrate the feasibility of a patented
ElectroCell that addresses current and future manufacturing limitations
associated with sophisticated high aspect ratio printed circuit board features.
The proposed innovation will enable the uniform metallization of high aspect
ratio z-interconnects, resulting in improved throwing power, high levels of
uniformity and improved mechanical properties as compared to currently available
plating cell geometries. Furthermore, the proposed technology will enable the
continuing miniaturization and sophistication of electronic circuitry. The Phase
I project will include plating of test vehicles from a commercial partner using
standard and novel flow schemes, analysis and comparison with state-of-the-art
technologies, and modeling of the system.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is important to
consumers and the U.S. Government due to the vast number of end-products and
services that rely on electronic devices. The proposed advanced manufacturing
process is anticipated to have a significant impact on performance and
reliability of such devices. The enhanced technical understanding and
breakthrough that could be achieved by this project could help to revitalize the
domestic printed circuit board industry. The public consumer markets for
electronic devices enabled by this innovation include thousands of consumer
products, such as handheld devices, computer products, global positioning
systems, automotive electronics/engine controls, cameras, and next-generation
automotive, aerospace and medical applications. The market for electronic
devices is currently estimated to be $1.3 trillion dollars.