* 0944555
* SBIR Phase I:  Catalyst for the Oxidation of Methane in Coal Mine Ventilation Air
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* Joseph Rossin, GUILD ASSOCIATES INC
* Standard Grant
* Maria Josephine Yuen
* 06/30/2010
* USD 149,974.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project seeks to develop a novel
high temperature catalyst for the oxidation of methane present in coal mine
ventilation air. Referred to as ventilation air methane (VAM), VAM emissions
contain between 0.2% and 1.2% CH4 plus ppm levels of sulfur gases (H2S, SO2 and
COS). While the sulfur levels are low, these levels are sufficient to rapidly
deactivate traditional oxidation catalysts employed in the control of CH4
emissions. In order to be successful, the catalyst must be operated at high
temperatures in order to avoid the formation of palladium sulfates, plus employ
a catalyst support material that is able to maintain its integrity in the high
temperature environment in the presence of water vapor and sulfur gases. This
project seeks to use a patented high temperature (700°C) catalyst capable of
destroying perfluorocompounds (e.g. C2F6 and SF6) present in semiconductor
manufacturing emissions. The success of the catalyst, a Co/ZrO2-Al2O3, stems
from the formation of cobalt-spinel complexes, which prevent acid gases from
forming the corresponding aluminum fluorides and sulfates. It is the objective
of this effort to employ this material as a basis for a high temperature CH4
oxidation catalyst for the treatment of VAM emissions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader/commercial impact of this project, if successful, will be the direct
conversion of CH4 to CO2 and H2O would reduce the overall a global warming
potential (GWP) by over 90%. Greenhouse gas emissions are coming under increased
scrutiny due to their link to climate change. CH4 is a key contributor to
greenhouse gas emissions with a global warming potential (GWP) of 21 times that
of CO2. Thus, VAM accounts for 10% of the anthropogenic methane emissions in the
US. Low cost, reliable technologies are sought for the treatment of these
emissions. Reverse-flow thermal oxidation systems have been proposed to treat
these emissions. These processes operate at extreme temperatures, are large and
require moving parts (valves and louvers) that operate at high temperatures. As
a result, the reverse-flow process is expensive and unreliable. Catalytic
processes offer significant advantages in terms of reduced size, lower energy
input and greatly enhanced reliability. However, catalysts capable of treating
VAM emissions are not available on the commercial market, due to durability
issues associated with the operating conditions. If successful, a catalytic
process would offer a low-cost alternative to the treatment of VAM
emissions.&lt;br/&gt;