* 0944559
* SBIR Phase I:  Student Assessment from Mobility Analysis in Virtual World Learning
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* William Seffens, Seftec
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2010
* USD 143,059.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will measure
avatar mobility in an Internet virtual world learning environment to correlate
with student educational psychology measures. The project seeks to develop
learning experience modules in a virtual world for biology instruction and
computer-assisted student assessment with minimal involvement by real world
classroom instructors. The intellectual merit of this activity is to assess the
extent that educational activities in a virtual environment mimic real world
classroom behavior, and hence whether trace analysis of avatar mobility
correlates with educational psychology measures of students. The learning
modules to be developed can replace the need and expense of real world field
trips, for instance, ecology plot surveys or island bio-geography studies. This
would lower costs for the biology lab course, and allow the instructor to focus
on individual assistance during the sessions.

Many educational organizations are experiencing expanding enrollments and
decreasing operational budgets in this economic recession. Efficiency and
effectiveness are critical areas in managing public, private, and for-profit
educational units. The project seeks to develop learning modules for biology
instruction and computer-assisted student assessment with minimal overhead by
teachers. The targets for these modules are high schools, undergraduate and
technical school Biology programs that have associated labs for introductory,
environmental, ecology, or genetics courses. The modules replace the need and
expense of real world field trips, for instance, ecology, evolution or
population growth studies. This project could have broad impact on computer-
assisted learning in virtual world environments by providing databases of actual
avatar traces. These mobility traces could then be compared with data from other
Second Life experiences, simulated traces, or other mobility models such as cell
phone, Bluetooth, or GPS traces to study social network models.