* 0944910
* SBIR Phase I: High Throughput Microfluidic Cell Injection for Cell Reprogramming
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* Andrea Adamo, Zaiput Technologies LLC
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 06/30/2010
* USD 0.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project supports research
aimed at developing a new technology to deliver material into living cells.
Delivery of material into living cells is a limiting step in a number of
biological applications and innovative therapeutic approaches, including stem
cells based therapy and regenerative medicine. In this project a novel
technology to allow high throughput delivery of any type of molecule into any
type of cell is explored. In this innovative system, living cells are lined up
by flowing them in a microfluidic channel and the material to be delivered is
shot on the cells with a miniaturized fluid jet that carries the molecules of
interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this research are expected
in the field of stem cell research and stem cell-based therapy. In particular,
this microfluidic based system has the potential to boost the generation of
induced pluripotent stem cells (iPS) , the rising star in the field of
regenerative medicine, by eliminating the intracellular delivery problems that
currently make generation of these cells extremely inefficient. Besides helping
the biomedical community in realizing the commercial potential of iPS, the
availability of the new intracellular delivery technology could benefit many
different fields of biology, ranging from molecular biology to pharmaceutical
research, and enable a number of new research applications.&lt;br/&gt;