* 0944109
* Extracting Earth Models from Body-Wave Microseisms
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2015
* Peter Shearer, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2015
* USD 314,000.00

This project will study seismic noise and nontraditional seismic sources using
advanced array signal processing algorithms that can extract information from
weak signals. The work will help to characterize seismic noise sources and
develop new methods to use them for resolving Earth structure. The main focus
will be on P-wave microseisms from storms but the researchers will also examine
non-volcanic tremor (NVT). One exciting aspect of the research is that noise
analysis methods have the potential to be very useful in improving body-wave
tomography for Earth structure, just as noise cross-correlation methods have
recently proven successful in surface-wave tomography. A preliminary test
examining teleseismic P waves recorded in southern California shows that similar
arrival-time anomalies can be obtained both from direct P waves from a natural
earthquake and P-wave noise generated by a large storm. In this
case,&lt;br/&gt;the noise can be processed using waveform cross-correlation
among different station pairs and optimal P relative arrival-time estimates can
be computed using the same approach traditionally used to analyze earthquake
arrival times. The investigators plan to experiment with taking advantage of
non-traditional seismic sources(storms) to improve tomographic images by filling
in the ray path coverage over certain azimuths. In addition, OBS observations
may eventually provide the chance to extract absolute timing information of
storm-generated P-wave microseisms, i.e., empirical Green?s functions, from
ambient noise crosscorrelation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will
fundamentally advance our understanding of microseism generation and what
microseisms tell us about storm activity and Earth structure. This research has
the potential to track storms via a non-satellite approach, monitor intensities
of storms, and contribute to inversions for deep Earth structure.