* 0944454
* SBIR Phase I:  Electrical Property Detection of Residual Cancer in the Surgery Suite
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* William Gregory, NovaScan LLC
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 12/31/2010
* USD 199,629.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project offers a
substantial improvement in the surgical treatment of cancer. The inability to
find malignant tissue by sight or touch limits the tissue that the surgeon can
identify and remove. Currently, removal of affected tissue must be confirmed in
the pathology laboratory resulting in delays of results for sometimes 24-36
hours. Some patients may be subjected to multiple surgeries for the complete
removal of the cancerous tissue. NovaScan has developed a highly innovative,
rapid and accurate criterion for detecting cancerous tissue using the tissue
electrical properties of the tissues. This technology will be incorporated into
a hand-held probe used by the surgeon to ascertain that the surgical wound and
regional lymph nodes are clear of cancer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of this research are related to reducing the number of repeat surgeries
that increase the risk for the patient, and add a cost burden to our society at
a time when we are trying to reduce health care costs. For breast cancer, one
group has reported 48.5% of patients required more than one operation to removal
the known cancer. In contrast to other methods under study, the proposed
technology requires less time, no sample preparation, and does not employ the
use of hazardous agents for tumor detection. Based on earlier studies, the
NovaScan device offers a tool for the surgical suite or pathology laboratory
that can detect tumor cells accurately and at lower costs than is currently
available.