* 0944993
* SBIR Phase I:  Use of Recycled Carbon Fibers in Sheet Molding Compounds (SMC)
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* Charles Segal, Firebird Advanced Materials, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2010
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase 1 project will develop materials
processing technologies to effectively utilize recycled carbon fiber (RCF)
derived from carbon fiber reinforced polymer (CFRP) thermoset wastes as fiber
reinforcement in structural sheet molding compounds (SMC). As recycled carbon
fibers have different morphologies and properties than the virgin carbon fibers
currently used in SMCs, RCF is usually not readily processible in commercial
process equipment used to formulate thermoset SMCs with high volume fraction
fiber loadings. Therefore, it is necessary to develop new processes and surface
treatments that facilitate the reuse of RCF in SMCs. In addition, the full life
cycle and recyclability of carbon-fiber-filled thermoset SMCs need to be
investigated, so that the carbon fibers can be reclaimed and reused in new SMC
products without a loss of performance. In Phase 2 of this project, the lab-
scale process and treatment methods developed in Phase 1 will be scaled up to a
pilot pre-production scale.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project involves recycling
valuable carbon fiber wastes that are currently disposed in landfills to create
a recycled raw material product that can be used for transportation applications
in a sheet molding compound. By diverting waste carbon fibers from landfills
toward useful applications in the transportation industry, substantial
quantities of a raw material for sustainable engineering can be produced,
benefiting the nation's need for high-performance, green structural materials.
Lightweight RCF-filled SMCs can be substituted for metal or fiberglass-filled
composites/resins used for transportation, thereby decreasing weight and
improving fuel efficiency in automotive applications. In addition, the energy to
produce and reuse RCF is much less than that of producing virgin carbon fibers,
so the development of RCF applications as a substitute for virgin carbon fibers
will provide a net energy savings to the economy. This research project will
facilitate the widespread use of recycled carbon fibers by SMC formulators for
molding into structural components, thereby increasing utilization of this
valuable resource.