* 0944694
* Collaborative: Benthic-pelagic coupling in an intact ecosystem: the role of top predators in McMurdo Sound
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2011,11/30/2015
* David Ainley, H.T. Harvey & Associates
* Standard Grant
* Christian Fritsen
* 11/30/2015
* USD 115,969.00

The research project will investigate the importance of top down forcing on
pelagic food webs. The relatively pristine Ross Sea includes large populations
of upper-level predators such as minke and killer whales, Adélie and Emperor
penguins, and Antarctic toothfish. This project will focus on food web
interactions Adélie penguins, minke whales, and the fish-eating Ross Sea killer
whales, all of which exert foraging pressure on their main prey, crystal krill
(Euphausia cyrstallorophias) and silver fish (Pleuragramma antarcticum) in
McMurdo Sound. The research will employ an unusual experimental design, taking
advantage of the opening of channel to resupply McMurdo Station to study
'before' (no predator access) and 'after' (predator access) impacts on prey
distributions and ecological processes. The investigators will use video- and
acoustic-capable ROVs with environmental sensors to quantify the abundance and
distribution of prey and prey food resources, and satellite tags and helicopter
surveys to study predator foraging and movements. Additional measurements will
track the redistribution of organic materials as a function of changing predator
and prey behavior and activity, allowing downstream quantification of top
predator effects on energy flow. This study will be among the first to assess
top-down forcing in the Ross Sea ecosystemand will form the basis for a
multidisciplinary studies in the future. to a multi-disciplinary investigation.
The relevance of this work will be communicated to scientists, students and the
public via publications, participation in scientific conferences, involvement of
graduate and undergraduate students in field and lab work as part of thesis and
capstone projects, and interactions with K-12 classes and clubs. Engineering and
ROV work will be incorporated into ongoing mentoring programs with universities,
community colleges, and high schools.