* 0944353
* EAGER:  Biomimetic Moisture-Resistant Micro-Condensation Surfaces for Civil and Architectural Engineering
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Valeria LaSaponara, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 08/31/2010
* USD 29,995.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

The objective of this study is to develop a photopatternable superhydrophobic
nanocomposite coating to achieve a moisture-resistant surface using an
innovative micro-condensation principle, mimicking nature. The presence of the
biomimetic micropatterned surface with alternating
superhydrophobic/superhydrophilic microstructures for high-efficient microscopic
condensation would allow a significantly more efficient removal of moisture,
which would selectively collect the moisture as condensed micro-droplets and
effectively remove them by gravitation, in comparison with the conventional
superhydrophobic surfaces. The proposed coating may be easily applied to a wide
range of surfaces, and can be obtained through a standard photolithography
manufacturing technique.

This work can potentially impact a wide variety of civil and architectural
engineering applications, for example, as protective coating of buildings,
statues and landmarks, a method to prevent rain/wind induced oscillations in
cables in suspension and cable-stayed bridges, a water harvesting method, and a
moisture control method for mold prevention. Two Ph.D. students will be involved
in this research: one student from Biomedical Engineering, who will develop and
characterize a patterned coating especially designed to bond with different
types of substrates; the other from Civil and Environmental Engineering, who
will run gravimetric analysis of the hygrothermally tested specimens, followed
by static testing.