* 0944952
* SBIR Phase I:  Method and Means for Collecting and Analyzing Customer Service Performance Data
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Lois Pannkuk, Vision-1, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 12/31/2010
* USD 149,544.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will test the
baseline requirements necessary for the development of an employee performance
measurement platform that utilizes technology to accomplish a continuous service
performance data flow used to motivate employees to higher performance levels
through the use of quantitative reporting, and consistent, steady
recognition/reward systems. Currently, business managers within the services
industries have few reliable, quantitative methods for measuring and managing
employee customer service performance. Research components for this project
include: 1) Test the utilization of POS (Point of Sale) / PIN-pad technologies
in a live retail environment to determine their capability in supporting this
transaction level surveying process 2) Determine if consumer respondents will
engage in this point of transaction survey process 3) Determine if the resultant
data provides meaningful reporting that demonstrates the fluid nature of
customer service and fills the knowledge gap regarding employee performance.

Employee performance and nearly every other customer-facing element of business
is rendered subjective without the timely input from the customer. With
continuous and consistent data measurement available through the electronic
delivery of survey questions / capture of responses real time at the transaction
level, a quantitative employee performance system is established. With
transaction level performance data combined with contextual data such as
employee, time of day, etc. new dimensions of employee performance measurements
will be derived.