* 0944266
* Collaborative Research:  Climate, Ice Dynamics and Biology Using a Deep Ice Core from the West Antarctic Ice Sheet Ice Divide
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2017
* Mark Twickler, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 07/31/2017
* USD 1,100,224.00

This award supports renewal of funding of the WAIS Divide Science Coordination
Office (SCO). The Science Coordination Office (SCO) was established to represent
the research community and facilitates the project by working with support
organizations responsible for logistics, drilling, and core curation. During the
last five years, 26 projects have been individually funded to work on this
effort and 1,511 m of the total 3,470 m of ice at the site has been collected.
This proposal seeks funding to continue the SCO and related field operations
needed to complete the WAIS Divide ice core project. Tasks for the SCO during
the second five years include planning and oversight of logistics, drilling, and
core curation; coordinating research activities in the field; assisting in
curation of the core in the field; allocating samples to individual projects;
coordinating the sampling effort; collecting, archiving, and distributing data
and other information about the project; hosting an annual science meeting; and
facilitating collaborative efforts among the research groups. The intellectual
merit of the WAIS Divide project is to better predict how human-caused increases
in greenhouse gases will alter climate requires an improved understanding of how
previous natural changes in greenhouse gases influenced climate in the past.
Information on previous climate changes is used to validate the physics and
results of climate models that are used to predict future climate. Antarctic ice
cores are the only source of samples of the paleo-atmosphere that can be used to
determine previous concentrations of carbon dioxide. Ice cores also contain
records of other components of the climate system such as the paleo air and
ocean temperature, atmospheric loading of aerosols, and indicators of
atmospheric transport. The WAIS Divide ice core project has been designed to
obtain the best possible record of greenhouse gases during the last glacial
cycle (last ~100,000 years). The site was selected because it has the best
balance of high annual snowfall (23 cm of ice equivalent/year), low dust
Antarctic ice that does not compromise the carbon dioxide record, and favorable
glaciology. The main science objectives of the project are to investigate
climate forcing by greenhouse gases, initiation of climate changes, stability of
the West Antarctic Ice Sheet, and cryobiology in the ice core. The project has
numerous broader impacts. An established provider of educational material
(Teachers? Domain) will develop and distribute web-based resources related to
the project and climate change for use in K?12 classrooms. These resources will
consist of video and interactive graphics that explain how and why ice cores are
collected, and what they tell us about future climate change. Members of the
national media will be included in the field team and the SCO will assist in
presenting information to the general public. Video of the project will be
collected and made available for general use. Finally, an opportunity will be
created for cryosphere students and early career scientists to participate in
field activities and core analysis. An ice core archive will be available for
future projects and scientific discoveries from the project can be used by
policy makers to make informed decisions. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;