* 0944622
* SBIR Phase I: The Marine Profiling Radiometer
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* Marian Klein, Boulder Environmental Sciences and Technology, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2010
* USD 150,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will
develop an instrument that enables continuous, autonomous surveillance of key
meteorological parameters, i.e., temperature, humidity profiles, cloud liquid
water path, and integrated water vapor. The Marine Profiling Radiometer (MPR) is
designed for operation on a buoy, ship, or for land-based applications. Despite
the increased utility of weather forecasts over the past decades, accuracy
decreases rapidly as the scale of the weather features decreases and the time
range of the forecasts increases. Forecasting the evolution and movement of
smaller-scale, short-lived, often intense weather phenomena such as tornadoes,
hail storms, and flash floods is less mature than prediction of larger-scale
weather systems. This is caused, in part, by inadequate observations. The
proposed technology will fill the missing gap in data. Phase I will develop a
simplified prototype of MPR to experimentally validate new concepts of ambient
calibration, as well as, a self-cleaning mechanism for protection of optical
components. The novel calibration approach will enable standalone operation even
under extreme weather conditions that can be encountered in harsh marine
environments. The major innovation of this all-weather technology is its ability
to provide otherwise un-obtainable data in a timely and cost effective
manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project is in demonstrating a novel approach to radiometer calibration that
could lead to advancement in its use and dramatic improvement in the
understanding of the thermodynamic state of the atmosphere, especially in the
boundary layer. As 50% of the US population lives within 50 miles of the coast,
better information about offshore conditions can have significant economical
impact. Improved forecasts will benefit water management of reservoirs/coastal
regions, can be used by commercial/military vessels to improve safety and
enhance missile guidance system accuracy. MPR data will improve coastal
meteorology, improve protection mechanisms and reducing evacuation costs for
severe weather events; enhance our understanding of ocean-atmosphere interaction
and provide information about regional climate change; reduce the cost
associated with offshore wind farm and oil platform operation while improving
overall safety; facilitate optimization of the electrical grid improving energy
efficiency; enhance weather/dispersion model ensembles for homeland security
applications; and provide current weather information to help ensure efficient
and environmentally sound sea and port operations for commercial and
recreational vessels.&lt;br/&gt;