* 0944078
* Firn Metamorphism: Microstructure and Physical Properties
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2014
* Ian Baker, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Julie Palais
* 05/31/2014
* USD 368,459.00

Albert/0944078

This award supports a project to investigate the transformations from snow to
firn to ice and the underlying physics controlling firn's ability to store
atmospheric samples from the past. Senior researchers, a graduate student, and
several undergraduates will make high-resolution measurements of both the
diffusivity and permeability profiles of firn cores from several sites in
Antarctica and correlate the results with their microstructures quantified using
advanced materials characterization techniques (scanning electron microscopy and
x-ray computed tomography). The use of cores from different sites will enable us
to examine the influence of different local climate conditions on the firn
structure. We will use the results to help interpret existing measurements of
firn air chemical composition at several sites where firn air measurements
exist. There are three closely-linked goals of this project: to quantify the
dependence of interstitial transport properties on firn microstructure from the
surface down to the pore close-off depth, to determine at what depths bubbles
form and entrap air, and investigate the extent to which these features exhibit
site-to-site differences, and to use the measurements of firn air composition
and firn structure to better quantify the differences between atmospheric
composition (present and past), and the air trapped in both the firn and in air
bubbles within ice by comparing the results of the proposed work with firn air
measurements that have been made at the WAIS Divide and Megadunes sites. The
broader impacts of this project are that the study will this study will enable
us to elucidate the fundamental controls on the metamorphism of firn
microstructure and its impact on processes of gas entrapment that are important
to understanding ice core evidence of past atmospheric composition and climate
change. The project will form the basis for the graduate research of a PhD
student at Dartmouth, with numerous opportunities for undergraduate involvement
in cold room measurements and outreach. The investigators have a track record of
successfully mentoring women students, and will build on this experience. In
conjunction with local earth science teachers, and graduate and undergraduate
students will design a teacher-training module on the role of the Polar Regions
in climate change. Once developed and tested, this module will be made available
to the broader polar research community for their use with teachers in their
communities.