* 0944420
* SBIR Phase I: Improved Analysis of Li-ion Battery Safety and Performance Using Impedance Spectroscopy
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* Andrew Tipton, Mobile Power Solutions
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Walters
* 06/30/2010
* USD 149,952.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I Project will develop new
analytical methods for lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) to enable significantly
greater safety and performance of batteries. Combing impedance spectroscopy
testing with physical analysis, the methodology will identify specific cell
components responsible for performance loss under a range of test conditions; a
significant advancement to the current industry standard evaluation methods of
only providing pass/no pass information. If successful, the outcome of this
research will provide more useful feedback information to develop next
generation battery technology and new quality control metrics, as well as to
serve as basis for novel controller circuitry.

The broader/commercial impact of this project, if successful, is the enhancement
of safety of lithium-ion battery technology to the level that larger
applications can be achieved. Since its introduction in 1991, the world market
for LIBs has grown beyond $10 billion/year. LIBs have become ubiquitous in
powering new consumer technologies, including mobile phones, laptops, and
digital cameras/videos. Depending on the specific chemistry employed, LIBs
energy densities can be 2 or 3 times those of previous battery technologies. To
date, larger applications, as in hybrid, plug-in hybrid, or full electric
vehicles, have failed to materialize on a significant scale due to concerns over
battery safety. Individual vehicle propulsion battery packs will each utilize
many cells. The proposed research is intended to provide unique advancement
towards understanding safety failure in LIBs that would benefit a wide range of
clients from cell and battery-pack manufacturers to battery end users.
Ultimately, the application of LIBs on a large scale in hybrid or electric
vehicle propulsion will lead to more energy efficient transportation in the US,
thereby decreasing the nation's dependence on oil imports, and simultaneously
reducing our CO2 emissions.