* 0944185
* Venezuela Planning Visit: Developing a Model for Assessing Social and Ecological Implications of Declining Freshwater Quality in the Maracaibo Basin, Maracaibo, July 2009
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2011
* Bjorn Sletto, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Carmina Londono
* 12/31/2011
* USD 19,924.00

Abstract Proposal: OISE-0944185 &lt;br/&gt;PI/Institution: Bjorn Sletto,
University of Texas at Austin &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed U.S.-Venezuela
planning visit will allow U.S. PI Dr. Bjorn Sletto from the University of Texas
at Austin (UT) and colleagues in Venezuela (Daniel Castro, Johnny Alarcon and
Mercedes Ferrer from the Universidad de Zulia) to discuss and plan an
interdisciplinary, collaborative research program to assess the links between
forest management, indigenous territoriality, and urbanization in the Lake
Maracaibo Basin, Venezuela. Participants intend to: 1) formulate key research
priorities and questions; 2) identify key sources of institutional and
scientific knowledge, data, and institutional support; 3) begin to build a
common knowledge base that will be made available to policymakers, scholars, and
students via the Internet; and 4) develop long-term educational and
collaborative opportunities for a diverse group of graduate and undergraduate
students from the University of Texas and the host institution, Universidad de
Zulia. By including students from minority groups from the University of Texas,
women and indigenous people, and outstanding international scholars from the
U.S. and Venezuela, the proposed planning visit will foster a more creative
engagement with the social and political-economic causes of the water crisis in
the Lake Maracaibo Basin that will allow participants to envision innovative
research approaches to this important research area. &lt;br/&gt;