* 0944239
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of Subminiature Abrasive-Waterjet Nozzles toward Micromachining
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Peter Liu, OMAX Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl F. Albus
* 12/31/2010
* USD 169,774.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I seeks to develop a micro-
abrasive-waterjet nozzle for machining features between 50 to 100 micrometers.
The project is extremely challenging because abrasive waterjet (AWJ) machining
involves an ultrahigh-speed, 3-phase flow engaging in complex solid/fluid
interactions within very small dimensions that are changing rapidly. The project
is aiming to minimize the beam diameters of abrasive waterjets, reshape and
refocus the jet stream exiting the nozzle, improve flow characteristics of fine
abrasives, and mitigate abrasive clogging. The micro-abrasive-waterjet nozzle
with a single-feed port will become the most compact size of its kind by
eliminating the vacuum assist and water flushing requirements needed to prevent
abrasive clogging. The recent advent of micro-nano, green energy, and biomedical
technologies has created tremendous opportunities for low-cost
micromanufacturing. The micro-abrasive-waterjet will take advantage of the
inherent merits of waterjet technology -- versatility (material independence),
cold cutting (preservation of material integrity), cost effectiveness, and fast
turnaround -- that are unmatchable by most established tools. The final goal is
to further downsize abrasive waterjet nozzles toward micromachining, meet the
high demand for low-cost micromanufacturing and further boost the market share
of waterjet machine tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader/commercial impact of
waterjet micromachining will be machining fits well within the 'just-in-time'
practice of lean manufacturing; using waterjet machining, small and large
parts/lots made from most materials can be completed from design to finish in
hours -- something that is not possible through outsourcing them abroad. This
project's development of waterjet micromachining will promote waterjet
technology for high value-added jobs and further sustain its phenomenal growth.
Inserting additional waterjet systems into the manufacturer arena would not only
raise the awareness of this technology but also help save jobs from being
outsourced overseas. This could have an important society impact through
planting the seeds needed to help rebuild a sustainable U.S. manufacturing
industry, leading to reversing the three-decade long trend of the continued
shrinkage of domestic manufacturing workforce, and revitalizing the once
prosperous manufacturing business toward a recovery of America's economy.