* 0944131
* Integration and Analysis of Reliable Networking for Remote Science, Education, and First Responders
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Hans-Werner Braun, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,043,111.00

OCI 0944131&lt;br/&gt;Hans-Werner Braun&lt;br/&gt;University of California at
San Diego&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
Hans-Werner Braun's research at the University of California at San Diego
through the High Performance Wireless Research and Education Network (HPWREN)
which is an NSF funded wireless high bandwidth cyberinfrastructure, which
originated in the year 2000 and has been continually evolving to include various
research and education applications in difficult to reach areas, as well as
first responder and public safety activities. The network operates in
predominantly remote and rugged areas of Southern California, spanning from San
Clemente Island in the Pacific Ocean, via the California coast, to the inland
valleys and on to the high mountains, reaching an altitude of more than 8700
feet. It then extends across the desert, reaching sites close to the Arizona
border. Many scientific disciplines and education activities benefit from the
network, including a number of NSF-funded projects. Without access to this high-
speed data Networking connectivity, many of these project research objectives
would be difficult, and several even impossible to
achieve.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The collection of
real-time data is one of the most valued aspects of the network, such as the
deployment of various environmental sensors that enable an understanding of
environmental conditions that would be had to obtain otherwise. Real-time data
allows for increased knowledge and understanding of an array of scientific
concepts such as heavily impact ecological systems on the earth and the tracking
of transient events throughout the universe. Examples of significant
accomplishments include the research on network workloads with a diverse traffic
profile, as well as major discoveries by the Palomar Observatory, providing
invaluable assistance during wildland fires, and the social aspects of enlarging
Native American contacts with the mainstream populations, with major educational
benefits being derived from such contact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two-year work
scope for this renewal proposal is three-fold. (s) maintain and enhance the
HPWREN cyberinfrastructure for its many interdisciplinary and multi-
institutional research, education, and public safety activities, (2) continue
the research on Quality of Service considerations on a highly functional
wireless cyberinfrastructure environment, and (3) evaluate transition strategies
towards an objective of a more sustainable
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;Throughout its
existence, the HPWREN project has been successful in its broader impacts, as
evidenced by many news updates on the http://hpwren.ucsd.edu/web site. This
project is centered around network research aspects and also serves as an
enabling cyberinfrastructure for various science disciplines and education
activities. While partnering with multiple institutions. HPWREN collaborators,
alongside this project's NSF support, invested substantially into the overall
environment, including by augmenting it with many projects of various scopes and
sizes. Specific HPWREN research is ongoing in the areas of workload profiling,
performance assessments, as well as backbone and access link Quality of Service
and Policy Based Routine implementations and experimentations. Research also
continues in the area of network impact-considerate intelligent sensors,
forwarding data based on locally determined events, rather than continuously.
The current stability and reliability of this network is a direct result of
lessons learned in its multi-year development effort. This includes a
significant investment in FCC-licensed spectrum radio system and an
implementation of backbone link diversity, as well as upgrading of high-traffic
links to 155Mbps capacity. Further enhancements are planned, such as a separate
45Mbps path to the Palomar Observatory bringing its aggregate bandwidth to
200Mbps of full-duplex links. Continuation of the HPWREN infrastructure and
research environment is an objective of this project.