* 0944859
* SBIR Phase I:  Power Tagging Grid Intelligence for 21st Century Energy Applications
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Steven Berens, Power Tagging Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 12/31/2010
* USD 200,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will prove the
deployment readiness of Power Tagging's technologies for utilizing the electric
grid as a communication medium for smart grid activities. Power Tagging plans to
inject intelligence into the grid and into the power itself. This approach
provides for efficient, in-band (on-grid) data communications. Rather than
requiring significant investments in new networks to manage the grid, the
company has developed technology that leverages and augments the existing
distribution infrastructure. This approach will allow a rapid adoption of the
Smart Grid with far less capital expense. The objectives of this SBIR project
include field-testing and refinement of devices and algorithms which have been
lab-tested and simulation-proven to enable the on-grid approach.

Using the company's architecture, smart grid capability will be deployed quickly
and effectively utilizing existing infrastructure, providing a basis for
improved grid stability and efficiency. The communication can enable "grid
location aware" balancing of distributed power generation such as wind & solar
systems with the aggregated batteries of electric vehicles, reducing the
dependence on expensive spinning reserves. The real-time, in-situ ability of the
technology to triangulate faults, predict high-loss paths, and detect security
breaches will provide a new level of grid reliability.