* 0944258
* SBIR Phase I:  Entrepreneurship Education Using Interactive Media
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Kirsten Barker, Prendismo, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2010
* USD 200,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I research project will
create a powerful technology platform for teaching scientists and engineers how
to develop their discoveries into successful businesses that transform
innovative ideas from the lab to enterprise, from enterprise to value. The
project will devise a new online instructional tool that combines real-world
technology-based case studies with the power of social media networks to provide
scientists and engineers with the intellectual rigor and rich decision-making
environment derived from Wikipedia-like crowd-sourced user feedback. The
platform will be accessible to a broad spectrum of users, including those
without access to typical entrepreneurship instructional opportunities in the
traditional academic setting. The research has two specific objectives: i) to
identify prospective case studies that showcase complex, real-world scientific
as well as business challenges often faced by startup businesses, and ii) to
complete the technology platform that integrates video-captured case studies
with interactive components for providing participatory feedback through social
networking sites as well as blogs, podcasts, and relevant links. The project
will also benefit directly from access to a 13,000 video clip collection on
entrepreneurship and leadership, a resource that offers deeper knowledge on each
relevant topic.

Entrepreneurship education has become an increasingly important aspect of the
entrepreneurial endeavor, especially in science and engineering, where
developments in the energy, biotechnology, pharmaceutical, medical device,
nanotechnology and life sciences sectors continue to experience record growth.
However, the gap between basic research and product
development/commercialization remains wide and deep. Educational efforts to
bridge that gap have generally been unsuccessful. The project is based on the
belief that peer-learning can accelerate the acquisition of valuable
entrepreneurial skills. Besides benefiting from 'on the job' experience,
entrepreneurs can better master the challenges of the business world using
realistic case studies enhanced with user-generated analysis and commentary
enabled by multimedia and social networking capabilities. Today's 'generation-Y'
or 'millennial' students and young professionals use online communities and
social networks to obtain and share information. By leveraging this online
participatory culture, Prendismo will create a new educational paradigm that
will help entrepreneurs hone their skills at creating, developing, and
commercializing the technologies of the future.