* 0944197
* Collaborative Research:  Establishing the Chronology and Histories of Accumulation and Ice Dynamics for the WAIS Divide Core
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2016
* Edwin Waddington, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Julie Palais
* 06/30/2016
* USD 605,852.00

This award supports a project to help to establish the depth-age chronology and
the histories of accumulation and ice dynamics for the WAIS Divide ice core. The
depth-age relationship and the histories of accumulation and ice dynamics are
coupled. An accurate age scale is needed to infer histories of accumulation rate
and ice-thickness change using ice-flow models. In turn, the accumulation-rate
history is needed to calculate the age difference of ice to determine the age of
the trapped gases. The accumulation history is also needed to calculate
atmospheric concentrations of impurities trapped in the ice and is an important
characteristic of climate. The history of ice-thickness change is also
fundamental to understanding the stability of the WAIS. The primary goals of the
WAIS Divide ice core project are to investigate climate forcing by greenhouse
gases, the initiation of climate changes, and the stability of the West
Antarctic Ice Sheet (WAIS). An accurate age scale is fundamental for achieving
these goals. The first objective of this project is to establish an annually
resolved depth-age relationship for the past 40,000 years. This will be done by
measuring variations in electrical conductivity along the ice core, which are
caused by seasonal variations in chemistry. We expect to be able to resolve
annual layers back to 40,000 years before present (3,000 m depth) using this
method. The second objective is to search for stratigraphic disturbances in the
core that would compromise the paleoclimate record. Irregular layering will be
identified by measuring the electrical conductivity of the ice in a vertical
plan through the core. The third objective is to derive a preliminary chronology
for the entire core. For the deeper ice we will use an ice-flow model to
interpolate between known age markers, such as dated volcanic horizons and tie
points from the methane gas chronology. The fourth objective is to derive a
refined chronology simultaneously with histories of accumulation and ice-sheet
thickness. An ice-flow model and all available data will be used to formulate an
inverse problem, in which we infer the most appropriate histories of
accumulation and ice-thickness, together with estimates of uncertainties. The
flow model associated with those preferred histories then produces the best
estimate of the chronology. The research contributes directly to the primary
goals of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet Initiative. The project will help develop
the next generation of scientists through the education and training of one
Ph.D. student and several undergraduate students. This project will result in
instrumentation for measuring the electrical conductivity of ice cores being
available at the National Ice Core Lab for other researchers to use on other
projects. All collaborators are committed to fostering diversity and currently
participate in scientific outreach and most participate in undergraduate
education. Outreach will be accomplished through regularly scheduled community
and K-12 outreach events at UW, talks and popular writing by the PIs, as well as
through our respective press offices.