* 0944285
* Collaborative research: acoustic logging of the WAIS Divide borehole
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2016
* Sridhar Anandakrishnan, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Julie Palais
* 08/31/2016
* USD 164,474.00

0944199/Matsuoka

This award supports a project to test the hypothesis that abrupt changes in
fabric exist and are associated with both climate transitions and volcanic
eruptions. It requires depth-continuous measurements of the fabric. By lowering
a new logging tool into the WAIS Divide borehole after the completion of the
core drilling, this project will measure acoustic-wave speeds as a function of
depth and interpret it in terms of ice fabrics. This interpretation will be
guided by ice-core-measured fabrics at sparse depths. This project will apply
established analytical techniques for the ice-sheet logging and estimate depth
profiles of both compressional- and shear-wave speeds at short intervals (~ 1
m). Previous logging projects measured only compressional-wave speeds averaged
over typically 5-7 m intervals. Thus the new logger will enable more precise
fabric interpretations. Fabric measurements using thin sections have revealed
distinct fabric patterns separated by less than several meters; fabric
measurements over a shorter period are crucial. At the WAIS Divide borehole, six
two-way logging runs will be made with different observational parameters so
that multiple wave-propagation modes will be identified, yielding estimates of
both compressional- and shear-wave speeds. Each run takes approximately 24 hours
to complete; we propose to occupy the boreholes in total eight days. The logging
at WAIS Divide is temporarily planned in December 2011, but the timing is not
critical. This project?s scope is limited to the completion of the logging and
fabric interpretations. Results will be immediately shared with other WAIS
Divide researchers. Direct benefits of this data sharing include guiding further
thin-section analysis of the fabric, deriving a precise thinning function that
retrieves more accurate accumulation history and depth-age scales. The PIs of
this project have conducted radar and seismic surveys in this area and this
project will provide a ground truth for these regional remote-sensing
assessments of the ice interior. In turn, these remote sensing means can extend
the results from the borehole to larger parts of the central West Antarctica.
This project supports education for two graduate students for geophysics,
glaciology, paleoclimate, and polar logistics. The instrument that will be
acquired in this project can be used at other boreholes for ice-fabric
characterizations and for englacial hydrology (wetness of temperate ice).