* 0944150
* Sensitivity of the Antarctic Ice Sheet to Climate Change over the Last Two Glacial/Interglacial Cycles
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2014
* George Denton, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Julie Palais
* 08/31/2014
* USD 354,181.00

Hall/0944150 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a project to investigate
the sensitivity of the Antarctic ice sheet (AIS) to global climate change over
the last two Glacial/Interglacial cycles. The intellectual merit of the project
is that despite its importance to Earth's climate system, we currently lack a
full understanding of AIS sensitivity to global climate change. This project
will reconstruct and precisely date the history of marine-based ice in the Ross
Sea sector over the last two glacial/interglacial cycles, which will enable a
better understanding of the potential driving mechanisms (i.e., sea-level rise,
ice dynamics, ocean temperature variations) for ice fluctuations. This will also
help to place present ice?]sheet behavior in a long-term context. During the
last glacial maximum (LGM), the AIS is known to have filled the Ross Embayment
and although much has been done both in the marine and terrestrial settings to
constrain its extent, the chronology of the ice sheet, particularly the timing
and duration of the maximum and the pattern of initial recession, remains
uncertain. In addition, virtually nothing is known of the penultimate
glaciation, other than it is presumed to have been generally similar to the LGM.
These shortcomings greatly limit our ability to understand AIS evolution and the
driving mechanisms behind ice sheet fluctuations. This project will develop a
detailed record of ice extent and chronology in the western Ross Embayment for
not only the LGM, but also for the penultimate glaciation (Stage 6), from well-
dated glacial geologic data in the Royal Society Range. Chronology will come
primarily from high-precision Accelerator Mass Spectrometry (AMS) Carbon-14
(14C) and multi-collector Inductively Coupled Plasma (ICP)-Mass Spectrometry
(MS) 234Uranium/230Thorium dating of lake algae and carbonates known to be
widespread in the proposed field area. The broader impacts of this work are that
it fits well within the West Antarctic Ice Sheet initiative and complements the
ANDRILL program. In addition, the PIs are committed to and have a long record of
student education and outreach at all levels. A number of students (4-6) will be
mentored in this project. The PI regularly visits classrooms to talk about
Antarctica and communicates with students from the field and participates in
local outreach efforts to attract girls to earth science.