* 0944980
* SBIR Phase I:  Large-Scale Production of Non-Ferrous Metal Fibers by Modulation-Assisted Machining
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* James Mann, M4 Sciences LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2010
* USD 200,814.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will demonstrate
a new way to produce metal fibers in materials such as titanium and aluminum
alloys using a special machining process known as Modulation-Assisted Machining
or MAM. The most widely adopted method for producing metal fibers is a multi-
step wire drawing process, where small diameter wires are drawn from a metal
billet and subsequently cut into discrete lengths. However, this process is
limited to materials that can be drawn into wires and the capital equipment
costs are high and related infrastructure requirements complex. The MAM process
has evolved from research at Purdue University and has demonstrated the
potential to radically change the capacity and flexibility of metal fiber
production while simultaneously achieving a lower cost. By using the MAM
process, fibers can be machined directly from metal bars. The project objectives
include: 1) Produce aluminum alloy and titanium fibers using MAM; 2)
Characterize the effects of MAM parameters on fiber geometry and microstructure;
3) Measure the strength of fibers produced by MAM; and, 4) demonstrate fiber
production scale-up concepts. This is expected to enhance the application of MAM
to a viable process for production of metal fibers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact/commercial potential of this project is that MAM processes will
enable a method for production of metal fibers in virtually any metal alloy
system. MAM could offer a new, low-cost method to produce fibers that are
difficult or impossible to create using existing technology. The commercial
potential for this project lies in the design and development of special
modulation devices that adapt MAM technology for fiber-making using a CNC
machine tool rather than a complex manufacturing plant. The extension of MAM
technology into materials production will increase the market space for M4
Sciences products and increase commercial and research activity in the total
market. Increased commercial impact also lies in the development of advanced
metal fiber materials produced by MAM. These new metal fibers are expected to
lead to commercial opportunities for the company's modulation devices for the
production of metal fiber-based products and composite material systems that
improve our quality of life. MAM could transform current machining technology
from a process traditionally used to produce discrete parts with specific
geometry to a process that produces advanced materials. Equally important, the
proposed research will further the understanding of the effects of modulation on
energy efficiency of machining processes.&lt;br/&gt;