* 0944578
* Collaborative Research: Pleistocene East Antarctic Ice Sheet History as Recorded in Sediment Provenance and Chronology of High-elevation TAM Moraines
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2013
* Kathy Licht, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Isern
* 05/31/2013
* USD 213,283.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will investigate changes in the
compositional variation of glacial tills over time across two concentric
sequences of Pleistocene moraines located adjacent to the heads of East
Antarctic outlet glaciers in the Transantarctic Mountains (TAM). The chronologic
framework for this work will be generated from cosmogenic exposure ages of
boulders on prominent morainal ridges. The PIs hypothesize that variations in
till composition may indicate a change in ice flow direction or a change in the
composition of the original source area, while ages of the moraines provide a
long-term terrestrial perspective on ice sheet dynamics. Both results are vital
for modeling experiments that aim to reconstruct the East Antarctic Ice Sheet
and assess its role in the global climate system and its potential impact on
global sea level rise. The variation of till compositions through time also
allows for a more accurate interpretation of sediment cores from the Ross Sea
and the Southern Ocean. Additionally, till exposures at the head of some East
Antarctic outlet glaciers have been shown to contain subglacial material derived
from East Antarctic bedrock, providing a window through the ice to view East
Antarctica?s inaccessible bedrock. Till samples will be collected from two well-
preserved sequences of moraine crests at Mt. Howe (head of Scott Glacier) and
Mt. Achernar (between Beardmore and Nimrod Glaciers). Each size fraction in
glacial till provides potentially valuable information, and the PIs will measure
the petrography of the clast and sand fractions, quantitative X-ray diffraction
on the crushed &lt;2mm fraction, elemental abundance of the silt/clay fraction,
and U/Pb of detrital zircons in the sand fraction. Data collection will rely on
established methods previously used in this region and the PIs will also explore
new methods to assess their efficacy. On the same moraines crests sampled for
provenance studies, the PIs will sample for cosmogenic surface exposure analyses
to provide a chronologic framework at the sites for provenance changes through
time. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
involves graduate and undergraduate training in a diverse array of laboratory
methods. Students and PIs will be make presentations to community and campus
groups, as well as conduct interviews with local news outlets. The proposed work
also establishes a new, potentially long-term, collaboration between scientists
at IUPUI and LDEO and brings a new PI (Kaplan) into the field of Antarctic Earth
Sciences.