* 0944279
* US-Chile Planning Visit to Organize A Neuroendocrine Workshop; Santiago, Chile
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2009,12/31/2011
* Tao-Yiao Wu, Henry M Jackson Fdn for Advmt of Military Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 12/31/2011
* USD 13,618.00

Planning Visit to Santiago, Chile, to Organize an International
Neuroendocrinology Workshop, Santiago, Chile, November
2009&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tao-Yiao John Wu&lt;br/&gt;Henry M. Jackson Foundation
for the Advancement of Military Medicine&lt;br/&gt;OISE-
09244279&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This U.S - Chile
Planning Visit award will support five senior researchers from the U.S., under
the leadership of Dr. T. John Wu of the Uniformed Services University, on a
workshop-planning visit to Santiago, Chile, in November 2009. The goal of this
trip is to organize an international neuroendocrine workshop to be held at the
University of Chile. This face-to-face meeting will bring together the five U.S.
neuroendocrinologists with counterparts at the University of Chile led by Dr.
Hernan Lara. The planning visit will accomplish the following: (1) to establish
the scope of topics to be discussed at the workshop; (2) to invigorate
collaborations and provide new linkages between U.S. and South American
neuroendocrinologists; (3) to identify possible training opportunities for young
scientists from the United States and South America; and (4) to determine
possible funding mechanisms to support participants from both North and South
America. The meeting will be held over 4 days and include sessions to discuss
various aspects of the workshop as well as visits by the US scientists to
laboratory facilities at the University of Chile and to possible conference
venues. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While it is well established that there is a
strong group of neuroendocrinologists in South America, US interactions with
them are limited. This face-to-face planning visit is part of a long-term effort
to establish collaborative interactions between US and South American scientists
and trainees. This visit will provide a venue for discussions of potential
scientific collaborations and training opportunities in the U.S. and in South
America. It is anticipated that the meeting will result in joint submission of a
workshop proposal to NSF and to funding agencies in South America.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;