* 0944645
* Age and Composition of the East Antarctic Shield by Isotopic Analysis of Granite and Glacial Till
* GEO,OPP
* 07/15/2010,12/31/2014
* John Goodge, University of Minnesota Duluth
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Kurz
* 12/31/2014
* USD 523,759.00

Intellectual Merit: Because of extensive ice cover and sparse remote-sensing
data, the geology of the Precambrian East Antarctic Shield (EAS) remains largely
unexplored with information limited to coastal outcrops from the African, Indian
and Australian sectors. The East Antarctic lithosphere is globally important: as
one of the largest coherent Precambrian shields, including rocks as old as ~3.8
Ga, it played an important role in global crustal growth; it is a key piece in
assembly of the Rodinia and Gondwana supercontinents; it is the substrate to
Earth?s major ice cap, including numerous sub-glacial lakes, and influences its
thermal state and mechanical stability; and its geotectonic association with
formerly adjacent continental blocks in South Africa, India and Australia
suggest that it might harbor important mineral resources. This project will
increase understanding of the age and composition of the western EAS lithosphere
underlying and adjacent to the Transantarctic Mountains (TAM) using U-Pb ages,
and Hf- and O-isotope analysis of zircon in early Paleozoic granitoids and
Pleistocene glacial tills. TAM granites of the early Paleozoic Ross Orogen
represent an areally extensive continental-margin arc suite that can provide
direct information about the EAS crust from which it melted and/or through which
it passed. Large rock clasts of igneous and metamorphic lithologies entrained in
glacial tills at the head of major outlet glaciers traversing the TAM provide
eroded samples of the proximal EAS basement. Zircons in these materials will
provide data about age and inheritance (U-Pb), crustal vs. mantle origin (O
isotopes), and crustal sources and evolution (Hf isotopes). Integrated along a
significant part of the TAM, these data will help define broader crustal
provinces that can be correlated with geophysical data and used to test models
of crustal assembly.

Broader impacts: This project will provide a research opportunity for
undergraduate and graduate students. Undergraduates will be involved as Research
Assistants in sample preparation, imaging, and analytical procedures, and
conducting their own independent research. The two main elements of this project
will form the basis of MS thesis projects for two graduate students at UMD.
Through this project they will gain a good understanding of petrology, isotope
geochemistry, and analytical methods. The broader scientific impacts of this
work are that it will help develop a better understanding of the origin and
evolution of East Antarctic lithosphere underlying and adjacent to the TAM,
which will be of value to the broader earth science and glaciological community.
Furthermore, knowledge of East Antarctic geology is of continuing interest to
the general public because of strong curiosity about past supercontinents,
what?s under the ice, and the impact of global warming on ice-sheet stability.