* 0944962
* U.S.-India Planning Visit: Collaborative Science Research and Education Projects between James Madison University and Scientists and Science Educators in India, January 2010.
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Louise Temple, James Madison University
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 08/31/2012
* USD 15,535.00

0944962&lt;br/&gt;Temple &lt;br/&gt;This award supports a planning visit for US
PI Louise Temple (biologist) and Co-PI, Brad Striebig (engineer), both faculty
at James Madison University, to multiple locations in India. These visits will
develop existing relationships and explore a variety of NSF-fundable projects
in: sustainable development, plant and animal biotechnology, and science
education. Dr. Temple's work is in bacterial pathogens and science education.
Dr. Striebig is an engineer and works with environmental systems design and the
development of sustainable infrastructure systems. The PI and Co-PI will give
formal or informal presentations describing their interests in scientific
research and education, as well as those of other JMU scientists who have
committed to participation in these partnerships. The investigators will be
hosted by the University of Hyderabad, Loyola College, Chennai, and the
Jawaharlal Nehru University, Delhi. &lt;br/&gt;The goal of the visit is to
develop collaborative research and education proposals to be submitted to NSF
programs. These include a proposal for an international Research Experience for
Undergraduates (REU) to be located at one of the Indian universities and a
workshop proposal to address common goals in science education.