* 0944560
* Collaborative Research: Controls over the Spatial Distribution and Activity of Microbial Communities in Southern Victoria Land
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2014
* Stephen Cary, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Charles Amsler
* 08/31/2014
* USD 189,483.00

Advances in molecular techniques have expanded our understanding of soil
microbial communities, and raised important questions about regional and global
patterns in microbial diversity. The proposed research will investigate the
composition and activity of microbial communities across a range of geochemical
and hydrologic soil conditions, and over local to regional scales in the
Transantarctic Mountains, in order to assess controls over microbial
biogeography. The research targets two areas in the Transantarctic mountains,
the McMurdo Dry Valleys, and the Beardmore Glacier region further south, the
latter representing an underexplored and inarguably more extreme soil
environment. The research project will adopt an integrated approach, using
molecular techniques and in situ assessment of biological activity in a
quantitative biogeographical framework, with the goal of distinguishing fine
versus broad scale controls over microbial community structure. The research is
essential to determining the basic trophic status of extreme microbial food
webs, and their sensitivity to climate change. The investigators will engage
secondary and post-secondary educators through first person outreach as well as
web-based communications and exercises. Two postdoctoral scientists will be
trained in an interdisciplinary and international setting.