* 0944148
* Collaborative Research: Surface wave and body wave modeling of attenuation in the mantle transition zone
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2011,06/30/2014
* Colleen Dalton, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2014
* USD 202,993.00

Seismic images of the Earth?s interior play a central role in the geophysical
and geochemical modeling of the planet?s structure and dynamics. The majority of
these seismic models contain three-dimensional variations in wave speed.
Attenuation, or Q&#8722;1, tomography has so far progressed more slowly than
velocity tomography because wave amplitudes and spectral content, which are the
primary data in attenuation studies, require a more complex interpretation than
traveltimes and phase delays. In addition to intrinsic wave attenuation,
amplitudes are affected by focusing due to spatial gradients in wave speed, the
presence of scatterers, and the earthquake rupture process.Progress in the
research of, for example, the nature of the low-velocity zone in the upper
mantle, the role of hydrous phases in the mantle, and material flow through the
transition zone depends critically on the availablity of models of seismic
velocity and attenuation. Because wave speed is influenced by several factors
(temperature, composition, melt), robust and unique interpretations of
tomographic velocity images require accompanying images of the attenuation
structure in the mantle, ideally with comparable spatial resolution.

The main thrust of the proposed work involves the development of a new 3-D
global-scale model for wave attenuation in the upper mantle that builds upon our
previous modeling. The model will be constrained by new fundamental-mode and
higher-mode surface-wave amplitudes. Notably, the overtone data set has not been
used in attenuation studies before and will allow resolution of the transition
zone. An important component of this research is the investigation into improved
theoretical and practical treatments for focusing effects on wave amplitude,
including a simultaneous inversion for global shear-velocity and attenuation
models. A critical component of ?resolution testing? involves model
interrogation with independent data sets of body-wave amplitudes and spectra,
and with realistic 3-D synthetics. They will investigate to what extent P and SH
spectra, S and SS amplitudes, and regional waveform data can be reconciled with
our new attenuation model. They will also examine a number of critical
theoretical approximations using SPECFEM synthetics