* 0944654
* SBIR Phase I:  High-Rate Low-Power Wireless Telemetry System for Medical Applications
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Te-Lung Kung, Leanics Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2010
* USD 149,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
demonstrate the feasibility of an efficient high throughput video broadcast
system over the Medical Implant Communication Service (MICS) band for camera
pill and micro robot technologies while maintaining ultra low power consumption.
Current camera pill designs have relatively low data rate and high power
consumption. The proposed system is designed to significantly improve the
specifications over the existing systems in use. The intellectual merit of the
proposed research lies in the design of an integrated circuit for camera pill
applications which combines advanced digital broadband technologies like
orthogonal frequency division multiplexing (OFDM), low density parity check
(LDPC) code, and diversity combining with the state of the art VLSI architecture
designs. Major expected advantages of this technology include: ultra high
throughput, super low power and compact transmitter, low cost transmitter, long
distance spec, real-time transmission, accurate synchronization algorithms,
frequency bandwidth efficiency, and interference avoidance. Furthermore, if this
high throughput system is used with other low rate devices, the remaining
throughput can be turned into additional power saving
automatically.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of
this project lies in its potential of spawning new less invasive vision sensor
based diagnosis and treatments which lead to smaller scar, less risk, less pain,
less discomfort, less anesthesia need, and less recovery time for patients.
Because of the challenging specs, the project also has significant impact on
VLSI design and wireless communication technology. The low power and low price
disposable transmitter will make endoscopy affordable and give patients more
freedom. The high quality high data rate video from different advanced sensors
will give doctors more detailed information in medical treatment and diagnosis.
If this technology is successfully developed, micro-robots can become a
convenient and reliable tool for less invasive diagnosis or surgery. A device
like this can give patients more convenience and make them more willing to take
an exam.