* 0944400
* SBIR Phase I: NanoIR:  Infrared Chemical Spectroscopy at the sub-20 nm Scale
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,11/30/2010
* Craig Prater, Anasys Instruments Corp.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 11/30/2010
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will explore new science
and technology to enable infrared (IR) spectroscopy and imaging with sub-20 nm
spatial resolution. Conventional IR spectroscopy is a benchmark tool in research
and industry, providing rich chemically specific information. Due to optical
diffraction limits, the resolution of conventional IR spectroscopy is limited to
a few microns, preventing its broad application to nanoscale research and
development. This project aims to dramatically surpass the current resolution
limits using an innovative, patent-pending probe based technique to measure IR
absorption below the diffraction limit. Leveraging prior investments in
nanoscale IR spectroscopy, the team will establish the feasibility of improving
spatial resolution and sensitivity by a factor of ten over previous work (and a
factor of 250 versus commercial IR microscopy). To achieve these goals, the
project team will develop high-sensitivity nanoscale probes, ultrasensitive
detection electronics and sophisticated data analysis algorithms to extend IR
spectroscopy to the sub-20 nm length scale. The resolution and sensitivity
breakthroughs will enable new solutions to a broad range of scientifically and
commercially critical problems as outlined below.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be dramatically
improved resolution of infrared (IR) spectroscopy, which is the most widely used
analytical technique for chemical characterization and identification, and which
constitutes a $1 billion industry. Infrared absorption spectra give critical
information about molecular structure and have led to broad adoption of IR
spectroscopy in diverse fields. The increasing global emphasis on nanoscience
and nanotechnology has led to a growing need to design, characterize, and
manufacture complex materials with physical and chemical structures on the
sub-100 nm length scale. The resolution limits of conventional IR spectroscopy
have left business and research communities lacking critical characterization
capabilities for making nanoscale chemical measurements. Filling this critical
gap in the characterization toolset will substantially accelerate the rate of
technological and commercial advances in fields which depend on chemical
analysis and imaging at the nanoscale. Research has indicated that the broadest
adoption of nanoscale IR will occur when the resolution reaches the sub-20 nm
range. Availability of nanoscale IR spectroscopy will have dramatic impacts on
materials development and basic research. Critical applications include
characterization of polymer blends, multilayer thin films, photovoltaics and
solar cells, organic LEDs, pharmaceuticals and life sciences, and biofuels
research.