* 0944253
* EAGER:   Stress resistance pathways in C. elegans
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Craig Hunter, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 08/31/2012
* USD 299,983.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the nematode C. elegans,
experimentally introduced double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) mediates specific gene
silencing that spreads between cells and tissues of the animal (and can even be
transmitted to progeny). This remarkable spreading phenomenon is known as
systemic RNA interference (RNAi), and is facilitated by a channel protein called
SID-1 that transports double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) between cells. Although SID-1
homologs exist in numerous species, including all vertebrates and many
invertebrates, an endogenous role for systemic RNAi in general and SID-1 in
particular remains unknown.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this
research project is to uncover a physiological and/or developmental role for
SID-1 and systemic RNAi in C. elegans. This project will test the hypothesis
that SID-1 protects animals against environmental stress by coordinating
communication between cells via stress-related noncoding RNAs (ncRNAs). In doing
so, the research will take advantage of the wealth of existing genetic resources
(e.g. mutant collections) and techniques (e.g. RNA profiling, in situ
hybridizations, transcriptional reporters) available in C.
elegans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: This project seeks to make
novel and transformative advances that have the potential to uncover a likely
widespread means of RNA-mediated, cell-to-cell communication that can span
generations. Given the burgeoning interest and investment in both basic and
applied aspects of the RNAi pathway, the research is especially timely. The
research has the potential to provide important new insights into the functions
of endogenous dsRNA in animals, as novel messengers that transmit stress signals
throughout the organism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The planned
activities will advance the goals of the NSF in four ways, namely by: 1)
Teaching and training of undergraduate students and postdoctoral fellows; 2)
Broadening the scientific participation of underrepresented groups; 3)
Disseminating scientific and technological findings through publication; and 4)
Providing specific benefits to society, including knowledge that will advance
the development of the therapeutic application of RNAi to treat genetic and
acquired diseases.