* 0944282
* Paleoenvironmental and Paleoclimatic Analysis of the Beacon Supergroup, Beardmore Glacier Area, Central Transantarctic Mountains, Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2015
* Stephen Hasiotis, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* thomas wilch
* 06/30/2015
* USD 399,696.00

Intellectual Merit: This proposal will study the diversity, abundance, and
tiering patterns of ichnofossils in continental and marine deposits of the
Beacon Supergroup in the Beardmore Glacier Area (BGA). The PIs will focus on
continental strata that contain a variety of ichnofossils and paleosols.
Ichnofossils will be evaluated for their architectural and surficial
morphologies, and will be compared to modern and ancient traces to interpret the
tracemaker behavior and paleoenvironmental setting. Distribution of ichnofossils
within these units may indicate the effect of lateral variability of
pedogenesis, the magnitude and frequency of depositional events, and the amount
of moisture within the sediment, as well as the effects of climate change. The
paleoclimatic significance of ichnofossils will be determined by comparing the
burrow size, occurrence, tiering, and pedogenic significance of ichnofossils in
measured sections of stratigraphic units deposited during global warming and
cooling episodes. Comparisons will be made between BGA formations to
stratigraphically equivalent rocks deposited at low paleolatitudes with
previously determined paleoclimatic settings. The objectives of this project are
to address two major questions: what differences existed in ichnodiversity,
abundance, and tiering in marine and continental deposits between high- and low-
paleolatitudes, and was there a dearth of habitat usage in continental deposits
during the late Paleozoic and Mesozoic, particularly in fluvial and lacustrine
environments compared to the habitat usage in the marine realm at that time?

Broader impacts: This study will enhance the ability to interpret
paleoenvironments to the subenvironmental scale, understand the evolution of
soil biota and ecosystems at high paleolatitudes, determine the role of
organisms in soil formation at high paleolatitudes, explore the effects of
climate change on the body size and diversity of organisms in the soil
communities, and develop new tools to interpret paleoclimate in high latitudes.
There is a strong education component associated with this proposal.