* 0944518
* SBIR Phase I:  New Low-Cost Approaches to Energy-Efficient Enriched Oxygen From Air Using Unique High-Permeability Membranes
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Earl Wagener, TETRAMER TECHNOLOGIES, L.L.C.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2010
* USD 186,294.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)Phase I project is focused on
commercializing a new gas separation product that will use ambient temperature
air at low pressures to enrich it's oxygen content from 20% to 30%. By using a
new plastic that separates the components of air, this process will be 50%
cheaper and more efficient than conventional cryogenic methods. The use of
oxygen-enriched air will save natural gas fuel in the US by as much as 70%
depending upon burner temperatures and will allow existing air-fueled furnaces
to be converted economically to oxygen-enriched furnaces. The impact of
significantly improving natural gas combustion efficiency throughout U.S.
electric power and manufacturing industries would serve to increase the ability
of US industry to lower imports of oil by using plentiful North American natural
gas. In addition, due to the small size of these membrane systems they could
also be applied to home heating systems using natural gas. The potential U.S.
utility, glass, and metal heating market for oxygen-enriched air is estimated at
over $8 billion. Our research project will focus on improving the filtration
ability of the plastic membrane by synthesizing patentable new molecular
architectures, building and testing prototype separation units at commercial
locations.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project comes from the fact that natural gas for combustion processes currently
provides US society with more than one-fifth of all primary energy used in the
United States. Oxygen enriched air could save up to 70% of this natural gas used
for a wide range of industrial combustion while improving the potential for
sequestration of CO2. Successful commercialization of this technology will
significantly improve US energy efficiency since it could also be applied to
home heating efficiency as well as industrial coal and oil combustion.
Scientific and technical knowledge enhancement will be enhanced in the active
field of membrane separations. Knowledge and understanding of gas transport
through membranes, polymer structure/gas solubilities, and performance of
polymer materials under industrial operational conditions will be advanced. New
designs for gas processing also will be valuable to system engineers.