* 0944845
* SBIR Phase I:  Micro-mark data matrix
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* Ross Teggatz, Triune Systems
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl F. Albus
* 06/30/2010
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to provide a
novel technique for the micro-mark data matrix and portable machine reading of
micro-codes on very small devices, as current marking methods are not applicable
for such devices such as those used in craniomaxiofacial surgery. The unique
marking code will enable encoding to provide information for inventory control,
tracking, traceability and accountability. The technology will provide more than
an order of magnitude improvement in symbol code size and data capacity.
Existing techniques are impractical due to the fact that they require a larger
footprint and do not provide the required data capacity of 100 characters or
more that is requested by potential customers for inventory, lot trace code and
so forth. The Phase I project will demonstrate feasibility to create a portable
field reader which is capable of reading cell sizes from a 102um to 6um, and to
extend micro-marking capabilities to 6um cell sizes. The project will
investigate micro-marking of two dimensional code in the groove of a screw head
and similar small dimensioned objects. Completion will result in an ability to
mark and inspect during manufacturing process and be readable in the field.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is in the medical
industry for the marking of bone screws and other implantable components and
subcomponents that have extremely high quality standards, long lifecycles and
must be biocompatible. Demand for implantable medical devices is projected to
grow at a 9.3% compound annual growth rate (CAGR), reaching $43.6 billion in
2011. The broader impact is potentially as transformational as was the migration
from numerical coding (price tags) to bar codes (UPC) in the retail business.
Many industries including defense, pharmaceutical, legal, and forensic
businesses have a demand for a micro-marking inventory and control systems.
Potential commercial markets include patent marking, controlled (substances)
products, ballistics and anything that requires strict quality and/or inventory
control or the need for traceability. Some of the commercial, societal and
environments benefits that result from encoded micro marks in applications
previously not attainable include: reduced waste by better inventory control;
fraud/counterfeit control; reduced errors as result of automated and accurate
identification;accountability through traceability increased efficiency from
automation;product quality improvements from increased trace code
history;statistics from data collection; and improved future product development
through rapid manufacturing feedback.