* 0944201
* Effect of Ocean Acidification on Early Life History Stages of the Antarctic Sea Urchins Sterechinus Neumayeri
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2014
* Gretchen Hofmann, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Charles Amsler
* 07/31/2014
* USD 613,812.00

Abstract

The research examine the effects of ocean acidification on embryos and larvae of
a contemporary calcifier in the coastal waters of Antarctica, the sea urchin
Sterechinus neumayeri. The effect of future ocean acidification is projected to
be particularly threatening to calcifying marine organisms in coldwater, high
latitude seas, making tolerance data on these organisms a critical research need
in Antarctic marine ecosystems. Due to a high magnesium (Mg) content of their
calcitic hard parts, echinoderms are especially vulnerable to dissolution stress
from ocean acidification because they currently inhabit seawater that is barely
at the saturation level to support biogenic calcification. Thus, cold-water,
high latitude species with a high Mg-content in their hard parts are considered
to be the 'first responders' to chemical changes in the surface oceans. Studies
in this proposal will use several metrics to examine the physiological
plasticity of contemporary urchin embryos and larvae to CO2-acidified seawater,
to mimic the scenarios defined by IPCC models and by analyses of future
acidification predicted for the Southern Ocean. The research also will
investigats the biological consequences of synergistic interactions of two
converging climate change-related stressors - CO2- driven ocean acidification
and ocean warming. Specifically the research will (1) assess the effect of
CO2-acidified seawater on the development of early embryos and larvae, (2) using
morphometrics, examine changes in the larval endoskeleton in response to
development under the high-CO2 conditions of ocean acidification, (3) using a
DNA microarray, profile changes in gene expression for genes involved in
biomineralization and other important physiological processes, and (4) measure
costs and physiological consequences of development under conditions of ocean
acidification. The proposal will support the training of undergraduates,
graduate students and a postdoctoral fellow. The PI also will collaborate with
the UC Santa Barbara Gevirtz Graduate School of Education to link the biological
effects of ocean acidification to the chemical changes expected for the Southern
Ocean using the 'Science on a Sphere' technology. This display will be housed in
an education and public outreach center, the Outreach Center for Teaching Ocean
Science (OCTOS), a new state-of-the-art facility under construction at UC Santa
Barbara.