* 0944101
* Improving the Understanding and Modeling of Land Processes in the Community Climate System Model (CCSM4.0)
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2016
* Xubin Zeng, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Anjuli Bamzai
* 03/31/2016
* USD 911,324.00

Land processes play a key role in the earth system, and their treatment is
crucial for climate system modeling. The overall goal of this project is to
improve the understanding and modeling of land processes in the new version of
the Community Climate System Model (CCSM4.0) whose land component is the
Community Land Model (CLM4.0). The investigators build on their significant
progress under prior NSF support in addressing various interdisciplinary issues
related to the land-atmosphere-ocean interface processes, as evidenced by the
implementation in CLM4.0 of their improved parameterizations related to five
different aspects of land processes, the implementation in the European Centre
for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF) of their ocean skin temperature
scheme, and the testing and implementation of their new formulations of land
surface roughness lengths for momentum and heat in the National Centers for
Environmental Prediction (NCEP) regional and global forecasting
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address four questions through
extensive in situ and satellite data analysis, process studies, and global
modeling: a) How realistic are the land surface energy/water/carbon cycles and
dynamic vegetation from CCSM4.0? b) How does CNDV (carbon and nitrogen cycling
with dynamic vegetation) affect the energy/water/carbon cycles in CLM4.0 and how
can its treatment be further improved? c) How does groundwater affect other land
processes in CLM4.0 and how can its treatment be further improved? and d) How to
use the insights gained from these efforts to better understand the
uncertainties in the future climate projections of land processes from
CCSM4.0?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the proposed work include:
a) improving the understanding of energy/water/carbon cycles, improving the
treatment of two important processes (i.e., groundwater and dynamic vegetation
with carbon and nitrogen cycling), training students, and incorporating research
results in teaching; b) upgrading and maintaining a computer cluster for
interdisciplinary research; and c) broadly disseminating results through peer-
reviewed publications, presentations at conferences and workshops, web page, and
lectures to the general public.