* 0944357
* Probing the Earth's Outer Core for a Stratified Layer
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/2009,11/30/2011
* Christine Houser, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Raffaella Montelli
* 11/30/2011
* USD 113,799.00

Core-mantle boundary science spans the deep Earth disciplines of seismology,
dynamics, geochemistry, geomagnetism, and mineral physics. An outstanding
question in deep Earth science is whether or not the iron core and silicate
mantle chemically react with each other. These chemical reactions at the core-
mantle boundary (CMB) would result in fine-scale outermost core and lowermost
mantle layering that could be detected using seismic waves. Recent geochemical,
dynamical, and geomagnetism considerations have supported core-side layering,
but such a layer has not been unambiguously imaged. Better resolving outermost
core structure has the potential of (a) spawning research activities in a number
of fields that depend on accurate knowledge of the core, and (b) helping
geoscientists better resolve issues relating to the current chemical state of
the planet.

Seismic studies of the outermost core rely on SmKS waves: mantle S-waves that
convert to P-waves upon entering the core, reflect m-1 times from the underside
of the CMB, then convert back to an S-wave for the final mantle leg. SmKS phases
are the only seismic waves that have turning depths in outermost core. Past work
indicates reduced P velocities at the top of the outer core, however, SmKS
phases can be significantly contaminated by lower mantle heterogeneities. Also,
a stably stratified outer core layer must be less dense, and hence predicts that
the velocity of such a layer will be elevated, not decreased. Thus, the
investigators seek to better image the outermost core, while accounting for
anomalous mantle structure. Our goal is to seismically study the fine scale
structure of Earth?s outermost core in unprecedented detail, to detect and
characterize (if present) any outer core layering (or establish its absence). We
first seek to better characterize the heterogeneous lowermost mantle that
affects SmKS. Building on an existing whole mantle tomographic model, we seek to
refine our understanding of the lowermost mantle by including a vastly increased
data set of SmKS arrivals from (a) new SmKS data from recent regional and global
seismic deployments obtained using a clustering algorithm optimized for
processing large data volumes, and (b) existing data sets of two other
seismologists. We will simultaneously invert for 3D mantle structure and 1D
outer core velocity to assess the need for an updated 1D reference model while
accounting for deep mantle heterogeneity. We will also forward model aspects of
the broadband SmKS wavefield that depend strongly on the P-wave velocity and
density in the outermost 10?s of km of the core. These experiments will include
modeling S4KS-S3KS and S3KS-S2KS times, and the ?birth? of the S2KS and S3KS
waves. These waveform-modeling experiments will include 1- and 2-D synthetic
seismogram predictions, array analyses, and deconvolution algorithms to sharpen
arrivals ? each of which will permit us to map any fine scale structure just
beneath the CMB. This project will reveal properties of core-mantle reactions
which are fundamental to understanding the evolution of the Earth. A unique
feature of this proposal is combining the tools of tomography with those of
detailed waveform modeling which offers cross-training for most of the proposal
participants.