* 0944061
* Increasing the Use of Community-based Mapping in the Russian Arctic and Mountainous Regions
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2010
* David Gordon, Pacific Environment and Resources Center
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 08/31/2010
* USD 199,862.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is an experimental applied
science project, PI David Gordon, Pacific Environment, to collaborate with high
altitude and high latitude indigenous communities in Siberia, Russia to 1)
facilitate their interest in mapping their ecological and cultural environments;
2) to provide scientific expertise and methodology to these groups; 3) to assist
them in engaging Russian policy makers and managers in the decision making
process over lands and resources on indigenous homelands; 4) to transfer
knowledge and methods between Siberian indigenous peoples; and 5) to evaluate
the effectiveness of Pacific Environment's program to engage Siberian indigenous
groups in civil governance in Russia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pacific Environment
(PE) is one of over 800-1,000 Environmental Non-
Governmental&lt;br/&gt;Organizations (NGOs) operating in Russia since the fall
of the Soviet Union (New&lt;br/&gt;Regional Environmental Center statistics).
PE's Russia Program has been in operation since the early 1990's and its focus
is on "strengthening the capacity of on-the-ground community-based NGOs and
local communities to protect the natural world." PE provides scientific
expertise, training, operational support, and organization to primarily
indigenous led organizations and communities in Siberia in order to facilitate
their knowledge, participation in, and support for civil society in Russia. PE's
philosophy is to strengthen Russian voices in civil society in order to protect
the environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PE has partnered in this project with the
Magadan Center for the Environment, the Russian Association of Indigenous
Peoples of the North (RAIPON), Silva Forest Foundation British Columbia, Lach
Ethno-ecological Information Center Kamchatka, Foundation for Sustainable
Development of Altai, and others to bring the Southern Siberian communities
together with the Northern Siberian communities to share their lessons, data,
and methods. This project is experimental not so much in the mapping and GIS
technology shared but in PE's response to an expressed need from the community;
its support of not only environmental mapping but cultural mapping - the
recognition that the natural world has metaphysical referents that need to be
respected; the transfer of methods, techniques, and knowledge between southern
and northern Siberian peoples; and the evaluation of the research and its
application to the policy debates over resources. The Altai communities and
later the Northern communities, approached PE and asked that they assist them
with GIS, geographic, and anthropological science to help them address a growing
concern and need they have over their changing relationships to their landscape
because of increasing development and rapid environmental
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is high risk/high return, the research
team is exploring new territory with the mapping of cultural and metaphysical
space, including place name data for highly endangered languages; they are
facilitating the voices of indigenous peoples in civil society; and perhaps most
importantly they want to reflexively self-examine their role and efficacy, as
one of the 600 plus environmental NGOs in Russia jockeying for space. The
project combines GIS, ethnography, anthropology, human geography, political
science, traditional knowledge, and applied research to increase understanding
of the cultural and ecological environments in Siberia and how this
understanding can facilitate the indigenous voice in policy and
management&lt;br/&gt;debates. It will transfer of knowledge south to north by
indigenous communities, for indigenous communities, which increases the
participation of underrepresented groups in science and allows for minority
peoples to co-opt science to inform their needs. In addition, the research and
the proposed workshop will train local people in the application of science to
address the identified community need to recognize, map, and register their
cultural sites with governmental authorities in order to give them a voice in
the larger discussion taking place about indigenous lands and resource
development. The knowledge gained through this project will be applicable to
communities mapping and understanding the environmental and cultural changes
they are undergoing due to climate change.