* 0944455
* SBIR Phase I:  Bistable Electrofluidic Device for High-Brightness Electronic Paper
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Kenneth Dean, Gamma Dynamics LLC
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 12/31/2010
* USD 199,436.00



This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will demonstrate
feasibility of a new electronic paper technology that promises substantially
improved black and white contrast and bright, viable color operation. The
technology, an electrofluidic pixel that uses voltage to move a colored pigment
in a fluid, is capable of achieving twice the reflectivity of existing e-paper
solutions. This improvement in reflectivity enables the color saturation found
in printed media. However, new electrofluidic pixel designs are required to meet
the low power requirements of e-paper applications. These applications require
bistable switching states with bistable grayscale levels. The Phase I research
project will design, fabricate, and demonstrate a 3D pixel structure that
imparts zero Young-Laplace pressure in the unpowered state, thereby creating a
bistable state. The Phase I design will produce a surface reflectivity exceeding
50%, while using fabrication steps that are compatible with flexible display
manufacture. This project will also provide a road map for optimizing the
optical films to achieve further reflectivity improvements. The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project is to drive improvements to
electronic paper and electronic book technology. The improved reflectivity
demonstrated in this project has the potential to produce saturated colors,
thereby overcoming performance barrier that has blocked color electronic books
from entering the market. More importantly, widespread adoption of electronic
paper and electronic books provides significant benefits to the environment by
saving millions of trees and reducing the landfill waste stream. The market
opportunity could exceed $10B, and will support numerous new U.S. jobs under a
business model providing a sustainable economic benefit to the U.S.A. Bistable
electrofluidic technology is also well-suited for both small and large
electronic signage. In addition to commercial potential, this Phase I SBIR will
develop and disseminate a new tool for realizing 3D microfluidic devices, and
create a new technology that will increase scientific interest and investment in
the growing fields of electrowetting/electrofluidics and flexible displays.

