* 0944168
* The Variability and Predictability of the Amundsen / Bellingshausen Seas Low and its Connection to the Regional Antarctic Climate
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Ryan Fogt, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Milne
* 09/30/2013
* USD 234,231.00

Abstract

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The West Antarctic Peninsula (WAP) is the one region of the
Antarctic continent that is unequivocally warming, and as such is associated
with the mobilization and loss of major ice shelves, as has been recently
observed for the Larsen B (2002) and Wilkins Ice Shelf (2008). The
Amundsen/Bellingshausen Seas Low (ABSL) is a sub-synoptic, often persistent low-
pressure weather system that leads to sustained west-northwesterly airflows
across the WAP region. Long term changes in the strength and position of the
ABSL, its teleconnection with large scale climate modes such as the Southern
Annular Mode (SAM) and the El-Nino Southern Oscillation (ENSO), and its
interaction with the polar vortex are suspected to be important factors in
attribution of Antarctic climate change currently being dramatically observed in
the WAP. Because of the paucity of reliable observations in this extremely
remote area of the continent, much remains that is uncertain

Existing satellite-era observational data (since 1979), along with reanalysis
sets, will be examined to shed better definition of the variability in position
and intensity of the ABSL as a weather feature. Several modeled data sets, from
a range of mesoscale and climatological models (e.g. Polar MM5, AMIP, CCM CAM3,
HadAM3, ECHAM4.5) will also be examined at the regional scales appropriate to
the ABSL to better describe the large scale influences of climate patterns such
as ENSO and SAM. Finally an assessment of the effects variability in the ABSL
may have on the regional West Antarctic climate will be made.