* 0944343
* Noble Gases in the WAIS Divide Ice Core as Indicators of Local and Mean-ocean Temperature
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2014
* Jeffrey Severinghaus, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Julie Palais
* 06/30/2014
* USD 462,461.00

Severinghaus/0944343

This award supports a project to develop both a record of past local temperature
change at the WAIS Divide site, and past mean ocean temperature using solubility
effects on atmospheric krypton and xenon. The two sets of products share some of
the same measurements, because the local temperature is necessary to make
corrections to krypton and xenon, and thus synergistically support each other.
Further scientific synergy is obtained by the fact that the mean ocean
temperature is constrained to vary rather slowly, on a 1000-yr timescale, due to
the mixing time of the deep ocean. Thus rapid changes are not expected, and can
be used to flag methodological problems if they appear in the krypton and xenon
records. The mean ocean temperature record produced will have a temporal
resolution of 500 years, and will cover the entire 3400 m length of the core.
This record will be used to test hypotheses regarding the cause of atmospheric
carbon dioxide (CO2) variations, including the notion that deep ocean
stratification via a cold salty stagnant layer caused atmospheric CO2 drawdown
during the last glacial period. The local surface temperature record that
results will synergistically combine with independent borehole thermometry and
water isotope records to produce a uniquely precise and accurate temperature
history for Antarctica, on a par with the Greenland temperature histories. This
history will be used to test hypotheses that the ?bipolar seesaw? is forced from
the North Atlantic Ocean, which makes a specific prediction that the timing of
Antarctic cooling should slightly lag abrupt Greenland warming. The WAIS Divide
ice core is expected to be the premier atmospheric gas record of the past
100,000 years for the foreseeable future, and as such, making this set of high
precision noble gas measurements adds value to the other gas records because
they all share a common timescale and affect each other in terms of physical
processes such as gravitational fractionation. Broader impact of the proposed
work: The clarification of timing of atmospheric CO2 and Antarctic surface
temperature, along with deep ocean temperature, will aid in efforts to
understand the feedbacks among CO2, temperature, and ocean circulation. These
feedbacks bear on the future response of the Earth System to anthropogenic
forcing. A deeper understanding of the mechanism of deglaciation, and the role
of atmospheric CO2, will go a long way towards clarifying a topic that has
become quite confused in the public mind in the public debate over climate
change. Elucidating the role of the bipolar seesaw in ending glaciations and
triggering CO2 increases may also provide an important warning that this
represents a potential positive feedback, not currently considered by IPCC.
Education of one graduate student, and training of one technician, will add to
the nation?s human resource base. Outreach activities will be enhanced and will
to continue to entrain young people in discovery, and excitement will enhance
the training of the next generation of scientists and educators.

