* 0944711
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Using plate circuits to constrain motion between East and West Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2014
* Joann Stock, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Kurz
* 03/31/2014
* USD 190,787.00

This proposal will address the motion between East and West Antarctica. The
estimates of motion in the Late Cretaceous and Cenozoic come from summing the
plate circuit linking East Antarctica to Australia to the Lord Howe Rise to the
Pacific plate to West Antarctica. However, major uncertainties remain in the
history of the plate motions in this region, leading to widely different
implications for the global plate circuit, without a clear indication of which
model is correct. The PIs propose to analyze this motion in two parts: motion
since 42 Ma and motion before 42 Ma. For the younger time interval, the PIs will
improve accuracy of rotations by taking advantage of an unusual plate geometry
that enables them to solve a five-boundary, four-plate configuration. For the
older time interval, the only way to calculate motion between East and West
Antarctica is via the long Aus-Pac plate circuit. The difficulty in this time
interval is that there are three sets of rotations with distinctly different
results for the Aus-East Ant boundary. The disagreement over the fundamental
motion between Aus and Ant before 50 Ma leads to large differences in the
predicted motion in the Western Ross Sea and near Ellsworth Land. The PIs
propose to re-examine the key elements in the Aus-Pac plate circuit with the
objective of reducing uncertainties, using quantitative methods where possible,
and resolving some of the critical issues involving alternative interpretations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: &lt;br/&gt;The scientific impacts of this
work are an improved understanding of Antarctic plate tectonic history to
incorporate into global models. This project will support one graduate student
at each institution. The results of the project will be made available in the
global plate motion and plate reconstruction databases. In addition, results
will be used for outreach work to middle school groups. Cande has made an
animated movie of the plate motions around the Aus-Pac plate circuit that he
uses as part of his undergraduate and graduate teaching. He plans to update and
expand this animation using the results of this project.