* 0944288
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Eathquake rupture dynamics on non-planar faults with off-fault damage
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2012
* Jean-Paul Ampuero, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 12/31/2012
* USD 221,687.00

Earthquakes generate dynamic stress concentrations near their rupture front and
near geometrical irregularities that can exceed the strength of the surrounding
material and produce inelastic brittle deformation in the bulk. Co-seismic off-
fault failure induces both irreversible deformation (plasticity) and reduction
of elastic moduli (damage) with potentially distinct signatures on the radiated
wavefield and fault zone structure. Dynamic damage can amplify near-fault
motions and produce bimaterial interfaces that affect the subsequent behavior of
rupture. These feedback mechanisms between off-fault damage and dynamic rupture
are not accounted for in models that represent off-fault dissipation by plastic
yielding with unchanged elastic moduli. Moreover, natural faults contain
geometrical features (roughness) over a broad range of length scales.
&lt;br/&gt;The multiscale non-planar geometry of faults can enhance the
complexity of dynamic rupture and high frequency wave radiation. Fault roughness
also induces stress concentrations that can contribute to the generation of
dynamic off-fault damage and affect the overall earthquake energy balance. The
overarching goal of this project is to provide, through theoretical and
computational modeling, quantitative predictions of the impact of off-fault
brittle damage and fault roughness (and their&lt;br/&gt;feedback) on observable
properties of earthquake rupture, seismic wave radiation and short-term
evolution of fault zone structure. The research addresses directly the following
fundamental questions about earthquake physics and fault dynamics: What are the
intensity and spatial extent of the coseismic reduction of wave velocities
around the earthquake source? &lt;br/&gt;How do off-fault inelasticity and fault
roughness contribute to the apparent scaling of earthquake fracture energy? What
are the limits imposed by damage on maximum slip rate and peak ground velocity?
Can the across-fault asymmetry of dynamic damage induce significant bimaterial
effects on rupture? Can dynamic brittle damage produce stronger wave radiation
and generate observable non-double-couple seismic radiation? &lt;br/&gt;How does
fault roughness affect the complexity of earthquake rupture, the distribution of
damage and the properties of high frequency radiation? How is the macroscopic
response of a fault related to the coupled mesoscopic properties of damage and
roughness?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current studies of earthquake dynamics by
several groups are pushing the frontier beyond the classical model of frictional
sliding on a planar fault in elastic media to understand the role of a more
realistic and complete set of ingredients. The diversity and complexity of the
physical processes involved calls for a step-by-step approach in which a few
candidate ingredients are tested at a time. The proposed studies aim to
investigate the combined effects on dynamic ruptures and seismic radiation of
two fundamental ingredients: non-planar fault geometry (fault roughness on a
broad range of scales) and off-fault material damage (reduction of elastic
moduli). Other related studies consider at present only large scale, kilometric
features of fault geometry, and represent off-fault inelasticity by an ideal
plastic rheology. The current project will consider fault geometry over a broad
range of scales, from meters to kilometers, and will include co-seismic
reduction of elastic moduli in the off-fault yielding process. The results can
have transformative impact on studies of properties of dynamic ruptures, limits
to the maximum expected ground motion, and inversions of observed seismic data
for earthquake source properties. The research may provide new target signals
for constraining earthquakes processes and dynamic evolution of fault zone
structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An improved understanding of properties of
dynamic ruptures, high frequency seismic radiation and physical limits to ground
motion will contribute to emerging physics-based approaches for earthquake
engineering and mitigation of seismic hazard. The incorporation of material
damage in the source process can have significant impact on many geophysical
studies that are based on derived earthquake source parameters (e.g., fault slip
and source mechanisms). The results will help to scale fault properties and
processes from the laboratory to natural fault zones. Although our focus is on
earthquake dynamics, the studies can also have impact on the solid mechanics and
material science communities.&lt;br/&gt;