* 0944735
* SBIR Phase I:  Targeted Information Products Built from a Curated Knowledge Base
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,09/30/2010
* James Garrels, Garbrook Knowledge Resources, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 09/30/2010
* USD 149,983.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project addresses the
problem of integrating advanced computational and curation techniques. Curated
knowledge resources are important in fields like genomics, but have not yet made
a significant impact in other fields like renewable energy. The purpose of a
curated knowledge product is to provide comprehensive, non-redundant, concise,
and unbiased information in a field where information is otherwise scattered and
hard for users to gather objectively. Garbrook has built an encyclopedic
knowledge base, the Advanced Biofuels Resource, to organize scientific,
commercial, and policy-related information for the Biofuels community. This
proposal will develop automated methods to produce multiple targeted information
products from such a resource.

For many users of technical, commercial, and policy information, the information
landscape is cluttered and confusing. The Internet now contains a wide variety
of newsletters, trade association sites, blogs, and other media reports, in
addition to scholarly publications, consulting reports, white papers from policy
organizations, and government sites. The solution to this problem is not more
sites, but a new standard for curated knowledge resources to reduce the clutter.
Garbrook proposes to build technology to automatically segment curated matter to
establish a comprehensive resource into targeted knowledge products suitable for
various sectors of the community. Combining its computational technology and its
ability to train agent curators, Garbrook is positioned to build additional
knowledge products in the future for topics related to energy and the
environment.