* 0944957
* SBIR Phase I:  Carbon Neutral Renewable Liquid Hydrocarbon Fuel Production System
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* Trent Molter, Sustainable Innovations, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Walters
* 06/30/2010
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project seeks to improve the
conversion efficiency of an electrochemical process that produces liquid organic
fuels from carbon dioxide using a Polymer Electrolyte Membrane (PEM) cell. The
work leverages extensive university research wherein fundamental studies have
demonstrated the conversion of CO2 to various organic products, but at low
Faradaic efficiencies caused by poor mass transport at the cathode. Our research
will target increasing the CO2 pressure, and hence its availability to support
the cathode reaction, to improve these efficiencies, as well as modifying
cathode materials and structures to better support the electrochemical reaction.
Using a novel, high pressure PEM cell, electro-reduction studies will be
conducted at pressures greater than 800 psi with a goal of achieving a Faradaic
efficiency of >90% to hydrocarbons such as methanol at economically viable
current densities (>500 mA/cm2). This will be achieved through careful
experimentation using a high-pressure laboratory system to facilitate operation
of this PEM cell. Analytical chemistry protocols will be developed and
implemented to identify and quantify the mix of reaction products. From these
data we will calculate the efficiency at which current, passed through the cell,
is converted to desirable liquid organic products.

The broader/commercial impact of this project is its outcome, if success, will
address the concern about the increasing level of carbon dioxide. Many believe
that there is a connection between greenhouse gas emissions and global warming,
driving societal interest in developing carbon-neutral fuel solutions. The
electrochemical CO2 reduction system being investigated in this program projects
to cost-competitively produce methanol from CO2 and electricity in a single
electrochemical reactor. The methanol can be used either as a fuel with a
worldwide market of >5 M tonne/yr, or as a commodity chemical, with a worldwide
market of ~50 M tonne/yr. This work will develop a better understanding of the
science of CO2 electro-reduction reaction, and effect a translation of this
technology from laboratory single electrode studies to a high-pressure cell
architecture that can provide the basis for a commercial product. This system
offers the potential to produce methanol fuel from clean, renewable electricity,
provides a means of transforming domestic coal to liquid fuels, offers a pathway
for the capture and reuse of CO2 released from industrial processes, and can be
used for closed environment life support.