* 0944884
* SBIR Phase I: Development of Low Cost Enzymatic Biodiesel Production from Wastewater
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* Theresa O'Keefe, Waltham Technologies Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2010
* USD 149,944.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims to create an
automated low-cost, low-energy system to produce biodiesel from wastewater.
Water cleaning is currently an energy intensive process that places high
monetary and environmental demands on many industries. This proposed scientific
development will create a revolutionary process that both cleans water and
produces bioenergy in a single, internally driven system. Due to the safety and
ease of operation, it will be possible to use this process anywhere to rapidly
eliminate dangerous contaminants while creating clean energy. The process to be
developed will use cyanobacteria's (blue-green algae) vitamin B12 production to
drive a simplified enzymatic biodiesel production system using wastewater.
Combined in an automated system, wastewater will be seamlessly converted into
clean water and biodiesel allowing heavy water users, including beverage, food,
and biofuel industries, to become clean water and clean energy producers.
Wastewater cleaning will become an energy efficient, sustainable activity that
creates financial value for the end-user.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be to reduce the
cost of energy used to clean and supply water. Large quantities of energy are
used to clean and supply water. California uses 19% of its electricity, 30% of
its natural gas and 88 billion gallons of diesel fuel to supply clean water and
manage wastewater. Many industries, especially food preparation, textile, and
biofuel, are heavily dependent on clean water. During their processes, they
create large quantities of contaminated water that must be cleaned at great cost
before it can be returned to the environment. For example, a single moderate-
sized brewer will produce over 80 million gallons of wastewater each year and
wineries produce over 9 gallons of wastewater for every gallon of wine. As the
demand for clean water increases, energy demands also will increase. The
proposed technology will lower the cost to clean wastewater while creating clean
fuel.