* 0944376
* SBIR Phase I:  4-Dimensional Optical Tissue Imaging by Variable Digital Illumination
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Jose Melendez, Spectral MD Inc
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 12/31/2010
* USD 200,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will lead to
methodologies and systems that extract deep tissue physiological images
utilizing novel optical illumination and capture technology. The problem
addressed is the challenge of effective and timely analysis of deep tissue
physiological processes and their corresponding impact upon human health, wound
formation and healing. The opportunity is to provide an affordable and
accessible means of identifying critical tissue characteristics in a
quantitative fashion thus leading to better clinical guidance and more informed
care decisions. The research will identify a set of digital illumination
conditions, define model-based transfer functions, and then combine these to
construct depth resolved physiological image maps. Illumination patterns will be
modeled and evaluated representing a variety of combinations of pattern density,
symmetry, geometry and coverage cycles. The resulting image maps and use cases
will be compared with established clinical metrics for validation. The project
shall lead to a definitive means for extracting depth resolved physiological
images.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project is to establish affordable and accessible point of use diagnostic tools
utilizing a novel non-contact, optical illumination and imaging modality to gain
insights into otherwise non-accessible physiological processes. The innovation
will enhance the scientific and technological understanding of the inter-
relationships between underlying physiology, hemodynamics, diffuse tissue
optics, signal processing, clinical understanding and care. Products to be
enabled by variable tissue depth physiological imaging include tools for the
effective diagnosis and treatment of the millions of Americans that are impacted
annually by debilitating skin conditions caused by cancers, burns, pressure
sores or skin transfers. At the same time care providers will realize reduced
labor costs and liabilities through more effective identification of wounds. The
project's technology advances in real-time, non-invasive optical imaging systems
will provide particular benefits to elderly and economically disadvantaged
patients who would otherwise suffer from reduced access to adequate diagnosis.
Resulting products shall provide greater accessibility to all segments of
society to better clinical information that can be used to prevent debilitating
wounds and enable more effective wound healing.