* 0944039
* NSF Workshop High Performance Computing Center Sustainability
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2009,05/31/2011
* Stanley Ahalt, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 05/31/2011
* USD 49,613.00

High Performance Computing Center Sustainability &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The vast
majority of researchers in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
(STEM) disciplines continue to rely on departmental, campus, or regional/state
research computing resources. Researchers use "local" computing resources (1) to
fulfill their science and engineering computational requirements, and/or (2) to
prepare their codes for eventual migration to national facilities, and/or (3) to
educate critically needed students that are required by the knowledge economy.
Some universities consider research computing a strategic investment and attempt
to provide sustained support for significant research computing resources,
including sizeable parallel clusters. These are typically housed in formally
recognized centers. More commonly universities view research computing as a
tactical need, and only provide intermittent funding for research computing. All
of these research computing centers are challenged to understand how best to
organize, manage, fund, and utilize their hardware and staff. The objective of
this workshop is to provide a forum for an open discussion among center
directors, campus Chief Information Officers and Research Officers on the topic
of the sustainability of research computing centers. The discussion will yield a
shared understanding of organizational models, funding models, management models
and training models that result in sustainable research computing centers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;Research computing centers
play a critical role in educating the next generation of scientists and
engineers ? the very cadre that will need to extensively utilize high
performance research computing resources to be globally competitive
intellectuals. This workshop will directly impact the intellectual capabilities
of our higher education institutions by initiating a sustained dialog into the
increasingly critical requirement for sustained investments and pervasive use of
advanced research computing training. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will prepare higher education institutions located in
economically disadvantaged areas of the country with models for successful
research computing centers that, if created and sustained, can markedly impact
local economies. Additionally, by developing and sharing institutionally-siloed
knowledge across diverse centers, this workshop will facilitate the
establishment and implementation of similar centers and will strengthen and
enrich broader learning communities.