* 0944159
* SBIR Phase I:  Seamlessly Integrated Methodology for Quick and Accurate Diagnosis of Digestive Diseases from Endoscopic Video
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* Jean Xie, Altrum Technologies, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 06/30/2010
* USD 149,989.00

This Small Business Innovative Research Phase I project is to develop a novel
multidimensional integrated software system and technology called "GISentinel"
for quick detection and reliable diagnosis of abnormalities from capsule
endoscopic video images. Using the proposed algorithm, GISentinel is able to
interactively and automatically detecting ulcers, bleeding and other
abnormalities from the video capsules images and allowing GI doctors to better
diagnose the abnormality. The proposed hybrid approach will provide GT doctors a
better tool to perceive anatomical landmarks and the color, shape and size of
lesions, polyps and other abnormalities, and to more accurately diagnose the
severity of the disease. If successful, the automatic detection algorithm will
significantly reduce assessment time in capsule endoscopy (CE).

The National Digestive Diseases Information Clearinghouse (NDDIC) estimates that
between 60 and 70 million people in the US are affected by digestive diseases
each year. The market for Capsule endoscopy is a rapidly-growing. If successful,
the GISentinel software system developed under this SBIR project will be a
powerful software tool that utilizes multi-dimensional information to rapidly
and accurately diagnose abnormalities from capsule endoscopic images. The
commercialization potential of the proposed system and technology is
significant.