* 0944565
* EAGER/Collaborative Research: Nanocomposite Copper Tooling for Faster Cycle and Improved Precision in Plastic Molding - Proof of Concept
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2011
* Palaniappa Molian, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 06/30/2011
* USD 32,407.00

The research objective of this EArly-concept Grants for Exploratory Research
(EAGER) collaborative research award is to test the hypothesis that the laws of
continuum mechanics hold inside a micro-well of molten copper such that, when
Single Wall Carbon Nanotubes are introduced into the micro-well, because of
their high aspect ratio they will follow the fluid streamline and cling to this
alignment upon solidification. The mechanical properties of this nanotube/copper
composite are critically influenced by the alignment of the nanotubes in the
Copper matrix. The approach to achieving this objective will be to employ a high
brightness laser for creating a molten well of 50 micron diameter and 200 micron
deep on a copper substrate and then introduce the nanotubes into the micro-well.
It has been shown through computer simulation that there exists a vertical
laminar flow pattern in the laser-induced micro-well. The microstructure of the
composite will be examined to determine how well the vertical alignment is
accomplished.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the benefits of this research
will include enabling technologies to allow copper alloys to be used in a number
of applications that require high mechanical strength in combination with high
electrical and thermal conductivities. A potentially transformative benefit is
for the $65 billion die and mold making industry. Building dies and molds
enforced by the nanocomposite will simplify the manufacturing process, reduce
the lead time, prolong die life, and create a new workforce of die and mold
makers.