* 0944900
* SBIR Phase I:  Advanced Infrared Imagers Constructed of Lead-Salts
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Brenda VanMil, Amethyst Research Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2010
* USD 149,168.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop
device structures for infrared sensor applications using lead chalcogenides.
This system has reduced cooling requirements over other high performance
infrared materials (such as HgCdTe) resulting from their reduced Auger
recombination rates. New developments in device engineering offer a route to low
dark current infrared imagers. The objective is to design, model and grow
(utilizing molecular beam epitaxy), an optimized uni-polar device structure.
Further reduction of dark current in these detectors through innovative design
of advanced detector structures further reduces or eliminates cooling needs that
results in fewer, smaller and lightweight components and systems for military
and commercial systems. This leads to an additional advantage with an increased
energy efficiency of the resulting system. This provides an extraordinary
opportunity for the manufacture of large area, defect-tolerant, infrared focal
plane arrays (IRFPAs).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial
potential of this project is to develop advanced infrared (IR) imagers that are
lower cost, require less cooling, and have higher performance than those of
HgCdTe- the current choice for high performance infrared detectors. The
advancement of Pb-VI technology and fundamental understanding that will occur in
this project will benefit all areas in which Pb-VI technology can be applied.
Pb-VI materials are theoretically predicted to be superior not only in infrared
detector materials (pursued here), but also in areas such as IR lasers and
thermoelectric applications. Implementing these important and diverse
applications of Pb-VI semiconductors will be aided by the developments of this
project. The defect-tolerant Pb-VI IR devices to be developed under this SBIR
will be the enabling technology to manufacture low cost, high performance
infrared imaging arrays, allowing advanced IR sensing to penetrate previously
untapped markets such as non-military surveillance, infrared radiography for
tumor and other medical imaging, and environmental
monitoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;