* 0944157
* Implications of Deep Transport of Slab-Adjacent Hydrated Material at Subduction Zones
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2013
* Laurent Montesi, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Raffaella Montelli
* 12/31/2013
* USD 165,770.00

Water transport from the Earth's surface into the lower mantle, and potential
mechanisms of return on a global scale are important considerations for
understanding whole mantle geochemical evolution, whole mantle dynamics, and the
water budget. Subducting slabs can carry significant amounts of water in hydrous
minerals, but most of these minerals dewater as they descend into higher
pressure/temperature conditions before or by the top of the lower mantle. An
additional, important down-going reservoir is hydrated mantle material (water
held in nominally-anhydrous minerals, forming a low-viscosity channel, or LVC)
entrained in the slab-adjacent flow field. The LVC forms in the shallow mantle
wedge as a consequence of fluid migration and thermal separation between the
slab surface and the hydrated solidus. It has the important consequence of
reducing the local solid viscosity and density relative to ambient mantle. We
will develop 2-D numerical models of slab-associated mantle flow and geochemical
evolution to characterize the geodynamical and geochemical implications of deep
transport of the LVC to the lower mantle at subduction zones and evaluate these
models using observations of deep mantle seismic velocity structure and ocean
island basalt geochemistry. We will define the impact of viscosity variations,
including global radial components and local viscosity reduction within the LVC,
to the overall velocity structure. We will include deep dehydration reactions,
evaluate potential density contrasts and melting, and will determine if the
buoyancy of the LVC will lead it to separate from the thermal slab and mix with
ambient mantle, thereby introducing a chemical heterogeneity defined by fluid-
modified trace element and isotopic character. We will use the petrological
model MELTS to evaluate the chemical contributions of slab and/or slab-adjacent
material and compare model predictions with existing geochemical datasets of
ocean island basalts. This research integrates geophysical and geochemical
constraints for a comprehensive study of deep slab geodynamics and the
associated mantle solid flow field. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The amount of water
present in the deep interior of the Earth is the least constrained aspect of the
global water cycle. As tectonic plates sink and are recycled into the Earth's
interior at subduction zones, they carry along a significant amount of water
within the structure of certain minerals. Some water will be liberated through
dehydration reactions but a potentially important fraction may remain within
mineral structures and reach the lowermost mantle, where it is able to influence
mantle flow patterns and melting in ways that can be observed through lavas at
the surface. We will develop 2-D geodynamic models of mantle flow associated
with the deep subduction of plates to (i) determine the impact of water held in
mineral structures on the physical dynamics of the system and (ii) study melting
of mantle rocks associated with the deep introduction of water. By comparison
with seismic studies of the Earth's interior and geochemical studies of deeply
originating lavas, we will be able to provide new constraints on the deep water
cycle of the Earth. This project is led by new female investigator and will
provide the valuable experience of participation in a cutting-edge integrative
study by an early-career scientist. Involvement of undergraduate students
recruited from areas outside the geosciences will allow for breadth of
experience and will advertise geophysical/geochemical research to other fields,
encouraging interdisciplinary innovation, as well as providing advising
experience to a postdoctoral investigator. Both PIs are involved in outreach
programs to minority students and local high schools. The results of this
research will be disseminated broadly to the earth science community through
national and international meetings and peer-reviewed publications.