* 0944336
* Observations and models of postseismic deformation: Constraints on the ductile strength of continental lithosphere
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2014
* Yuri Fialko, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 01/31/2014
* USD 365,881.00

Large shallow earthquakes generate sudden stress perturbations in the ambient
rocks that may induce a ductile response of the lower crust and the uppermost
mantle. Much improved global imaging of surface deformation due to the existing
Synthetic Aperture Radar satellites (in particular, the L-band ALOS mission)
allows us to measure the delayed postseismic response of the crust and upper
mantle to the coseismically induced stress changes in areas of recent large
earthquakes (most of which occurred in remote and poorly accessible regions).
Measurements of postseismic transients bear on a long-standing debate on the
effective rheology of the lithosphere below the brittle-ductile transition.
Commonly considered models of postseismic transients include enhanced creep on a
seismic rupture or its extension below the brittle-ductile transition (the so-
called afterslip), poro-elastic rebound of the fluid-saturated crust, and visco-
elastic relaxation of the lower crust or upper mantle. A robust discrimination
(or some assessment of relative importance) of these mechanisms is often
hindered by similarities in the predicted patterns of surface displacements.
Such discrimination is nevertheless critical for our understanding of post-
earthquake stress changes, delayed triggering of seismicity, and long-term
strength of the ductile part of the continental lithosphere. We will use space
geodetic observations and a new modeling approach based on elastic solutions for
equivalent body forces in a spectral domain to study postseismic deformation due
to three major recent earthquakes from diverse tectonic settings: the 2003 M7.2
Altai (Russia) earthquake, the 2006 M7.0 Mozambique earthquake, and the 2008
M7.9 Sichuan (China) earthquake. Data that will be used to constrain our models
will primarily come from the ALOS mission of the Japanese Space Agency. The
chosen events are characterized by different mechanisms (strike-slip, normal,
and mixed thrust/strike-slip, respectively) which may greatly help with
identifying a dominant relaxation mechanism and deducing the effective long-term
strength of a ductile portion of the lithosphere in the corresponding locations.

Detailed observations of post-seismic deformation in diverse tectonic settings
will provide new constraints on the effective mechanical thickness and strength
of the continental lithosphere. Such constraints will improve our understanding
of continental tectonics. Physically-based models of post-seismic deformation
might help forecast the evolution of stress and strain in the Earth crust
following large earthquakes, and provide a useful input for seismic hazard
estimates. Computer codes developed under the auspices of this project will be
made available to a wider research community. Data and modeling results will be
used in two graduate classes taught at SIO/UCSD.