* 0944429
* SBIR Phase I:  A new drug discovery method to transform peptides to small molecules:  proof of principle with p53-hdm2
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Daniel Erlanson, Carmot Therapeutics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 12/31/2010
* USD 199,998.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will advance an
innovative drug discovery technology to tackle important disease targets such as
protein-protein interactions. Conventional drug discovery technologies are
rarely successful at identifying drugs that can disrupt protein-protein
interactions. While peptides can disrupt protein-protein interactions, peptides
seldom make good drugs. This proposal describes a powerful approach to transform
peptides into drug-like molecules. The well-characterized and important anti-
cancer target p53-hdm2 will be used as a model system. Peptide inhibitors of the
p53-hdm2 interaction have been described in the literature. The objective of
this Phase I proposal is to convert these peptides into drug-like molecules.
Subsequently, these molecules can be further advanced into drug candidates for
treating human cancers. In addition, successful completion of the proposed
research will validate a transformative new drug discovery technology.

The broader impacts of this research are to develop the technologies to tackle
important human disease targets that are not amenable to current drug-discovery
approaches. Protein-protein interactions present one of the largest untapped
opportunities to develop new therapies. The technology provides a general and
systematic method to tackle this target class by efficiently transforming
peptides into small molecules. It has the potential to revolutionize the drug
discovery process, and thus the commercial opportunity is enormous. In addition,
the proposed technology will advance our understanding of drug discovery. The
societal impact will be substantial, as the technology will facilitate the
discovery of drugs for unmet medical needs.