* 0944236
* Mapping Lithospheric Structure Beneath the Andes from Telesismic Analysis of Depth Phase Precursors
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2013
* Suzanne Kay, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2013
* USD 100,000.00

The PIs will use seismic data collected by the USArray component of EarthScope
as well as appropriate stations of the Global Seismic Network (GSN) to probe the
crust and upper mantle beneath the Andean mountain belt of South America. This
research is based on the use of ?underside? reflected signals which may arrive
ahead of the depth phase pP to identify and map key lithospheric
discontinuities, including but not limited to the Moho, the Hale discontinuity,
the base of the lithosphere and possible magma bodies. pP precursors represent
the only currently available information about the existence, extent and nature
of such discontinuities in key areas of the Andes. They also offer a new
perspective on these features in areas where more conventional seismic
information is available (e.g. refraction, tomography, receiver functions). By
analyzing data from regions where substantial data exist from conventional
techniques, we hope to refine our methodology. More importantly, these
observations should provide new tests of the various geodynamic models which
have been proposed to relate crustal thickening, tectonic shortening, plateau
uplift, lithospheric delamination and volcanism along Andean-type margins. The
Andean orogenic belt is the global archetype of non-collisional mountain
building. As such it has been extensively cited as hosting the modern analogs
for many of the processes that have shaped western North America. Thus our
proposed research should not only advance our understanding of the Andes, but by
extension provide new insight into the tectonics of the western US.

As the technique is still exploratory to some degree, the PIs will focus efforts
in the most profitable directions with particular emphasis on using the largest
earthquakes as sources and working on the stacking techniques. They hope to
demonstrate some of the processing and be on the road to obtaining first order
results.The methodology to be developed/applied here not only represents a
relatively novel use of EarthScope facilities to probe lithospheric structure
outside the U.S., it constitutes a merger of earthquake and exploration seismic
methodologies that should prove useful in studying other regions of the world
where deep seismic sources are available. The graduate student to be supported
by this award represents training that bridges the active and passive seismic
cultures. This type of integration is sure to become a hallmark of future
seismological investigations.