* 0944928
* SBIR Phase I: Motion-Free Tracking Solar Concentrator
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* Eric Pan, Meridian Deployment Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2010
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project investigates
novel optical element (OE) for Photovoltaic (PV) systems that uses refractive
index modulation to steer sunlight. It addresses the fundamental challenge of
tracking the motion of the sun while keeping the concentrated light on the
target. For decades this has been accomplished electro-mechanically using motors
and feedback circuitry to physically move the optics and/or the target so that
the device is always aligned with the sun. This project develops a simple,
motion-free tracking system that eliminates all the negative aspects of current
mechanical trackers. It is suitable for deployment on any PV system by adapting
the optical characteristics. The project goals are to optimize design elements
of the OE including materials, configuration and manufacturing technique, and
building prototypes for testing in both lab and field sites. Phase I will
establish a prototype of a motion-free tracking collector and concentrator that
will address three interconnected design issues. These are 1) maximizing
throughput of the device by eliminating unwanted reflections from various
interfaces, 2) maximizing the range of solar incidence angles, and 3) lowering
the cost of the finished device for commercialization.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be to enable
widespread adoption of localized solar power generation. This technology solves
the inherent complexity of simultaneously realizing mechanical stability under
wind and seismic loading, electro-mechanical tracking accuracy, and eliminates
high costs associated with mechanical trackers. Phase I of this program will
establish technical benchmarks to maximize the steering range and light
concentration ratio for a novel motion-free tracking system. New conductive
coatings are index-matched to minimize internal reflections that cause loss of
light throughput, while lens geometries and other components will be engineered
to maximize efficiency of the system. Because the device is low-profile and
lightweight, it can be easily installed on existing rooftops without requiring
substantial structural reinforcement, making commercial acceptance likely. This
motion-free tracking technology has these commercial advantages over existing
solar PV systems: simple, inexpensive installation, low profile esthetics, and
more efficient solar power generation for commercial and residential
installations. In summary, it will generate more electricity from a smaller
footprint for lower overall cost.