* 0944681
* SBIR Phase I:  Improving Energy Efficiency by Using Nanofluids in Vapor Compression Systems
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* Edward Clancy, ACTA LLC
* Standard Grant
* Grace Jinliu Wang
* 06/30/2010
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to
incorporate nanoparticles and filtration membranes into vapor compression
systems to improve energy efficiency. The approach is to identify nanoparticles
with proper surface properties and suspend these nanoparticles in a surfactant
type base material. This will not only enable the nanofluid with the refrigerant
to improve the heat transfer occurring in the condenser of a typical vapor
compression system, but also solve the problems such as sedimentation, cohesion
and corrosion that happen with conventional heterogeneous solid liquid mixtures.
A novel membrane system will be introduced to collect the nanoparticles at the
outlet of the condenser and return the particles to the inlet of the condenser,
thereby preventing particles from entering the compressor.

The broader/commercial impact of this project will be the potential to improve
the energy efficiency in vapor compression systems. There is a demand for high
performance cooling systems used in medical devices, computer chips, residential
appliances, industrial cooling and refrigeration systems. Nanofluids have been
known for their superior heat transfer properties. The challenge is how to
introduce the nanofluids into a vapor compression system, which is addressed by
this project. The anticipated result of this project is about 10% reduction in
energy consumption of vapor compression systems.