* 0944223
* Collaborative Research: SAM's Contribution to Increased Ocean Heat Content on the Continental Shelf of Western Antarctic Peninsula
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2010,07/31/2014
* John Klinck, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Milne
* 07/31/2014
* USD 133,635.00

The dynamics of a warming Southern Ocean and its interactions with Antarctic
continental shelf circulation patterns brought about by the intensification of
the Southern Hemisphere westerlies, circumpolar winds which prevail between 30
and 60 0 S, remains uncertain in several respects. Current global climate models
(e.g. IPCC/AR4) attribute intensification of the westerlies to anthropogenic
increases in greenhouse gases in the troposphere along with decreased levels of
stratospheric ozone, seasonally observed as the polar ozone hole. Other
dynamical oceanic processes may also be involved. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
numerical and analysis project seeks to further evaluate the contribution of
oceanic heat content to the accelerating warming and sub-glacial melting
currently being observed in the terminal ice streams in the Amundsen and
Bellingshausen Seas, and the adjacent rapidly warming Western Antarctic
Peninsula (WAP). Use of the Palmer Station LTER data set, which extends back to
1993, provides a observational series which in part covers the time period where
changes in atmospheric circulation and air temperatures are most likely to have
taken place. Use of a regional oceanic numerical model (3-D, fully dynamic)
under contrasting wind regimes corresponding to observed (more positive) trends
in the Southern Annular Mode will shed light on the dynamics of climate change
in these sensitive continental shelf regions of the continent.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impact of melting glaciers and ice sheets on global
sea level rise is an acknowledged area of uncertainty in the most recent IPCC
assessment, and would be a direct impact of climate change on society in this
century.