* 0944079
* Collaborative Research: A Proposal for the Cosmic-Ray prOduced NUclide Systematics on Earth (CRONUS-Earth) Project
* GEO,EAR
* 05/14/2009,02/29/2012
* Robert Reedy, Planetary Science Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 02/29/2012
* USD 34,776.00

The central thesis to this project is that household decision making under
uncertainty functions within a complex system of human-environment interactions
with many socio-economic, policy, and institutional forces also playing roles.
Two workshops will be conducted that will bring together a number of social
scientists, ecologists, modelers, and others working with climate forecasts and
remote sensing to better understand what is known across several sites globally
about decision making under uncertainty. These workshops will form the basis for
one or more synthesis papers in peer-reviewed publications. The results of these
workshops also will serve as the basis for the development of a general approach
for analyzing decision making within the context of environmental and socio-
economic factors. Project leaders will develop an integrative research plan to
1) synthesize what is known about household patterns and processes of decision
making associated with climate variability from sites around the world including
North America, Amazonia, Africa, and Central Asia; 2) collect data where needed
for the synthesis; 3) develop or adapt and link socio-economic agent-based
household models to ecosystem models to test hypotheses that relate climate
variability and climate change to decision making and the impacts and
consequences they have on people and ecosystems, and; 4) develop a series of
workshops, seminars, and training sessions for students, researchers, and
decision makers.

Research that focuses on household and community behavior is important because
it is at that level where fundamental decisions are made regarding climate
variability. It is also the place where climate variability and change is felt
most directly and severely and where people are most vulnerable to climate
perturbations. The project will refine current knowledge about household
decision making, uncertainty, and change. The integrative plans will outline the
means and methods necessary to translate this knowledge into improved decision
making. Future work building on this plan will advance methodological frontiers
by coupling agent-based modeling, ecological models, GIS, and remote sensing to
develop scenarios of decision-making under climate variability and change. Tools
will be developed and means to disseminate the information to the many
stakeholders at many levels, both nationally and internationally. The results
will be valuable for both households and decision makers at many levels of
social organization and institutions to enhance the sustainability of human
communities everywhere. This developmental award was supported as part of the
Fiscal Year 2003 Human and Social Dynamics priority area special competition on
Decision Making Under Uncertainty (DMUU).