* 0944615
* Collaborative Research: Polyphase Orogenesis and Crustal Differentiation in West Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2014
* Michael Brown, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Mark Kurz
* 08/31/2014
* USD 359,970.00

Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;The northern Ford ranges in Marie Byrd Land,
Antarctica, record events and processes that transformed a voluminous succession
of Lower Paleozoic turbidites intruded by calc-alkaline plutonic rocks into
differentiated continental crust along the margin of Gondwana. In this study the
Fosdick migmatite?granite complex will be used to investigate crustal evolution
through an integrated program of fieldwork, structural geology, petrology,
mineral equilibria modeling, geochronology and geochemistry. The PIs propose
detailed traverses at four sites within the complex to investigate Paleozoic and
Mesozoic orogenic cycles. They will use petrological associations, structural
geometry, and microstructures of host gneisses and leucogranites to distinguish
the migration and coalescence patterns for remnant melt flow networks, and carry
out detailed sampling for geochronology, geochemistry and isotope research.
Mafic plutonic phases will be sampled to acquire information about mantle
contributions at the source. Mineral equilibria modeling of source rocks and
granite products, combined with in situ mineral dating, will be employed to
resolve the P?T?t trajectories arising from thickening/thinning of crust during
orogenic cycles and to investigate melting and melt loss history.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: &lt;br/&gt;This work involves research
and educational initiatives for an early career female scientist, as well as
Ph.D. and undergraduate students. Educational programs for high school audiences
and undergraduate courses on interdisciplinary Antarctic science will be
developed.