* 0944922
* SBIR Phase I: Game-like Teaching/Practice System with Automated Personalized Text Messaging, Email, Web, and Voice Interaction
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* Dimitri Gioev, Exelera, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2010
* USD 149,994.00

The Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I research project will
develop and build a novel method and system for advancing education, in
particular, in the STEM disciplines, applying the currently available computer
and communication technologies. The student-system interaction will be enabled
via the following four channels: text messaging (Short Message Service (SMS)
using mobile phone); email; website; voice (phone line). The key feature of the
system is the capability to carry out light-weight personalized dialogs with
each student via SMS and email. These two channels have a number of pedagogic
advantages over the website and voice channels. In particular, the system will
send personalized problems, process replies, and provide answers and explanation
to students. The mobile-enabled system design will allow automatic processing of
the students' inputs in the free-text format and not just as one-symbol replies
to multiple choice problems. The level of difficulty of subsequent assignments
will be adjusted and increased based on the individual student's learning curve.
The automated SMS and email processing will create a game-like experience for
the student enhancing the desire to use the system and ultimately stimulating
the learning process. Importantly, the location-independent access to the system
makes it fully accessible to disadvantaged students.

Although the system will be first applied to STEM disciplines, the flexible
design and the intrinsic free-text processing capabilities of the system make
the range of potential applications extremely broad. The cornerstone principles
used in the system architecture, in particular, the mobile-enabled device-
independent design, allow the system to be utilized in learning at all levels
from K-12 to higher and professional education, both at public and private
organizations. The system can be utilized regardless of a specific education
subject or topic, or a specific type of education activity, or a specific method
of content delivery. The intuitive system administration functions allow any
course instructor to manage the system without help from expert staff. The
current size of the e-learning market globally is estimated to be $40B; this
includes not only K-12 institutions but also universities, corporate and
government clients. The system belongs broadly in the m-learning niche of the
e-learning market; the m-learning sector is very new and is growing rapidly. A
conservative estimate for the m-learning market niche globally is $1.5B by 2011.
The universal applicability of the system together with its intrinsic free-text
processing and mobile-enabled functionality gives it a significant momentum for
gaining a sizable market share.