* 0944584
* Methane Isotope Variations Covering the Holocene from the WAIS Divide Core
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2015
* Todd Sowers, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Julie Palais
* 04/30/2015
* USD 251,113.00

Sowers 0944584

This award supports a project to better predict how natural CH4 emissions will
respond to and force future climate change through a detailed study of the
global biogeochemical cycles that control atmospheric CH4 over the past 11,000
years (11kyr), when the Earth's climate has remained relatively close to its
current state. During that time, methane concentrations changed significantly.
The project involves generating 13C/12C isotopic records of atmospheric CH4
using the core material from the WAIS Divide ice core. The ä13CH4 data from WAIS
will be used to construct the first Antarctic atmospheric record covering the
Holocene. This record will be compared to our recent Holocene record from the
GISP2 ice core from Greenland. The new Antarctic record will provide an
important verification of the GISP2 record as well as our first glimpse of the
inter-hemispheric ä13CH4 gradient covering the Holocene. Together these records
provide important boundary conditions for testing various emission scenarios
(time, space and source) that should provide a quantitative basis for assessing
the nature of CH4 emissions throughout the Holocene. The intellectual merit of
this work relates to the fact that the earth's climate is directly influenced by
levels of trace, "greenhouse" gases (carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide,
CFC's, and others), and the modern build up of these gases in the atmosphere is
a fundamental concern for human society. In terms of broader impacts the
proposed work will enhance our understanding of the patterns and causes of
methane change throughout the Holocene. This is important for understanding the
natural climate system, and in particular, feedbacks between climate and
greenhouse gas biogeochemistry. The Holocene CH4 record suggests that the global
methane cycle was profoundly influenced by various feedbacks that do not involve
large temperature swings. This implies strong feedbacks to a relatively small
(and presently unknown) forcing. The proposed work will lead to improved
understanding of why methane levels changed throughout the Holocene, providing
fundamental information to refine and test global models. It will also
contribute to testing the controversial, but important, hypothesis, that humans
impacted the atmosphere significantly starting about 5000 years ago.
Undergraduate and graduate students will participate in all phases of the
research and a special emphasis will be placed on recruiting under represented
minority students thru our college based office of educational equity. All data
will be archived on appropriate databases per OPP policies.