* 0944519
* Parameterization of tracer transport by geostrophic eddies in the southern ocean
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2014
* John Marshall, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Peter Milne
* 04/30/2014
* USD 619,723.00

Abstract

Eddy diffusion is the actual mixing caused by turbulent processes associated
with ocean eddies, which vary from transient microscales (cm) to stable features
(hundreds of km) such as subtropical gyres or even hemispheric scale currents.
The eddy component of the ocean circulation, clearly a first order mixing term,
is not directly driven by the wind stress forcings that climate models typically
project. A problem arises - how can the lateral mixing produced by eddies be
parameterized?

An approach to improving a widely used coarse resolution ocean climate model
(MITgcm) of the Southern Ocean using a residual-mean formulation in which eddy
potential vorticity fluxes appear as forcing terms in the residual-mean momentum
equations, will be investigated. Prior application of residual-mean theory has
suggested that values of the eddy diffusivity (K) is enhanced in the vicinity of
critical levels where eddies and mean flows move at the same speed. Some
scientific problems that the resulting model will be used to better understand
and more reliably predict are: (i) the response of the Southern Ocean and its
meridional overturning circulation to changes in prevailing winds and in the
larger sense changing climate (ii) associated changes in the air-sea flux of
heat, CO2, biogeochemical fluxes, including the ability of the Southern Ocean to
enable the deep storage of anthropogenic carbon (iii) how ocean tracer
transports depend on the underlying physics, dynamics and biogeochemistry of the
Southern Ocean.