* 0944890
* SBIR Phase I:  Optic-On-Eye Virtual Reality Display
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Randall Sprague, Innovega Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 12/31/2010
* USD 178,977.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will demonstrate
the feasibility of using specially modified contact lenses to enable a new class
of electronic eyewear products for viewing of virtual images. The proposed
architecture based on these specially modified contact lenses will enable
compact wearable displays with very wide fields of view. The proposed Phase I
research will analyze the human eye/contact lens optical system for standard
display and vision parameters to predict system performance, develop prototype
contact lenses based on this analysis, and evaluate the resulting image quality
through clinical evaluations. The research will include evaluation of chemical
and bio-compatibility of the materials to be included in the special contact
lenses. Investigations will also focus on solving the various challenges of
assembling the components into the lenses. The objective of this first phase
will be to determine the trade-offs between wearer comfort, virtual image
quality, and minimizing adverse affects on wearer's normal vision. It is
anticipated that a high performance virtual image display system can be achieved
with wearability similar to normal contact lenses and with imperceptible impact
to normal vision.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be a significant
improvement in how mobile and immersive imagery is viewed. Today, mobile
computing devices must present their information through tiny liquid crystals
displays (LCD) panels, while immersive computing must settle for the limited
fields of view available through flat panel monitors and TVs. Wearable
electronic eyewear are available today that attempt to address these
limitations, but they themselves suffer from limited fields of view and excess
bulk. This SBIR research will pave the way for understanding how to enhance the
normal biological imaging capabilities of the human eye using special contact
lenses in order to experience virtual images on par with images from the natural
environment. This advancement will enable many new applications for wearable
displays including virtual reality displays, realistic simulation imaging,
highly immersive 3-D video, augmented reality systems, stylish mobile display
eyewear, and even comfortable high quality electronic vision enhancement for
sufferers of macular degeneration and other vision disorders. Because mobile
devices and home computers are so ubiquitous in our modern societies, the
anticipated benefits of improving the man/machine interface through high quality
virtual imagery eyewear should impact numerous markets and demographics.