* 0944220
* The Physiological Ecology of Two Antarctic Icons: Emperor Penguins and Leopard Seals
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2014
* Paul Ponganis, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Charles Amsler
* 08/31/2014
* USD 399,745.00

Emperor penguins (Aptenodytes forsteri) and leopard seals (Hydrurga leptonyx)
are iconic, top predators in Antarctica. Understanding their physiological
ecology is essential to the assessment of their adaptability to the threats of
climate change, pollution, and overfishing. The proposed research has
multipronged objectives. Prior results suggest that Emperor penguins have
flexible (vs. static) aerobic dive limits (ADL) that vary with the type of dive,
and that the role of heart rate in utilization of oxygen stores also varies with
dive type. A series of physiological measurements are proposed with backpack
electrocardiogram recorders, that will allow further delineation of patterns and
interrelationships among heart rate, dive behavior, and oxygen stores.
Importantly, the research will be done on free diving emperors, and not
individuals confined to a dive hole, thereby providing a more genuine measure of
diving physiology and behavior. A separate objective is to examine foraging
behavior of leopard seals, using a backpack digital camera and time depth
recorder. Leopard seal behavior and prey intake is poorly quantified, but known
to be significant. Accordingly the research is somewhat exploratory but will
provide important baseline data. Finally, the P.I. proposes to continue long
term overflight censuses of Emperor penguin colonies in the Ross Sea. Broader
impacts include collaboration with National Geographic television, graduate
student training, and development of sedation techniques for leopard seals.