* 0944121
* Tropospheric Anthropogenic Aerosols and Climate
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2014
* Chien Wang, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Anjuli Bamzai
* 07/31/2014
* USD 592,606.00

This project seeks to quantify the climate responses and feedbacks to the direct
and indirect effects of tropospheric anthropogenic aerosols and natural aerosols
converted by anthropogenic pollutants. The investigators will continue to
develop a size- and mixing-resolving aerosol model interactively coupled with
the National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) Community Climate System
Model (CCSM), an effort previously supported by NSF. In this study they will:
(1) include new anthropogenic aerosol types to better describe the chemical and
physical transfer of aerosols across the whole size and mixing spectra; (2)
include important chemical conversions of "natural aerosols" of dust and sea
salt by anthropogenic pollutants; and (3) fully couple the aerosol model with a
chemistry module and a 2-moment cloud microphysics module in the new version of
CCSM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will examine aerosol-caused
climate responses and feedbacks, either occurring locally or remotely from
regions of high aerosol loading, and reveal the aerosol effects on the
hydrologic cycle including cloud, precipitation, surface water and heat budget.
Specifically, they will: (1) define aerosol perturbations on major dynamic
processes and circulation; (2) search for representative diagnostics (also
suitable for other models) to identify such mechanistic alterations by aerosols;
(3) examine the key factors of major feedbacks; (4) understand climate responses
as functions of aerosol composition and size distributions; and (5) compare
climate response to aerosol forcing and that of long-lived greenhouse gases. The
model performance will be evaluated using available surface and satellite data,
and a Kalman-filter-based inverse modeling tool will be used to optimize the
emission inventories particularly of absorbing aerosols.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, this project will advance our knowledge of climate feedbacks and
responses to aerosol forcing, making important contributions to the next
generation of models to predict not only the future climate but also the state
of the environment and ecosystems. The results of this project will be useful
for climate-related policy decisions, as well as global environment and air
quality studies. The project is based on a community model framework and the
model developed by this program will be provided to the community. Postdocs and
graduate students will be trained in the project.