* 0944058
* The Role of Water Vapor in Midlatitude Stormtracks and the Global Circulation
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2014
* Olivier Pauluis, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Anjuli Bamzai
* 07/31/2014
* USD 695,366.00

A recent study of the isentropic circulations by the principal investigator and
his collaborators has shown that the poleward mass transport in the mid-
latitudes is equally split between a "dry branch" in the upper troposphere, and
a "moist branch", associated with a low level poleward flow of warm, moist
subtropical air that ascends in the upper troposphere within the
stormtracks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a new framework to
better assess the relationship between precipitation and mid-latitude weather
systems on both the local and global scales, and will evaluate how the global
circulation is affected by different climatic conditions. It seeks a better
understanding of (i) what controls the partitioning of the circulation between
these dry and moist branches, (ii) how does this partitioning affect the energy
and momentum transport by the circulation, (iii) what are the implications at
the level of the individual storm, and (iv) how this might change in the future
either as a result of natural climate variability or as a consequence of
anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach here
is based on analyzing the zonal mean circulation averaged on either dry
isentropes, i.e., surfaces of constant potential temperature, or moist
isentropes, i.e., surfaces of constant equivalent potential temperature. The
research includes theoretical development to assess the role of moist processes
on the dynamics of mid-latitude weather systems, numerical simulations of
baroclinic life-cycle and of the global atmosphere, and a comprehensive study of
the current circulation based on reanalysis datasets. A set of diagnostic tools
to assess the isentropic circulation in numerical models will also be developed
and made available to the broader community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts of the proposed research are in the potential to improve our ability to
predict how climate change can affect subtropical and mid-latitude weather, and
modify the global distribution of rainfall. Different global climate models used
by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) will be carefully
evaluated and compared to reanalysis data. This should both indicate possible
ways to improve these models, as well as increase our confidence in their
ability to accurately simulate the climate system and the hydrological cycle.