* 0944257
* Surface wave triggering of earthquakes and non-volcanic tremor: Insights into the physics of rupture
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2013
* Aaron Velasco, University of Texas at El Paso
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 03/31/2013
* USD 262,333.00

This proposal outlines detailed analyses and modeling of surface waves in
relation to triggering of both earthquakes and non-volcanic tremor. In
particular, we have two main hypotheses that we will test: 1) the orientation of
the local stress field and the orientation of the transient stresses induced by
the surface waves combine to generate failure and 2) triggered earthquakes and
triggered non-volcanic tremor exhibit similar failure mechanisms caused by
transient stress fluctuations. We will test these two hypotheses by analyzing
numerous large (M> 7.0) earthquakes in regions with good local/regional network
coverage, local/regional catalogs, and with documented triggered earthquakes and
NVT. We will also develop a simple failure model that can explain our
observations of triggered earthquakes and NVT. Our results will provide
fundamental insight into stresses that trigger events, and whether these two
seemingly different processes are indeed similar. Closely studying surface waves
and triggering holds the key for understanding the physics of rupture.

A growing body of scientific studies has demonstrated that the passage of
transient signals, or seismic waves, from large earthquakes can remotely trigger
small earthquakes and non-volcanic tremor thousands of kilometers from an
epicenter of a large earthquake. These two phenomena, at first glance, appear
quite different, with the only common attribute being the triggering stress:
surface waves. Triggered non-volcanic tremor (NVT) is the radiation of non-
impulsive seismic energy not associated with volcanic processes that occurs
coincidentally with the passage of the surface waves of a larger earthquake;
similarly, dynamically triggered earthquakes are generally small earthquakes
that trigger coincidentally or shortly after the arrival of surface waves from a
larger earthquake. Given the fact that these two triggered phenomena occur on a
frequent basis, a detailed investigation into both the local and triggering,
transient stress fields could provide fundamental insight into the physical
mechanisms of rupture failure This project will gain fundamental insight into
dynamically triggered earthquakes and non-volcanic tremor, one of the most
intriguing discoveries in earthquake science that has occurred in the past 8
years. Results of the project will be published in peer-reviewed journals and
presented at national conferences to share with the scientific community.
Furthermore, the University of Texas at El Paso is a Hispanic Serving Institute
(HSI) and we will actively recruit undergraduate and graduate students, plus a
postdoctoral scholar from underrepresented groups to participate in this
project.