* 0944103
* Collaborative research:  The impact of stratospheric ozone depletion/recovery on Antarctic Climate
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2013
* Beate Liepert, NorthWest Research Associates, Incorporated
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Milne
* 04/30/2013
* USD 185,591.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A data analysis and modeling project seeks to
quantify the changes acting on Antarctic climate over the coming century
attributable to the recovery of stratospheric ozone. Anticipated as a
consequence of the Montreal Protocol to reduce ozone depleting halocarbon
emissions, the seasonal polar ozone holes are now showing signs of recovery. The
current lack of a discernable global warming effect on much of the East
Antarctic (EA) is thought to stem from stratospheric cooling in part brought
about by successive annual ozone depletion events. A steepening of the polar
vortex due to stratospheric cooling is accompanied by a strengthening of the
westerly winds that circle the continent, which in turn lessens the meridional
heat transfer from a warming Southern Hemisphere. As this stratospheric cooling
is removed, a stronger warming of the EA is possible. &lt;br/&gt;A range of
current global climate model outputs will be examined as to their ability to
reproduce recent Antarctic climate conditions. Whether these can be reliably
attributed to a single factor such as ozone or other (well mixed) greenhouse
gases may enable future Antarctic climate responses to be better estimated.
Antarctic climate variability, especially with respect to surficial melt at the
coastal margins has important potential impacts on ice sheet mass balance and
global sea-level rise in the coming century.