* 0944491
* SBIR Phase I:  Covert Combinatorial DNA Taggants Signatures for Authentication, Tracking and Trace-Back
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Anthony Macula, Anthony J. Macula
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 12/31/2010
* USD 170,974.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project develops a new
biomolecular covert taggant method that marks objects with synthetic DNA nano-
scale biosensors, called ComDTags, for verification of authenticity and for
forensic track and trace-back. Pharmaceutical companies, brand owners and
governments need thousands of covert and unique signatures to protect their
drugs, products, documents and citizens. Using DNA for this purpose is
environmentally safe, but to date, no DNA taggant method can produce enough
unique and information-rich signatures. This project expects to demonstrate that
the ComDTag DNA taggant system can easily construct millions of unique,
information-rich and covert DNA signatures and that these signatures can be
detected and decoded only by authorized users.

The broader impacts of this research are anti-counterfeiting, authentication and
quality control technologies. Counterfeiting costs the U.S. economy $200 billion
per year and is responsible for the loss of 750,000 American jobs. The
counterfeiting of the drug heparin has been linked to the deaths of over a
hundred Americans with hundreds more having severe allergic reactions. These
disturbing facts indicate that there is an increasing need for safe and covert
methods to prevent, track and trace-back counterfeit products. Covert ComDTag
signatures can feasibly meet these needs. Combined with more overt taggant
products, ComDTag signatures can yield more robust, secure and useful covert
track and trace-back solutions for commercial and national security interests.