* 0944956
* SBIR Phase I:  Mathemantics: Diagnostic Math Games for Kindergarten Children
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* Paul Horwitz, Educational Network Services, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2010
* USD 149,304.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I research project builds
on decades of math education research, most of which has failed to have much
impact in ordinary classrooms. Our immediate objective is to create a rich
mathematical world for young students to explore, within that world to pose
developmentally appropriate challenges, to monitor children as they engage in
problem solving, analyze their actions to make informed inferences regarding
their learning, and use the results of that analysis to inform teachers and to
make instructionally relevant suggestions. The project will observe students'
interaction with Mathemantics in the absence of mentoring, looking for
opportunities where such a mentor might usefully have intervened. Based on these
observations, the project will add to Mathemantics a friendly computer-based
avatar who will react to patterns of student actions and provide context-
sensitive help and feedback. The project will aggregate student performance data
and use it to generate formative assessments in the form of diagnostic reports
to teachers. The underlying goal is to introduce knowledge gained from math
education and cognitive science research into elementary classrooms by packaging
it for teachers and students in a usable and actionable form.

In prior work a sequence of prototype Mathemantics games was created. It was
demonstrated that children found them engaging and that they learned important
mathematical concepts from them, albeit in the presence of a graduate student
who guided them and gave them feedback. Now the project proposes to demonstrate
that with appropriate scaffolding these games can 'stand alone' so that children
will understand them and find them motivating, and most of all that they will
learn from them. It is also hopes that Mathemantics is capable of generating
formative assessments that teachers find accessible and useful. These
assessments will be aligned to mCLASS:Math, an application for handheld
computers that guides teachers through 'clinical interviews' with individual
students and analyzes data teacher-entered to produce diagnostic reports.
Pending a successful outcome of this feasibility study, an enhanced version of
mCLASS:Math will be produced which will offer suggestions for how to customize
Mathemantics to meet the needs and match the abilities of individual students.
By offering Mathemantics to classrooms already equipped with mCLASS:Math, we
will have immediate access to an important 'early adopter' segment of the
market.