* 0944463
* SBIR Phase I:  Creating an Interoperable Accessible Student Assessment System
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* Thomas Hoffmann, nimble Assessment Systems, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2010
* USD 149,779.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to increase
the efficiency of educational testing. The project examines the feasibility of
modifying a universally designed test delivery system so that it can import test
items tagged using a tagging protocol - Question Test Interoperability (QTI) and
Accessibility Meta-Tags (AMT), to deliver that content in an accessible manner.
This key questions this research will address are: 1. To what extent do the
existing QTI AMT specifications address the test accommodations allowed by state
testing programs?; and 2) What additional meta-tags are required to meet the
universe of state test accommodations? 3. Is it feasible to modify the existing
version of the company?s key product so that it interprets and accurately
present test items formatted using the QTI AMT standards.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be a computer-based
test delivery system that employs the QTI AMT specifications to make test
content accessible and portable is a major advance in the technology of
educational testing. Successful completion of this research and development
effort will also provide a concrete example of the value of creating
accessibility standards and specifications, and will demonstrate the importance
of considering access needs that extend beyond print-based disabilities (i.e.,
blind/visual impairment, dyslexia, etc.) and will inform the development of the
next version of the National Instructional Materials Accessibility Standard
(NIMAS) as employed by commercial learning material developers.