* 0944751
* SBIR Phase I: Thick Thermal Barrier Coatings
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* John Whitaker, Modumetal, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2010
* USD 148,889.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project proposes to develop a
non-line-of-sight process for nanolamination of thick (> 1 mm) thermal barrier
coatings (TBCs) with both a) improved durability and b) reduced thermal
conductivity. Diverse sectors including transportation, power generation, and
oil & gas desire increased operating temperatures for improved efficiency and
performance, but are limited in part by the high temperature behavior (e.g.
creep, wear, and corrosion) of available materials of construction. One route to
overcoming these limitations is through thermal barrier coatings, ceramic-based
coatings which protect and insulate high temperature components thereby allowing
higher operating temperatures. The insulating efficacy of a TBC improves with a)
lower thermal conductivity (k) and b) greater coating thickness. Unfortunately,
both emergent low-k ceramics and thicker TBCs result in reduced durability.
Research indicates that both low-k and improved durability can be achieved
through nanolamination; however, no process is currently capable of cost-
competitive application of nanolaminated TBCs onto the complex geometries
encountered in the above sectors. This project's objectives are therefore to
apply our innovative electrochemical deposition process to develop nanolaminated
ceramic-metal composites to achieve superior thermal barrier coating
performance.

The market for thermal barrier coatings is over $3.75 billion, with these
structures being used in a variety of market segments, including diesel and gas
engines, aerospace and land based turbine engines, and aerospace structure
applications. In addition to having a substantial impact in these sectors, the
proposed technology, if successful, would have impact as an environmental
protection and anti-corrosion coating, with concomitant benefits to the nation's
infrastructure. This Phase I research plan includes collaborations with both
Purdue University and the University of Washington (UW), and will help establish
unrivaled flexibility for producing novel TTBC architectures, allowing
researchers to customize thick TBC architectures for experimentally validating
structure-property models and furthering the understanding of high temperature
materials' constitutive behavior. Finally, this project will allow undergraduate
science and engineering students from UW to participate in the project as
interns. These internships will take advantage of the talent pool available at
UW, in addition to providing a unique learning experience for the students
themselves. Students will gain exposure to materials synthesis and testing
methods, and will have the opportunity to substantially impact our ongoing
research, development, and production efforts.