* 0944752
* SBIR Phase I:  ASL Literacy Support System
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* Corinne Vinopol, Institute for Disabilities Research and Training, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl F. Albus
* 06/30/2010
* USD 149,986.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will examine the
feasibility of producing a hardware/software system that will enable a user to:
1) scan paper-based text; 2) read screen-based text; and 3) type and have that
text appear in software that supports it with American Sign Language graphics
and video clips in real time. This software also will enable the user to edit,
print, select appropriate signs when more than one match the English word,
'hide' signs when support is not wanted, retrieve sign graphics/video through an
index, and generate flashcards and sign/word matching worksheets. This outcomes
of this project will result in creation of a software beta version using pen
scanning capabilities having 5,000 signs/words, and planning for screen reading.
Many deaf children are challenged by reading since this process largely depends
on auditory understanding. Teachers of the deaf frequently re-interpret text
into ASL or enhance it with signs to render it more comprehensible to their
students. Research has shown that incorporation of signs with text provides a
multimodal approach to the development of early literacy skills that utilizes
multiple intelligences and learning styles. Heretofore, the process of
reinforcing text with signs has involved laborious copying, drawing, cutting,
and/or pasting.

ASL is a visual/gestural language distinct from English. Many deaf people who
rely on sign language do not have good facility with English. Because English is
an auditory mediated language that depends upon phonological code, reading
achievement scores of deaf children usually fall far short of those found among
hearing children of comparable abilities. A particularly interesting aspect of
the low reading skill levels displayed by deaf students is that while they may
not understand a sentence in print, they may understand it perfectly if it is
presented in ASL. Incorporation of sign language into early reading skills
training is fast gaining favor also among early childhood educators who have
long struggled with finding fun and productive ways to actively engage young
children in the process. This product will be tremendously useful to teachers,
business personnel, speech/language pathologists, etc. who have a need to
support understanding of English text with ASL signs for purposes of literacy
improvement, curriculum enhancement, or communication. This product will enable
users to type, scan text, or read screens and have output in text with ASL
graphics and/or video support at an affordable price.