* 0944716
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a Low Cost Thermal Storage System Using a Novel Phase Change Material for Use with Solar Thermal and Waste Heat Recovery Systems
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Christopher Edwards, Fulcrum Composites Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2010
* USD 193,400.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Project will develop a thermal storage
system combined with solar thermal heating and waste heat recovery allowing
energy to be accumulated throughout the year to be used when needed in winter.
The use of a new phase change material as the energy storage device, combined
with the use of winter and summer heat generation will make feasible the storage
of sufficient heat for a typical family residence in an acceptably small storage
space. Storage of thermal energy is the single largest barrier to large scale
implementation of solar thermal collection. Currently, no viable option exists
for heat storage in a reasonable volume. The objective is to develop a solar
thermal heating system with sufficient heat storage capacity to allow heat to be
generated and stored throughout the year and used to provide heating in winter.
During phase I a prototype system capable of generating and storing 300MJ of
heat, or roughly the daily heat requirement for a domestic house in winter, will
be developed. The techniques and data developed during this work will provide
the necessary basis to develop a full scale system capable of providing heating
throughout the winter to a typical domestic house.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project lies in making localized
solar heat generation for space heating a viable option for domestic as well as
commercial, institutional and industrial buildings a commercial practicality. It
is estimated that approximately 40 million buildings in the US are suitable for
implementation of solar thermal heating. This represents a US-based
manufacturing opportunity of >$400 billion. Successful implementation on this
scale could result in annual energy savings of 300billion kWh corresponding to
$30 billion in energy costs.