* 0944614
* SBIR Phase I: IPPM:  IN-LINE PIERCING PROCESS MONITORING FOR SEAMLESS TUBE MANUFACTURING
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* Tzyy-Shuh Chang, OG TECHNOLOGIES, INC
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl F. Albus
* 06/30/2010
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to verify
the feasibility of an imaging based monitoring system for the piercing process
used in the manufacturing of seamless steel tubes. Piercing is the core process
of seamless tubes manufacturing, the process that puts a hole in a steel bar
without drilling chips. Seamless tubes are crucial materials in many critical
applications ranging from energy, chemical, automotive, aerospace to
infrastructure. Piercing, if not done correctly, could cause tube quality
issues. The proposed innovation consists of a set of imaging sensors for
measuring the part vibrations in the piercing process. The vibration data will
be used to derive the piercing conditions for critical failure modes through
advanced mathematical analysis. This project is expected to validate the new
approach on selected tubes, forming the basis for the commercialization of a new
piercing monitoring system. This project will be carried out by a team
consisting of industry-academia collaboration. Tests in a tube mill are planned
for performance verification. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project is very significant. This project
presents an approach with soft as well as hard sensors to control a highly
stochastic and non-linear process. When commercialized, it will improve seamless
steel tubing manufacturing by reducing mill downtime, fewer set-up pieces, and
tightened tolerances. This project also reduces the pollution emissions and
costly energy consumption associated with remanufacturing or reworking out-of-
tolerance products. Industry-wide adoption across the seamless tube and pipe
industry could yield drastic reductions in waste byproducts and would produce a
cost savings of $250 million per year. Scientifically, the project could have an
impact on the adoption of emerging high dimensional data analysis techniques.
The project carries strong educational implication due to the close working
relationship with the academia. Social impact is also expected with this
project, by improving energy preservation and environmental protection. The
estimated benefits include energy savings of 3 terawatt-hours and reduction of
300,000 tons of carbon-equivalent emission and 260,000 tons of toxic waste per
year. Beyond the piercing process, the success of the project will also provide
generic modeling and analysis tools for systems with complex information.