* 0944927
* SBIR Phase I: A Sustainable Laundry Solution: Organosilane Based Fabric Conditioners for Reducing the Environmental Footprint and Energy Consumption In Laundry Systems
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Bakul Dave, NanoAqueonics
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 12/31/2010
* USD 174,984.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop a
novel rinse additive product formulation for use in commercial and home fabric
care systems. The silicate-based product formulation will repel water and dirt,
decrease energy used in washing machines, decrease detergent usage, and speed up
drying time. The rinse additive can be incorporated in the normal fabric care
process to retain the look and feel of the garment while enhancing the overall
appearance and visual appeal of the garments to make fabrics truly "wash and
wear" capable. Normally, fabric care processes are characterized by significant
environmental footprint due to use of water, harmful chemicals, and energy
associated with laundry. The ability to make fabrics less susceptible to getting
dirty would reduce the use of water and detergent along with energy savings
associated with washing and drying of garments. At present, there is no other
product in the market that can provide these benefits in the form of a fabric
conditioner and the success of this project would lead to development of a new
technology for energy efficient laundry process for commercial as well as in-
home use.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be significant from
several perspectives. The success of this technology will provide a new fabric
conditioner system that can be easily integrated into laundry processes to
provide a cost-effective, value-added product. The use of these products in
fabric care is also expected to a) save water usage due to self-cleaning
properties, b) save energy due to lesser drying time for fabrics, c) reduce the
generation of harmful ingredients associated with dry cleaning since the treated
fabrics become self-cleaning, and d) reduce the use of chemicals associated with
routine laundry, washing, drying, ironing, and water proofing via harmful
treatments. The reduced washing and laundering needs of the fabrics are expected
to lead to reduction of contaminated grey water, reduced proliferation of
chemicals in the environment, and increased energy savings due to less water and
energy consumption. Finally, the active components in our formulations degrade
to environmentally benign compounds for minimum impact on the environment during
their life-cycle.