* 0944126
* Student Travel Fellowships to Attend the 2nd Workshop on Resource Discovery
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2011
* Zoe Lacroix, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Vasant G. Honavar
* 08/31/2011
* USD 12,500.00

The second workshop on Resource Discovery (RED) is co-located with&lt;br/&gt;the
35th International Conference on Very Large Data Bases (VLDB)&lt;br/&gt;on
August 28, 2009, in Lyon, France. This project provides travel fellowships
&lt;br/&gt;to students enrolled in US universities in order to attend the
workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop is concerned with the design and
development of models and &lt;br/&gt;prototypes that support the representation
of resources, the discovery of &lt;br/&gt;resources on the Web, the
identification, localisation, and composition of &lt;br/&gt;resources. A
resource corresponds to an information source such as a data
&lt;br/&gt;repository or database management system (e.g., a query form or a
textual &lt;br/&gt;search engine), a link between resources (an index or
hyperlink), or a service &lt;br/&gt;such as an application or tool. Resources
are characterized by core information &lt;br/&gt;including a name, a description
of its input and its output (parameters or format), &lt;br/&gt;its address, and
various additional properties expressed as metadata. Resource
&lt;br/&gt;discovery is the process of identifying and locating existing
resources that have a &lt;br/&gt;particular property. Machine-based resource
discovery relies on crawling, clustering, &lt;br/&gt;and classifying resources
discovered on the Web automatically. Resources are &lt;br/&gt;organized with
respect to metadata that characterize their content (for data sources),
&lt;br/&gt;their semantics (in terms of ontological classes and relationships),
their characteristics &lt;br/&gt;(syntactical properties), their performance
(with metrics and benchmarks), their quality &lt;br/&gt;(curation, reliability,
trust), etc. Resource discovery systems allow the expression of
&lt;br/&gt;queries to identify and locate resources that implement specific
tasks. For further &lt;br/&gt;information see the project web page at:
http://bioinformatics.eas.asu.edu/RED/red2009.html