* 0944764
* Atmospheric CO2 and Abrupt Climate Change
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2013
* Edward Brook, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Julie Palais
* 12/31/2013
* USD 448,074.00

This award supports a project to create new, unprecedented high-resolution
atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) records spanning intervals of abrupt climate
changes during the last glacial period and the early Holocene. The proposed work
will utilize high-precision methods on existing ice cores from high accumulation
sites such as Siple Dome and Byrd Station, Antarctica and will improve our
understanding of how fast CO2 can change naturally, how its variations are
linked with climate, and, combined with a coupled climate-carbon cycle model,
will clarify the role of terrestrial and oceanic processes during past abrupt
changes of climate and CO2. The intellectual merit of this work is that CO2 is
the most important anthropogenic greenhouse gas and understanding its past
variations, its sources and sinks, and how they are linked to climate change is
a major goal of the climate research community. This project will produce high
quality data on centennial to multi-decadal time scales. Such high-resolution
work has not been conducted before because of insufficient analytical precision,
slow experimental procedures in previous studies, or lack of available samples.
The proposed research will complement future high-resolution studies from WAIS
Divide ice cores and will provide ice core CO2 records for the target age
intervals, which are in the zone of clathrate formation in the WAIS ice cores.
Clathrate hydrate is a phase composed of air and ice. CO2 analyses have
historically been less precise in clathrate ice than in ?bubbly ice? such as the
Siple Dome ice core that will be analyzed in the proposed project. High quality,
high-resolution results from specific intervals in Siple Dome that we propose to
analyze will provide important data for verifying the WAIS Divide record. The
broader impacts of the work are that current models show a large uncertainty of
future climate-carbon cycle interactions. The results of this proposed work will
be used for testing coupled carbon cycle-climate models and may contribute to
reducing this uncertainty. The project will contribute to the training of
several undergraduate students and a full-time technician. Both will learn
analytical techniques and the basic science involved. Minorities and female
students will be highly encouraged to participate in this project. Outreach
efforts will include participation in news media interviews, at a local festival
celebrating art, science and technology, and giving seminar presentations in the
US and foreign countries. The OSU ice core laboratory has begun a collaboration
with a regional science museum and is developing ideas to build an exhibition
booth to make public be aware of climate change and ice core research. All data
will be archived at the National Snow and Ice Data Center and at other similar
archives per the OPP data policy.

