* 0944932
* SBIR Phase I:  Web Enabled Expert System to Scale Diagnosis and Improvement of Entrepreneurial Skills
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Michael Sigal, Guidewire Group
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 12/31/2010
* USD 200,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop an
offering designed to help early stage entrepreneurs identify their knowledge
gaps, business risks and market challenges, and prescribe actionable measures
that enable the entrepreneurs to reduce or ameliorate their risks, thereby
increasing the likelihood of success in innovative new ventures. Today, such
diagnostics and prescriptive remedies are delivered in one-on-one engagements
with entrepreneurs. This application strives to make diagnosing and addressing
the knowledge gaps of entrepreneurs a scalable endeavor. If Guidewire Group's
expertise can be encapsulated in this platform and delivered to entrepreneurs in
a highly scalable fashion, this project may shift the way in which entrepreneurs
evaluate and improve their business performance.

It is no secret that the U.S. economy relies heavily on entrepreneurial activity
to deliver economic growth. Each year, hundreds of thousands of entrepreneurs
start new businesses. But according to the US Small Business Administration,
over 50% of businesses fail in their first five years. The SBA estimates that in
2007, 637,100 new employer firms began operations and 560,300 firms closed that
year. The number one reason the SBA cites for this statistic is lack of
experience among entrepreneurs. First-time entrepreneurs often lack the
experience to validate their judgments, qualify their actions, and assess their
performance. Yet because evaluating and coaching entrepreneurs are typically un-
scalable activities, little has been done to make a significant impact on the
business sustainability or performance of these entrepreneurs. The system
proposed in this SBIR Phase I project has the potential to make market-leading
diagnostic expertise available in the form of a self-service, Web-based
application, thereby distributing actionable diagnostics more widely than ever
before.