* 0944358
* COLLABORATIVE: Adelie penguin response to climate change at the individual, colony and metapopulation levels
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2015
* Katie Dugger, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Christian Fritsen
* 08/31/2015
* USD 376,225.00

While changes in populations typically are tracked to gauge the impact of
climate or habitat change, the process involves the response of individuals as
each copes with an altered environment. In a study of Adelie penguins that spans
13 breeding seasons, results indicate that only 20% of individuals within a
colony successfully raise offspring, and that they do so because of their
exemplary foraging proficiency. Moreover, foraging appears to require more
effort at the largest colony, where intraspecific competition is higher than at
small colonies, and also requires more proficiency during periods of
environmental stress. When conditions are particularly daunting, emigration
dramatically increases, countering the long-standing assumption that Ad√©lie
penguins are highly philopatric. The research project will 1) determine the
effect of age, experience and physiology on individual foraging efficiency; 2)
determine the effect of age, experience, and individual quality on breeding
success and survival in varying environmental and competitive conditions at the
colony level; and 3) develop a comprehensive model for the Ross-Beaufort Island
metapopulation dynamics. Broader impacts include training of interns,
continuation of public outreach through the highly successful project website
penguinscience.com, development of classroom materials and other standards-based
instructional resources.