* 0944474
* Collaborative Research: Historic Perspectives on Climate and Biogeography from Deep-sea Corals in the Drake Passage
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2011
* Laura Robinson, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Vladimir Papitashvili
* 08/31/2011
* USD 147,234.00

Polar oceans are the main sites of deep-water formation and are critical to the
exchange of heat and carbon between the deep ocean and the atmosphere. This
award ?Historic perspectives on climate and biogeography from deep-sea corals in
the Drake Passage? will address the following specific research questions: What
was the radiocarbon content of the Southern Ocean during the last glacial
maximum and during past rapid climate change events? and What are the major
controls on the past and present distribution of cold-water corals within the
Drake Passage and adjacent continental shelves? Testing these overall questions
will allow the researchers to better understand how processes in the Southern
Ocean are linked to climate change over millennia. This award is being funded by
the Antarctic Earth Sciences Program of NSF?s Office of Polar Programs,
Antarctic Division. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: The skeletons of
deep-sea corals are abundant in the Southern Ocean, and can be dated using
U-series techniques making them a useful archive of oceanographic history. By
pairing U-series and radiocarbon analyses the awardees can reconstruct the
radiocarbon content of seawater in the past, allowing them to address the
research questions raised above. Collection of living deep-sea corals along with
environmental data will allow them to address the broader biogeography questions
posed above as well. The awardees are uniquely qualified to answer these
questions in their respective labs via cutting edge technologies, and they have
shown promising results from a preliminary pilot cruise to the area in
2008.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: Societal Relevance: The proposed
paleoclimate research will make significant advances toward constraining the
Southern Ocean?s influence on global climate, specifically it should help set
the bounds for the upper limits on how fast the ocean circulation might change
in this region of the world, which is of high societal relevance in this era of
changing climate. Education and Outreach (E/O): These activities are grouped
into four categories: i) increasing student participation in polar research by
fully integrating undergraduate through post-doctoral students into research
programs; ii) promotion of K-12 teaching and learning programs by providing
information via a cruise website and in-school talks, iii) making the data
collected available to the wider research community via data archives such as
Seamounts Online and the Seamount Biogeographic Network and iv) reaching a
larger public audience through such venues as interviews in the popular media.