* 0944022
* Crustal and Uppermost Mantle Anisotropy Beneath Tibet: New Constraints on Deformation
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2010,12/31/2013
* Michael Ritzwoller, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 12/31/2013
* USD 284,088.00

The PIs will apply innovations in seismic surface wave tomography to burgeoning
broadband seismic data sets in China to construct a 3-D model of radial and
azimuthal anisotropy within the crust and uppermost mantle beneath and
surrounding much of Tibet. The new tomographic methods include ambient noise
tomography and array-based earthquake tomography that promise new structural
constraints on isotopic and anisotropic structures from the shallow crust to
mantle depths of at least 150 km with a lateral resolution of about 100 km
across most of the study region. Targeted data sets leverage past and on-going
US PASSCAL experiments by introducing a vast new data resource, the Chinese
provincial networks surrounding Tibet. This work will be facilitated by
collaboration with researchers at the Institute of Geodesy and Geophysics of the
Chinese National Academy of Sciences in Wuhan, China. Preliminary proof-of-
concept data processing and inversion efforts establish the quality of the
constituent data sets and guarantee the production of integrated isotropic and
anisotropic models of the crust and uppermost mantle across all of Tibet.

This work is motivated to gain new insight into fundamental questions related to
the continental collision between India and Asia; in particular, the role of the
Indian and Asian mantle lithospheres in the collision and how the crust deforms
in response to the collision. Detailed consideration of these questions requires
high resolution 3D models of isotropic and anisotropic seismic variables in the
crust and uppermost mantle across all of Tibet. Anisotropic models especially
will provide new constraints on the vertical coherence of strains in the crust
that will help resolve debate between competing theories of crustal deformation
in response to continental collision.