* 0944489
* History of the East Antarctic Ice Sheet since the mid-Miocene: New Evidence from Provenance of Ice-rafted Debris
* GEO,OPP
* 07/15/2010,06/30/2014
* Sidney Hemming, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Kurz
* 06/30/2014
* USD 242,974.00

Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;The PIs propose to study the stability and
dynamics of the East Antarctic ice sheet during the Pliocene in the area of the
Wilkes and Aurora subglacial basins. Models indicate the ice sheet is most
sensitive to warming in these low-lying areas. This study is important as there
is very little direct evidence about which parts of the East Antarctic ice sheet
became unstable under warm conditions. In a pilot study the PIs have shown that
the isotopic geochemical signature of downcore ice-rafted debris (IRD) can be
linked to continental source areas indicating which parts of the ice sheet
reached the coast and calved IRD-bearing icebergs. Their initial results suggest
rapid iceberg discharge from the Wilkes Land and Ad√©lie Land coastal areas at
times in the late Miocene and early Pliocene. In this study the PIs will analyze
IRD from IODP sediment cores collected on the continental rise off East
Antarctica. By analyzing 40Ar/39Ar ages of hornblende IRD grains, U-Pb ages of
zircons, and Sm-Nd isotopes of the fine fraction of several IRD-rich layers for
each core, they will be able to fingerprint continental source areas that will
indicated ice extent and dynamics on East Antarctica. The PIs will also carry
out detailed studies across a few of these layers to characterize the anatomy of
the ice-rafting event and better understand the mechanism of ice
destabilization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: &lt;br/&gt;The data
collected will be important for scientists in a broad variety of fields. The
project will involve one undergraduate student and one summer intern at LDEO,
and a graduate student at Imperial College London. The project will expose to
cutting edge methodologies as well as an international research team. Data from
the project will be deposited in the online databases (SedDB) and all results
and methods will be made available to the scientific community through
publications in peer-reviewed journals and attendance at international
conferences.