* 0944059
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Exploring Migration and Social Identity in the Albuquerque Area during the Late Developmental to Coalition Period Transition
* SBE,BCS
* 11/15/2009,10/31/2011
* Patricia Crown, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/2011
* USD 13,064.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Patricia Crown, Ms. Dorothy Larson will conduct
research on prehistoric pottery from Albuquerque, New Mexico. The collections
date from ~AD 1100-1300, a period that spans significant social changes in the
region. During this era, people moved from many smaller, scattered pueblos to
fewer, larger villages. These social changes are accompanied by notable shifts
in ceramic technology and design. Archaeologists have put forth two different
hypotheses to explain these developments: (1) migration of new people into the
area, or (2) shifting sociopolitical alliances. Ms. Larson will use ceramic
analysis to test these alternate hypotheses. Low-visibility attributes of
pottery can be used to identify migration of people. While migrant potters may
easily copy highly visible attributes of local pottery, typically, the way that
potters manufacture a pot,their "learned tradition" is resistant to change.
Therefore, migrant pottery can be distinguished from local traditions through
intensive research, including chemical and geologic analyses to help pinpoint
the location where the pottery was produced. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
is significant both to the academic community and the public. Despite the fact
that Albuquerque is New Mexico's most populous city, there has been surprisingly
little archaeological work in the region, particularly for the time period in
question. Therefore, this research will fill a major void in the understanding
of New Mexico's rich cultural heritage. This project is also important because
it relies exclusively on artifacts recovered from federally-mandated cultural
resource management projects (such as those required prior to road
construction). The purpose of these projects is to preserve information about
the past, as well as to preserve the objects that may yield additional
information in the future. Museum collections constitute a virtual treasure
trove of these publicly funded archaeological materials. This research will tap
into this under-utilized resource. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will have a
significant impact on public education. An exhibit and website, targeting middle
to high school age students, will be developed at the Maxwell Museum of
Anthropology, and students will participate in development. Ms. Larson has built
a partnership with Mathematics, Engineering, Science Achievement (MESA). The
mission of New Mexico MESA is to provide the state's culturally diverse student
body with science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) enrichment. Sixty-
two percent of New Mexico MESA students receive free or reduced lunch, 56% are
female, and 72% are targeted minorities. Therefore, the project will reach
groups that are under-represented in science careers. MESA students will
participate in a summer enrichment program, which will follow artifacts from the
field through the lab to the museum. The program will focus on how
archaeologists use techniques from the physical sciences, as well as the
scientific method.