* 0944938
* SBIR Phase I:  Using Simulations for Large-Scale Assessment of Higher-Order Thinking Skills
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* Joel Abraham, SimBiotic Software
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2010
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will attempt to
develop a prototype for an online, simulation-based toolset for auto-assessing
higher-order thinking skills and technological literacy. These skills are widely
acknowledged as important and are included in state and federal science
standards, but there are currently few effective means to assess whether
students are learning them. The project will use an existing system that allows
rapid prototyping of educational simulations to develop test scenarios that
provide information on five categories of higher-order thinking. These scenarios
will match student actions within a simulation to both correct and incorrect
reasoning patterns, and can be easily modified to different contexts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Standardized tests are critically important to directing
what is taught in our nation's schools. Although educational standards across
the country emphasize technological literacy and higher-order thinking, state
and national education tests continue to rely primarily on short-answer and
selection type questions that are insufficient for measuring higher-order
skills. This system aims to provide a better means with which to assess student
performance in these areas at an affordable price, and will also pioneer a more
flexible, customizable way of designing test items that will reduce the costs
associated with the development and validation of new test items. If successful,
these simulation-based testing scenarios will allow for improved evaluation of
student reasoning skills and technological literacy, especially as class sizes
increase and remote instruction becomes more commonplace.