* 0944479
* EAGER: Synthesis of One-Dimensional Carbon Chains by Selective Bond Breaking in Polymers
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2010
* Yongfeng Lu, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 07/31/2010
* USD 100,000.00

0944479&lt;br/&gt;Lu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Goal &amp; Objectives: Historically,
carbon allotropes of different dimensional structures (e.g., 3-D diamonds, 2-D
graphite and carbon nanotubes - rolled graphitic sheets, and 0-D fullerenes)
have been copiously studied. However, 1-D carbon chains (carbyne) have long been
an unfrequented zone in scientific community due to the absence of sufficient
sizeable and well-defined carbyne crystal samples. The primary goal of this
project is to produce carbyne from a polymeric precursor 'polythiophene' through
laser-assisted synthesis process. This research has the potential to not only
enrich scientific knowledge of the carbon family tree by enabling for the first
time a detailed characterization of the crystal and electronic structures of
carbyne, but also allow for the potential new technological approaches to the
all-carbon electronics. The goal of this project will be accomplished through
five objectives: 1) to develop a synthesis method to obtain carbyne from
polythiophene using laser-induced selective bond-breaking; 2) to produce well-
defined and sizeable crystalline carbyne in scalable quantities; 3) to improve
stability of carbyne crystals, 4) to clarify crystal and electronic structures
of crystalline carbyne; and 5) to understand the fundamental physical properties
of carbyne. &lt;br/&gt;The PI has shown that carbon-chain nanocrystals could be
prepared by breaking the C-S and C-H bonds in polythiophene. Atomic force
microscopy and X-ray diffraction measurements suggested that the formation of
cubic carbon nanocrystals with a quasi-1-D carbon-chain structure is possible.
Based on these preliminary results, the PI will selectively break the C-S bonds
in polythiophene using resonant laser excitation, which is anticipated to
produce sizeable carbyne crystals with well-defined structures in scalable
quantities. Furthermore, the PI will carry out structural characterization of
the carbyne crystals and investigate the electronic properties using scanning
tunneling microscopy. Fundamental physical properties of the carbyne crystals
will be investigated correspondingly to evaluate the possibility of potential
applications in all-carbon electronics. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This
research will establish a state-of-the-art approach to preparing sizeable well-
defined carbyne crystals with scalable quantities. Successful implementation
could advance all-carbon electronics. Compared to currently used processes, the
process to be developed has these advantages: 1) the proposed method is
environmentally friendly by eliminating hazardous solutions; 2) by obtaining
well-defined carbyne crystals, the crystalline structure of carbyne will be well
characterized; 3) the process is cost-effective because it requires only a
single step, meeting manufacturing needs of carbyne crystals. Because the PI has
successfully undertaken previous research on laser interactions with polymers,
the process and characterization equipment recently developed will be used in
this project &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project will benefit social and
educational communities. The mass-production of crystalline carbyne would
provide a knowledge base and practical approaches for a wide range of
engineering applications, such as the all-carbon electronics, light harvesting
antenna, and antioxidant and anticorrosive material. The research results will
be released to scientific, industrial, and public communities in various ways,
including the internet, journal papers, and conferences. This new knowledge will
be incorporated into courses at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln (i.e., 'ELEC
952: Introduction to Nanotechnology'). One graduate student from an
underrepresented minority group and two undergraduate students will work on this
project.