* 0944777
* Research at Undergraduate Institutions: Development of an On-line GIS Repository of Geological Data from the Ford Ranges, Marie Byrd Land, &amp; Application to Cenozoic Paleogeogra
* GEO,OPP
* 06/15/2010,05/31/2013
* Christine Siddoway, Colorado College
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Isern
* 05/31/2013
* USD 49,545.00

Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;This work will create a GIS-based repository of
geological data sets from the Ford Ranges that will be made available via the
Internet in both GIS and interactive web format. The proposed project will
integrate the products of geological research with WorldView imagery and high
resolution TMA photography available from the Antarctic Geospatial Information
Center. The aims of the project are: 1) to develop an internet-based system for
sharing of geological data, 2) associate these data with high resolution
photography and imagery to extend analysis from areas of rock exposure to
completely glaciated areas, and 3) to provide undergraduates with an exciting
context in which to acquire fundamental skills and analytical experience in GIS
together with an understanding of physical-chemical principles. The research
will use GIS for inquiry and interpretation of a geological-glacial setting that
has significance for climate, ice sheet, or tectonics in West Antarctica,
augmented by in-depth study of published geological literature, through which
students will learn to think critically, problem-solve, and experiment with
methods and data sets in order to find solutions to contemporary scientific
questions. This compilation of geological data and bedrock physical parameters
is needed for the quantitative analysis of past paleotopography by ANTscape and
Antarctic Climate Evolution scientists, and may be used as input data for
continually more refined climate evolution and ice sheet
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: &lt;br/&gt;As part of this work
three undergraduates pursing senior theses will develop proficiency in GIS while
exploring research questions about Antarctic climate evolution. This work will
enable the scientific community to access an on-line repository of geological
data from the Ford Ranges, West Antarctica that will be placed within the larger
geospatial framework offered by satellite imagery. Interpretations of
paleoelevations for selected regions and time intervals will be of broad use for
climate/ice sheet modelers and glacial geologists. Petrological,
geochronological, and structural data will be of value for solid earth
scientists conducting work in segments of the former accretionary margin of
Gondwana.