* 0944249
* VisWeek 2009 Doctoral Colloquium
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2009,03/31/2010
* Klaus Mueller, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 03/31/2010
* USD 19,968.00

This is funding to support a Doctoral Colloquium (workshop) of promising
doctoral students and distinguished research faculty, to be held in conjunction
with this year's IEEE VisWeek Conference, which will take place October 11-16,
2009, in Atlantic City, NJ. Visualization, or the use of interactive graphics to
support data analysis and understanding, has become an integral part and
critical component of many application areas. VisWeek consists of three main
events: IEEE Visualization (Vis), IEEE Information Visualization (InfoVis), and
the IEEE Visual Analytics Science and Technology Symposium (VAST). IEEE Vis is
the oldest of the three venues of VisWeek, and will celebrate its 20th
anniversary this year. Its traditional focus has been on a wide range of topics
in scientific and medical visualization. InfoVis centers around helping people
explore or explain abstract data through interactive software that exploits the
capabilities of the human perceptual system, focusing on cognitively useful
spatial mappings of abstract datasets that are not inherently spatial, and
accompanying the mappings with interaction techniques that allow people to
intuitively explore the data. VAST, the youngest event, was founded in 2006 to
address the growing interest in the science of analytical reasoning supported by
highly interactive visual interfaces; its focus is on visual analytics tools and
techniques to synthesize information into knowledge, derive insight from
massive, dynamic, and often conflicting data; detect the expected and discover
the unexpected, provide timely, defensible, and understandable assessments, and
communicate assessments effectively for action. IEEE VisWeek is the premier
forum for visualization advances in science and engineering for academia,
government, and industry, bringing together about 800 researchers and
practitioners from around the world with a shared interest in techniques, tools,
and technology. The papers published in the special conference issue of IEEE
Transactions of Visualization and Computer Graphics are rigorously refereed and
widely cited.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Doctoral Colloquium at IEEE VisWeek 2009
will bring together approximately 12 dissertation stage doctoral students in the
field of visualization, from the United States and abroad, who will come
together on Saturday, October 10, for a day of discussions and interaction with
6 faculty researchers, with follow-up events that will take place during the
conference?s technical program. A primary goal of the colloquium is to allow
students to discuss their research directions in a supportive atmosphere with a
panel of distinguished leaders and with their peers, who will provide helpful
feedback and fresh perspectives. The colloquium also supports community
building, by connecting beginning and advanced researchers so as to build a
cohort group of new researchers who will then have a network of colleagues
across the world. Student research will be disseminated via posters during the
VisWeek 2009 technical program, and via extended abstracts published in the
VisWeek 2009 Extended Abstracts. Feedback about the Doctoral Colloquium will be
provided to future conference committees. The PI has affirmed that in managing
this event he and his colleagues will try explicitly to identify and include the
broadest possible group of highly qualified participants, and that they will
ensure that NSF funds are used chiefly to support participation by students
enrolled in graduate programs in the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The VisWeek Doctoral Colloquium has taken place annually at the
Visualization conference since 2006, and has helped launch the careers of a
number of outstanding young Vis researchers. It brings together the best of the
next generation of visualization researchers, and allows them to create a social
network both among themselves and with senior researchers, which plays a major
role in their enculturation into the profession. Since the students and faculty
are a diverse group on several dimensions (nationality, scientific discipline,
research specialization), the students' horizons are broadened at a critical
stage in their professional development.