* 0944055
* Studies of Unusual Earthquakes: Volcanos and Landslides
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2013
* Goran Ekstrom, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Raffaella Montelli
* 06/30/2013
* USD 247,543.00

The project involves the investigation of anomalous seismic sources with a
specific focus on slow earthquakes associated with volcanos and landslides. It
builds on results and discoveries that have come from the systematic application
of a long-period event detection algorithm to real-time and archive seismic data
recorded on the Global Seismographic Network. For each year since 1991, more
than 100 earthquakes of magnitude 5 or greater that are not reported in other
catalogs have been detected and located using this algorithm. Many of these
earthquakes are slow, and a large number of them have been associated with
volcanos and landslides. The first goal of the project is to discriminate
volcano and landslide earthquakes from other earthquakes that have been
identified only by the long-period detection algorithm. The second goal is to
relate those earthquakes that occur in volcanic regions to eruptive activity and
changes in the geometry and behavior of magmatic plumbing systems. In
particular, the project will involve a detailed comparative study of unusual
earthquakes associated with the two greatest caldera collapses of basaltic
volcanos over the last century, Fernandina (Galapagos Islands) and Miyakejima
(Japan). The third goal is to investigate anomalous earthquakes associated with
large landslide events. A recently developed methodology for determining the
trajectory of the sliding mass during a landslide directly from the radiated
seismic waves will be refined and improved and applied to several known and
inferred landslide events in order to estimate dynamic landslide
parameters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will lead to an improved
characterization and discrimination of earthquake sources, and will help clarify
the phenomenology of volcano and landslide earthquakes. The volcano
investigations will provide new constraints on stress and deformation patterns
within active volcanoes, as well as on the mechanics of caldera collapse and its
relationship to magmatic transport and plumbing. The landslide investigations
will lead to better characterization of the seismic radiation from landslide
sources, and will provide new constraints on key landslide parameters, such as
mass, runout, and effective coefficient of friction. The seismological analysis
methods developed for these studies will contribute to improved monitoring
capabilities for volcanos and landslides, which represent important classes of
geohazards.