* 0944435
* SBIR Phase I:  Batch Fabrication of High Aspect Ratio Metallic AFM Probes
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Mehdi Yazdanpanah, NaugaNeedles LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2010
* USD 200,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is to demonstrate the
feasibility of batch fabricating high-aspect ratio atomic force microscopy (AFM)
probes. These probes have excellent mechanical and electrical properties and are
customizable to a wide range of applications and substrates. Currently each
probe is individually fabricated by dipping a silver-coated probe into melted
gallium at room temperature, resulting in the self-assembly of a long, constant-
diameter metal nanoneedle on the probe tip. Current production throughput is
only five probes per hour. Because of their unique form and function there is a
growing demand for these probes which can only be met if they are fabricated in
parallel. In Phase I, a batch process will be developed, with the goal of
moderate yield (25%) over a 1 cm square area. One innovative aspect of the
project is the use of a gallium coated substrate that has an elastomeric
underlayer to provide a degree of self-alignment that ensures intimate contact
of the thick gallium film layer with surfaces that are not perfectly flat. The
extension of this concept - in future studies - to the patterning of arrays of
freestanding nanoneedles over curved and multilevel substrates appears
reasonable. Based on the attainment of adequate yields in Phase I, Phase II will
focus on the development of a semi-automated tool for wafer-scale growth of
probes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project is a dramatically increased commercial viability of a new kind of
specialized AFM probe. The total market for AFM probes is $385 million, of which
up to $100 million is addressable, if such probes can be fabricated in larger
quantities. Since the launch of this technology in late 2008, customer feedback
has been overwhelmingly positive. Current customers of these probes have made it
clear that this new probe technology represents an enabling tool which will help
advance and accelerate the pace of research and discovery in areas including
nanomanipulation, biophysical probing, nanomechanics, nanoelectronics and
metrology. The long range economic and societal impact will be a new
manufactured product which will help to maintain U.S. leadership in
nanotechnology and create high-paying technical jobs for scientists and
engineers in Kentucky, a state where such opportunities have traditionally been
extremely limited.