* 0944892
* SBIR Phase I:  Portable, Miniaturized Fourier Transform Infrared Spectrometer for Analysis of Inaccessible, Complex Surfaces
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* Steven Donahue, A2 TECHNOLOGIES, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl F. Albus
* 06/30/2010
* USD 149,155.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)Phase I project will characterize
sample requirements, as well as breadboard electronic and optical instrument
hardware, in support of the development of an ultra-miniaturized Fourier
transform infrared analyzer. The proposed analyzer is unique in that it will be
capable of functioning effectively on a wide variety of irregular and previously
inaccessible surfaces of varied composition associated with pharmaceutical
cleaning verification and aerospace maintenance applications. Specifically, the
project will determine the optimum means to detect trace levels of active
pharmaceutical ingredients on the various materials (i.e., Teflon and stainless
steel) and irregular surface geometries in pharmaceutical manufacturing
equipment, using an infrared spectrum analyzer. The need to access locations
deep in inside an object will drive the requirement to miniaturize this
technology and to develop novel means of accessing particularly difficult
locations. For example, in aircraft maintenance, the need to probe the molecular
integrity of composite material in the fuselage of a plane will require a
miniature analyzer coupled with highly sensitive detector and flexible sampling
probe. The outcome of this work will be the invention of a miniaturized FTIR-
based surface analyzer, which will find application in a host of key industries.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is substantial and will
benefit a number of manufacturing related industries. By understanding what is
required to develop useful technology for characterizing a wide range of
surfaces by infrared analysis, as well as miniaturizing the technology for use
in non-lab environments, a host of industrial applications become accessible.
For example, in the pharmaceutical industry the technology will lead to on-site
cleaning verification that reduces manufacturing equipment down-time and the
costs to produce pharmaceuticals. In the aerospace industry, many surfaces must
be cleaned, and verified as clean, during manufacturing and maintenance in order
to ensure that coatings, paints and primers are effectively applied to metal,
polymer and composite surfaces. For devices as sophisticated as the next
generation space shuttle or composite base commercial airlines, the need to know
that surfaces are properly cleaned and/or prepared is critical as it impacts
vehicle maintenance and safety.