* 0944000
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel buffer layers for superior superconductor films on a low-cost substrate
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* Muralidhar Rao, Kavana Technology, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2010
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims to increase the
commercial use of high temperature superconductors (HTSs) by reducing component
costs and increasing manufacturability. Specifically, the innovation is to
produce high-quality HTS thin films on a new substrate material that is a
fraction of the cost of substrates currently in commercial use. The
incompatibility in the physical properties of the proposed low cost substrate
and HTS material prevent commercial application at present. This incompatibility
will be bridged by an innovative buffer layer grown between the substrate and
HTS. The research objectives are focused on identifying the critical parameters
of the buffer layer that result in superior HTS films suitable for practical
applications. A series of HTS thin films with different buffer layer variations
will be grown. The films will be characterized by atomic force microscopy. In
addition, their transition temperature and critical current density will be
measured. A prototype commercially-relevant HTS film with optimized buffer layer
parameters, fabricated on a low-cost substrate, will be the end product of the
Phase I research. The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is
that it enables a high-performance superconductor wireless filter product that
can be produced at greatly reduced costs over comparable superconductor filters.
The filter will reduce dropped calls and increase base station range, thus
enhancing the customer's wireless experience. Wireless carriers will benefit
from reduced infrastructure costs due to a lower number of base station
installations, which will also have a beneficial environmental impact. The
immediate target markets of the innovation are cellular base station original
equipment manufacturers (OEMs), and wireless operators. The total market for
wireless filter equipment is $400 million per year and is growing at 22% per
year. The project will also result in an increased understanding of the role of
buffer layer designs on thin film properties, which will have a benefit in other
areas, such as magnetic thin films and other thin film material systems where
incompatible substrates limit commercial applications.