* 0944552
* Applications of Advanced Laser Spectroscopy to the Ice Core Record of Changes in Climate and Methane Biogeochemistry
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2017
* Edward Brook, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 03/31/2017
* USD 670,020.00

0944552/Brook

This award supports a project to develop and use a new analytical tool for ice
core gas and isotope analyses based on an innovative laser spectroscopic
technique. The measurements will be integrated with sample processing techniques
that continuously melt vertical sections of ice core, and the ancient air that
is normally wasted in such sample processing will be released and analyzed. The
proposed work focuses on three climatically relevant measurements for which
laser technology has sufficiently advanced that ice core applications are
possible. These include the atmospheric concentration and stable isotopic
composition of methane (delta 13C and delta D), the carbon monoxide mixing
ratio, and the isotopic composition of the ice itself (delta D and delta 18O).
The biogeochemical rationale for these choices is that methane mixing ratios are
highly correlated with temperature change in the northern hemisphere and used as
global stratigraphic markers in ice core studies. The methane isotopic
composition is important for understanding sources and sinks of methane and
addressing controversies over the stability of the large marine hydrate
reservoir. Carbon monoxide, which can be measured simultaneously with methane
and its isotopes, is involved in biogeochemical cycles that also control methane
mixing ratios. The stable isotopes of water are basic tracers of past
temperature in ice core research. The proposed work will bring new cutting-edge
technology to polar research, and develop it further. The proposed isotopic
methods are particularly important in this regard given that these measurements
are difficult with traditional methods, the proposed work has the potential to
transform isotopic studies of methane in ice. Measuring gases in air released
from ice cores during continuous melting of vertical sections for other chemical
measurements will save valuable time and precious ice and will ultimately
generate trace atmospheric gas data in real time. The project will support both
a postdoctoral researcher and a graduate student and will involve a new faculty
member who is bringing significant industry experience to academia. The PIs will
participate in recruitment efforts that target minority graduate students and
post-docs will participate in a variety of outreach efforts, including news
interviews, television documentaries, lab tours, mini-classes for gifted middle
school students and a new effort with Oregon Museum of Science and Industry to
build a climate exhibit.