* 0944161
* Collaborative Research: Comprehensive Analysis of Seismic Processes in a Deep South African Mine
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2014
* Margaret Boettcher, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2014
* USD 255,958.00

Many fundamental questions in earthquake physics remain unresolved, largely
because of&lt;br/&gt;difficulties in obtaining high-quality, near-source
recordings of small earthquakes and&lt;br/&gt;deriving reliable source
parameters. The overarching goal of this project is to provide
an&lt;br/&gt;improved understanding of earthquake source processes for a wide
magnitude range&lt;br/&gt;(approximately -4 to 4). We are performing detailed
seismological investigations of&lt;br/&gt;source properties that characterize
several distinct classes of seismic events (earthquakes,&lt;br/&gt;rockbursts,
and blasts) in a 3.6 km deep South African mine. We will also conduct a
short&lt;br/&gt;field campaign to record seismic events at the extremes of the
magnitude range and in&lt;br/&gt;close proximity to fault structures. Full
source tensor inversions, second moment&lt;br/&gt;analysis, and spectral methods
will be used to determine comprehensive sets of source&lt;br/&gt;properties
including scalar potencies/moments, focal mechanisms, corner
frequencies,&lt;br/&gt;strain/stress drops, radiated energies, rupture
velocities, and source time functions.&lt;br/&gt;Special effort will be devoted
to detecting isotropic components of faulting.
Theoretical&lt;br/&gt;calculations of expected radiation from different event
types will help in the&lt;br/&gt;interpretation of results.&lt;br/&gt;Applying
the above analysis to the small-magnitude, near source seismic data will
allow&lt;br/&gt;us to obtain constraints on many aspects of earthquake physics
including nucleation&lt;br/&gt;processes, the prevalence of isotropic components
of seismic radiation, changes in the&lt;br/&gt;physics of rupture with event
magnitude or with proximity to geologic and mining&lt;br/&gt;structures, and
source parameter differences between earthquakes, explosions, and
other&lt;br/&gt;seismic sources. The high-resolution results on seismic source
properties and scaling&lt;br/&gt;relations will significantly impact the
earthquake physics and rock mechanics&lt;br/&gt;communities by helping to
resolve long-term controversies on earthquake nucleation and&lt;br/&gt;rupture
processes, scaling of laboratory results to natural faults, and earthquake
energy&lt;br/&gt;budgets, among others. In addition, the findings on spatially
dependent seismic properties&lt;br/&gt;will be useful for decision-making
concerning when and where to suspend mining&lt;br/&gt;activities to enhance
underground safety