* 0944104
* Scientific, Educational and Logistical Preparation for Advanced Modular Incoherent Scatter Radar (AMISR) Relocation to Argentina
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* David Fritts, NorthWest Research Associates, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Robinson
* 08/31/2012
* USD 400,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;The investigator will complete a detailed evaluation of suitable
locations in Argentina, to determine the potential next site to relocate and
operate the Advanced Modular Incoherent Scatter Radar (AMISR). This relocation
of the AMISR instrument aims to create a global scale ionospheric plasma
laboratory by placing two National Science Foundation (NSF) - Upper Atmospheric
Facilities (UAF) at both ends of the same geomagnetic field line.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research effort will involve three parallel and
complimentary work activities: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) A logistic approach to
establish the most suitable location to install and operate AMISR, via a series
of field trips and technical workshops. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2) A scientific
approach in which crucial atmospheric measurements will be made in Argentina,
some coincident with the Arecibo radar and its soon-to-be-operational
ionospheric HF heater. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3) A human resources development
approach in which, through a series of educational programs, the PI will build a
teaching environment to train Argentine and US students and postdocs through
collaborative studies and international interactions&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research will pave the way for an improved understanding of the 3-dimensional
structure of the atmosphere, ionosphere, and magnetosphere (AIM) system,
especially at Southern latitudes, where there is currently a scarcity of ground
based measurements. The work will leverage existing NSF upper atmosphere
observing facilities in a synergistic fashion, and thus extend the capabilities
to provide improved global coverage of important AIM interactions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator is involving young students in the site
evaluation work, and will develop valuable international teaching courses to
prepare the next generation of atmospheric scientists to operate the radar, and
interpret the scientific results. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit
of this project is the opportunity to perform a series of studies, using a test
radar and several optical cameras, to better understand inter-hemispheric large-
scale dynamics and electrodynamics studies at Southern latitudes, and prepare
for the possible deployment of the AMISR instrument in Argentina, which
represents a logical expansion of the NSF UAF network.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work is funded jointing by the NSF Upper Atmosphere
Research Section in the Division of Atmospheric Sciences, and the NSF Office of
International Science and Engineering (OISE). &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;