* 0944202
* Collaborative Research: From Earthquake Physics to Testable Forecasts
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2014
* Danijel Schorlemmer, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 07/31/2014
* USD 299,278.00

Models that attempt to incorporate earthquake physics play an increasingly
important role in seismology and are prevalent in seismic hazard assessment.
&lt;br/&gt;Most often, the physical ideas that inform these models are
heuristically motivated and based on expert opinion. The Uniform California
Earthquake Rupture Forecast (UCERF2) employs several such models. To increase
the testability of the upcoming UCERF3, we propose to investigate the
characteristic earthquake hypothesis, the relation of maximum magnitude to fault
length, and the Coulomb Stress hypothesis. For many faults, seismologists
identified so-called characteristic earthquakes and include them as expected
target earthquakes in hazard assessment. The most prominent and best studied
example is the sequence of magnitude 6 events at Parkfield, CA. Studies have
shown that this phenomenon possibly could be explained by low sample size from
the upper magnitude ranges of the frequency-magnitude distribution. The relation
of maximum magnitude to fault length plays a major role in hazard assessment as
it is used to estimate the size of future large events at particular faults.
This relation is based purely on a posteriori observations and has not been
tested using a priori predictions. The most complicated of the selected models
is the Coulomb Stress model. It shows great descriptive capabilities but is also
relies on a posteriori observations through fitting of the free parameters. Its
uncertainty range remains relatively unexplored. Common to all of these
conceptual models is the fact that they were never rigorously tested for their
predictive power, owing in some part to the difficulty in formulating them as
testable hypotheses. We propose to explore the uncertainty ranges of these
hypotheses and to translate them into testable hypotheses to be tested
rigorously in the framework of the Collaboratory for the Study of Earthquake
Predictability. &lt;br/&gt;This study will add more testability to the UCERF3
effort and help to understand and to quantify the impact of these models on
seismic hazard assessment.