* 0944995
* SBIR Phase I:  Modified Doherty Transmit Architecture Employing Digital Signal Synthesis for Wideband RF Communication
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* Deepnarayan Gupta, HYPRES, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2010
* USD 106,090.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
demonstrate a Radio Frequency (RF) transmitter capable of groundbreaking
performance for wireless infrastructure applications. Significant performance
gains are expected from three main innovations in this highly-digital
transmitter. First, building on the Doherty Power Amplifier (PA), a unique
method of optimal digital synthesis of the RF drive signals is proposed; no
analog upconversion, power-split and phase adjustment are needed. Digital
signals drive a Doherty PA with modified bias, achieving higher efficiency than
conventional designs. Second, efficiency and linearity are further improved over
wide bandwidth (BW) by predistorting the digitized RF waveform directly. Third,
a modular PA implementation is introduced, which is adaptively reconfigured to
optimize the overall power efficiency with varying load. The design goals of the
proposed work are: wide BW (100MHz), widely programmable carrier frequency
(2.3-2.8GHz), high linearity (better than -65dBc), high output power (200W) and
excellent average efficiency (&gt;60% at 10dB backoff). Analysis comparing the
proposed PA to a conventional design shows average efficiency improvements of
over 10% for maximum average power and up to 100% for 6dB backed off average
power; the output power and average power gain are enhanced by 11% and 4Ã—
respectively. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of
this project is considerable. Wireless network operators have long been
demanding RF transmitters offering wider BW, better power efficiency, compact
size and increased re-configurability to evolve their networks towards 4G at
reasonable cost. Conventional transmitters cannot these requirements
simultaneously. With groundbreaking performance, the proposed technology would
be an ideal candidate for insertion into next generation 4G basestations.
Commercialization of this work would result in significant savings in
operational and capital expense for network operators, thereby enabling cost-
effective 4G deployment with smaller, fewer and more aesthetic basestations.
Reduction in energy consumption is also in line with the future roadmap of
?green technology?. Several options exist for product insertion into the
wireless marketplace including: independent development of a complete
basestation product, partnership with an established supplier of wireless
basestations and licensing of inventions to external parties. The proposed
research will increase understanding of PA nonlinearities, especially due to
intrinsic device properties, and demonstrate the potential of a ?mixed signal?
approach to realizing RF transmitters, wherein the rapidly advancing speed and
complexity of digital circuits greatly improves the performance of traditionally
analog RF systems.&lt;br/&gt;