* 0944784
* SBIR Phase I: Ultra High Capacity and High Rate Anodes for Next Generation Lithium-Ion Batteries
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* Jinjun Shi, Nanotek Instruments, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Maria Josephine Yuen
* 06/30/2010
* USD 149,990.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project seeks to develop a new
generation of anode materials for lithium-ion batteries having the advantages of
low cost, high Li+ ion storage capacity, high rate, and long cycling life. These
anode materials are innovative nanocomposite structures made up of Si nano
particles, carbon, and nano graphene platelets (NGPs). NGPs were recently shown
to exhibit the highest intrinsic strength among existing materials. This
reasearch aims to demonstrate the technical feasibility of this electrode
technology by carrying out the following tasks: (1) preparation and
characterization of the nanocomposite particles based on theoretical guidelines,
and (2) cycling performance evaluation of laboratory-scale cells. The goal is
the development of an anode material with a capacity over 700 mAh/g.

The broader/commercial impact of this project is that the availability of a
high-capacity and high-rate anode material will overcome one of the barriers
that have prevented the more widespread implementation of Li-ion batteries in
electric vehicle applications. If successful, the new anode technology is
expected to speed the development and deployment of advanced lithium-ion
batteries for electric vehicles. The batteries that use this anode material will
have enhanced the charge/discharge rates and enable electric vehicles with
higher mileage range. The technology is expected to have positive impact in
several of the nation's energy-related initiatives: reduction of greenhouse gas
and other emissions, and decrease in dependence on imported fossil fuel.
Moreover, the successful commercialization of this technology is expected to
provide a differentiating capability that can strengthen Li-ion battery
development and manufacturing within the US.