* 0944309
* Collaborative research: Quantifying the Sensitivity of Antarctic Snowpack Nitrate to Primary NOx Sources and Photodenitrification:  Implications for the Ice Core Record
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2012
* Daven Henze, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Peter Milne
* 04/30/2012
* USD 116,440.00

The processes that form, transport and recycle the reactive forms of nitrogen in
the atmosphere are important in global air quality, atmospheric nutrient
deposition, and for controlling the long term oxidation capacity of the
atmosphere. The NOx gases (NOx = NO + NO2) are also important greenhouse gases.
The ultimate goal being pursued in this modeling study is the understanding of
past (polar) atmospheric composition, and through a better accounting of the
variability of contemporary atmospheric reactive nitrogen compounds as may be
discerned from measurements of nitrate concentrations retained in snow, firn and
ice cores on the Antarctic continent. The approach will use a inverse chemical
transfer model (adjoint GEOS-Chem) to test the sensitivity of nitrate deposition
to Antarctic ice from various possible sources. By integrating a snowpack
radiative transfer subroutine into the chemical transport model, comparisons of
calculated with observed fluxes of snowpack NOx at some observed inland and
coastal Antarctic sites are to be used to parameterize photdenitrification
rates. An additional question to be investigated with the developed modeling
tools is what fraction of the nitrate concentration undergoing photolysis at the
snow surface is recycled back to the atmosphere, or else preserved in the
accreting ice.