* 0944634
* Rigid Chelating Ligands as Tools for Discovery of New Reactions and Applications in Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2009,01/31/2012
* Oleg Ozerov, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 01/31/2012
* USD 300,118.00

This research award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic program
supports work by Professor Oleg Ozerov at Brandeis University to explore the
chemistry of transition metal complexes supported by a series of rigid pincer-
type ligands. The modular construction and the rigidity will allow for logical
and systematic variation of the electronic interactions of the supporting
ligands with the transition metal centers. New catalytic transformations by the
designed metal complexes will be targeted, such as boron-boron bond formation
and rhodium-catalyzed carbon-carbon and carbon-heteroatom coupling reactions.
The pursuit of catalytic applications will take place in synergy with
fundamental explorations: generation of a unified scale for reactions of simple
and oxidative addition, possible observation of a transition metal methane
complex and of a gold hydride complex, and studies of electronic consequences of
severe unsaturation at the metal center. Research results will be used to create
educational materials, which will be disseminated. An integral part of the work
is the collaboration with colleagues at other, especially primarily
undergraduate, institutions. Prof. Anthony Fernandez of Merrimack College will
be supported through a subaward to investigate solid-state oxidative addition
reactions. A regional undergraduate research symposium will be organized to
promote undergraduate research and enhance ties in the regional chemistry
community.

Transition metal catalysis is indispensable in many industrial processes of
importance to modern society. Chelating supporting ligands can be used to
stabilize homogeneous transition metal catalysts. Using a series of modularly
variable, rigidly constructed ligands will permit the development of better
understanding of the influence of the individual donor sites on the overall
reactivity of the metal complex.