* 0944025
* SBIR Phase I:  A Novel Antimicrobial Polymer for Medical Devices
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Michael Szycher, STERLING BIOMEDICAL, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2010
* USD 184,614.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project addresses the issue of
costly and fatal infections associated with polymer-based, implantable medical
devices. Device infections occur when bacteria adhere to the polymer surface,
forming a biofilm that can be 100 to 1,000 times less susceptible to antibiotics
than are planktonic bacteria. While only an estimated 5% of venous catheters
become infected, this equates to about 90% of all sepsis cases in intensive care
medicine. Thus, there is a critical need for a long-term, antimicrobial polymer.
This technology reduces the chances for catastrophic, biomaterial infections by
incorporating silver-based antimicrobial agents into polyurethane which inhibits
bacterial adhesion and biofilm formation on medical devices. The research
objectives of this study are to make initial measurements on our formulas to
determine their mechanical, chemical, and long-term antimicrobial properties of
our novel biomaterial to determine their efficacy. The overall goal is to
demonstrate in vivo feasibility of this new concept.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project includes enhancing
technological understanding of antimicrobial implantable devices. The project
will also impact society by decreasing patient morbidity and mortality related
to implant -caused infections. Finally, this research will have significant
commercial impact; with over 100,000 device-related infections each year, the
healthcare cost is over $4.0 billion annually. These infections have been
targeted by the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services as priorities for
eradication starting October 2008. In 2009 it will stop paying for hospital-
based device infections. Hospitals purchase millions of implantable devices
yearly. The multi-billion dollar implantable device market needs new technology
for manufacturing infection-resistant devices. The proposed technology can be
manufactured on a large-scale, and could lead to the successful
commercialization and production of cost-effective medical devices. The
worldwide market for chronic venous catheters is estimated at $600 million
annually, representing a significant market opportunity for the company and a
major reduction in national care costs due to catheter-related infections.