* 0944982
* SBIR Phase I:  3-D Printing of Fiber-Reinforced High-Temperature Ceramic Metal Composites
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* Thomas Briselden, Visual Composites, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl F. Albus
* 06/30/2010
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will expand the
knowledge of high-temperature material formulations for 3-D printing, rapid
prototyping, and rapid manufacturing. Significant amounts of energy can be saved
in systems such as solid oxide fuel cells, nuclear reactors, industrial
furnaces, chemical processing plants and steam generators if a low cost material
method can be developed. This project will investigate making fiber-reinforced
ceramic-metal composites that provide superior strength and endurance and are
capable of operating in high-temperature harsh environments. A novel 3-D
printing process that lends itself to mass-customization will be used to
generate these new compositions. A successful research outcome will establish
the feasibility of producing low cost high performance components for energy
systems that cannot be cost effectively manufactured with traditional methods.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will enable significant
next generation advances in energy systems. The ability to 3-D print new high-
temperature material formulations will support research at universities and
corporations and initiate a new paradigm in the way designers view component
integration for energy intensive systems. The U.S. energy market will save a
potential 2,670 trillion BTUs of energy and 26.82 million tons of green house
gas reductions through the successful commercialization of this technology. The
reduction in fossil fuels will have a positive impact on our energy security,
environmental quality, and the economic well-being of our country. This research
will expand the body of knowledge of 3-D formed ceramic-metal based materials
and components with the expectation of spreading this technology into the
developing renewable energy applications in the wind, solar and nuclear arenas.