* 0944544
* SBIR Phase I:Unified Social Inbox
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* Jonathan Rosenberg, Rocket Technology Labs, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 06/30/2010
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I attempts to unify
electronic communications into a single interface. Which, to date, has been
difficult to achieve with existing technology. When each new communications
modality results in a new "inbox," it only makes the situation worse. Social
networks, some with over 200 million users, are the most egregious example,
attempting to lock users into using only their site to access social networking
messages (essentially proprietary captive email). The problem intended to be
solve in the proposed project is to integrate a broad range of message
modalities from disparate, often proprietary, and blocked sources into an
integrated solution. In the current effort, the architected server will channel
all incoming social networking messages through published APIs and other means.

Rocketvox's target markets are the 75 million "Millennials" and the 30 million
Mobile Professionals in the U.S. - mobile, technically savvy, heavy users of
multiple modes of communication, highly social, experimental, and interested in
simplicity. These users frequently are required to use over a dozen different
modes of communication on a daily basis. Each mode may require a different
application which requires they learn each application and they must maintain
them all on their computers. Further, studies show great time lost and cognitive
dissonance when having to constantly change from one client to another.
Rocketvox is building a comprehensive, cross-platform, integrated
ecommunications. If successful, the solution will markedly simplify the
management of our digital lives.