* 0944165
* Collaborative Research: Impact of Mesoscale Processes on Iron Supply and Phytoplankton Dynamics in the Ross Sea
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2016
* Dennis McGillicuddy, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Christian Fritsen
* 06/30/2016
* USD 649,317.00

The Ross Sea continental shelf is one of the most productive areas in the
Southern Ocean, and may comprise a significant, but unaccounted for, oceanic CO2
sink, largely driven by phytoplankton production. The processes that control the
magnitude of primary production in this region are not well understood, but data
suggest that iron limitation is a factor. Field observations and model
simulations indicate four potential sources of dissolved iron to surface waters
of the Ross Sea: (1) circumpolar deep water intruding from the shelf edge; (2)
sediments on shallow banks and nearshore areas; (3) melting sea ice around the
perimeter of the polynya; and (4) glacial meltwater from the Ross Ice Shelf. The
principal investigators hypothesize that hydrodynamic transport via mesoscale
currents, fronts, and eddies facilitate the supply of dissolved iron from these
four sources to the surface waters of the Ross Sea polynya. These hypotheses
will be tested through a combination of in situ observations and numerical
modeling, complemented by satellite remote sensing. In situ observations will be
obtained during a month-long cruise in the austral summer. The field data will
be incorporated into model simulations, which allow quantification of the
relative contributions of the various hypothesized iron supply mechanisms, and
assessment of their impact on primary production. The research will provide new
insights and a mechanistic understanding of the complex oceanographic phenomena
that regulate iron supply, primary production, and biogeochemical cycling. The
research will thus form the basis for predictions about how this system may
change in a warming climate. The broader impacts include training of graduate
and undergraduate students, international collaboration, and partnership with
several ongoing outreach programs that address scientific research in the
Southern Ocean. The research also will contribute to the goals of the
international research programs ICED (Integrated Climate and Ecosystem Dynamics)
and GEOTRACES (Biogeochemical cycling and trace elements in the marine
environment).