* 0944730
* Collaborative Research: Annual satellite era accumulation patterns over WAIS Divide: A study using shallow ice cores, near-surface radars and satellites
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2014
* Summer Rupper, Brigham Young University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 07/31/2014
* USD 232,977.00

This award supports a project to broaden the knowledge of annual accumulation
patterns over the West Antarctic Ice Sheet by processing existing near-surface
radar data taken on the US ITASE traverse in 2000 and by gathering and
validating new ultra/super-high-frequency (UHF) radar images of near surface
layers (to depths of ~15 m), expanding abilities to monitor recent annual
accumulation patterns from point source ice cores to radar lines. Shallow (15 m)
ice cores will be collected in conjunction with UHF radar images to confirm that
radar echoed returns correspond with annual layers, and/or sub-annual density
changes in the near-surface snow, as determined from ice core stable isotopes.
This project will additionally improve accumulation monitoring from space-borne
instruments by comparing the spatial-radar-derived-annual accumulation time
series to the passive microwave time series dating back over 3 decades and
covering most of Antarctica. The intellectual merit of this project is that
mapping the spatial and temporal variations in accumulation rates over the
Antarctic ice sheet is essential for understanding ice sheet responses to
climate forcing. Antarctic precipitation rate is projected to increase up to 20%
in the coming century from the predicted warming. Accumulation is a key
component for determining ice sheet mass balance and, hence, sea level rise, yet
our ability to measure annual accumulation variability over the past 5 decades
(satellite era) is mostly limited to point-source ice cores. Developing a radar
and ice core derived annual accumulation dataset will provide validation data
for space-born remote sensing algorithms, climate models and, additionally,
establish accumulation trends. The broader impacts of the project are that it
will advance discovery and understanding within the climatology, glaciology and
remote sensing communities by verifying the use of UHF radars to monitor annual
layers as determined by visual, chemical and isotopic analysis from
corresponding shallow ice cores and will provide a dataset of annual to near-
annual accumulation measurements over the past ~5 decades across WAIS divide
from existing radar data and proposed radar data. By determining if temporal
changes in the passive microwave signal are correlated with temporal changes in
accumulation will help assess the utility of passive microwave remote sensing to
monitor accumulation rates over ice sheets for future decades. The project will
promote teaching, training and learning, and increase representation of
underrepresented groups by becoming involved in the NASA History of Winter
project and Thermochron Mission and by providing K-12 teachers with training to
monitor snow accumulation and temperature here in the US, linking polar research
to the student?s backyard. The project will train both undergraduate and
graduate students in polar research and will encouraging young investigators to
become involved in careers in science. In particular, two REU students will
participate in original research projects as part of this larger project, from
development of a hypothesis to presentation and publication of the results. The
support of a new, young woman scientist will help to increase gender diversity
in polar research.