* 0944684
* The Zinsmeister Antarctic Fossil Collection: Enhancing Accessibility to the Research and Educational Communities
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2013
* Gregory Dietl, Paleontological Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Isern
* 07/31/2013
* USD 266,589.00

Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;The fossils of Seymour Island have been the
subject of intense research over more than 30 years for topics from molluscan
evolution and biogeography to the Cretaceous-Tertiary mass extinction to global
climate change. The specimens in the William Zinsmeister Collection, a
comprehensive collection of Antarctic fossil molluscs, have been the basis of
much of this research. The Zinsmeister Collection has not previously been easily
available to researchers outside of Purdue University. This proposal seeks
support to make specimen records and images widely available for the Zinsmeister
Collection, recently transferred to the Paleontological Research Institution at
Cornell. The Zinsmeister Collection contains approximately 22,000 specimens of
Cretaceous-Eocene fossil mollusks from Seymour Island, Antarctica, including
bulk samples from measured Cretaceous-Tertiary boundary sections. The PIs
propose to protect the sizeable investment in this collection and ensure that
its full potential is realized by making it more widely known and available to
the research community through an online, publicly available, object record and
image database. During this project, the collection will be upgraded to the
highest curatorial standards. Easier access to information on the Zinsmeister
Collection will promote Antarctic research using this material and it could be
used to raise awareness of climate change, extinction, and evolution in through
teaching programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: &lt;br/&gt;The PIs will
mount the most spectacular specimen in the collection, the heteromorphic
ammonite Diplomoceras maximum, in the Cretaceous area of the permanent exhibits
in Paleontological Research Institute?s (PRI) Museum of the Earth. A web based
virtual exhibition hosted on PRI?s web site will be created. Building from the
online exhibition, in celebration of Earth Day 2011, PRI will host a "virtual
tour" of the online exhibit. A teacher professional development program will be
created using specimens and data from the collection and virtual exhibits to
explore topics in global change and evolution in support of secondary school
science teachers. The exposure of a broader public to the collection will create
awareness not only for the ongoing research in the polar regions, but also for
the value of paleontological studies as important contributions to the solution
of the problems of global climate change.