* 0944944
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Optical Platform for Patient Self Monitoring of Coagulation in Whole Blood
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* Paul Lingane, ThromboMetrix, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 06/30/2010
* USD 149,501.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project develops a novel optical
system for use in home monitoring of oral anticoagulation therapy, of particular
benefit in situations where a patient is dangerously at risk of injury from a
bleed. Current systems that are sold for use in home testing appear to have
issues of precision and accuracy at the high end of the range, which may
contribute to significant morbidity and mortality. In the period from 2006 to
2008 there were close to 4000 adverse events reported to the FDA associated with
the use of this generation of handheld testing devices. In the most serious of
these adverse events, the devices erroneously reported values within a
clinically acceptable range, while the patient displayed clinical symptoms of
bleeding, and laboratory tests showed that the patient was dangerously over
anticoagulated. The detection system proposed in this project seeks to monitor
the aggregation and dis-aggregation of rouleaux as an indicator of clot
formation. The proposed optical system, if successful, is tuned particularly to
the dis-aggregation of rouleaux and thus, will be more accurate and precise in
the supratherapeutic range.

There are three million people in the US who are on long term oral anticoagulant
therapy and who would benefit from tighter control of their dosages enabled by
the availability of home testing systems. The number of people who perform home
testing has grown since Medicare first provided coverage in 2003 and then
expanded coverage in 2008, yet currently the number of people who perform home
testing represents only a small percentage of all persons eligible. As home
testing becomes more popular, there can be expected a concomitant increase in
the number of adverse events. Home test systems must give accurate results over
their entire reporting range, as there is no opportunity for a health care
professional to judge the result in the context of a patient?s clinical
symptoms. When used properly, home test systems can be of particular value to
those who find it difficult to visit a lab or clinic for regular testing, such
as the elderly, the economically disadvantaged, and those who are geographically
dispersed in rural areas. Development and commercialization of a home test
system that implements the innovations proposed by this research is expected to
increase the safety of home monitoring of oral anticoagulant therapy.