* 0944076
* Committee on Geological and Geotechnical Engineering
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2014
* Sammantha Magsino, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 09/30/2014
* USD 325,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;This award provides core funding for the Committee on Geological and
Geotechnical Engineering (COGGE) which was formed in November 2001 as a standing
committee under the National Research Council?s Board on Earth Sciences and
Resources. The committee?s predecessor was the U.S. National Committee for Rock
Mechanics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;COGGE is the focal point within the Board on
Earth Sciences and Resources for scientific, technical, and public-policy issues
pertaining to the engineering applications of Earth Sciences. The committee?s
scope encompasses Earth processes and materials, including the mechanics of rock
and soil, and focuses on safe and responsible human development, risk
assessment, and mitigation of natural anthropogenic hazards. The committee
organizes and oversees studies:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) to identify,
investigate, and report on questions relating to geological and geotechnical
engineering to government, industry, academia, and the public;&lt;br/&gt;2) to
provide scientific and technical information to inform public policy on
geological and geotechnical engineering issues;&lt;br/&gt;3) to identify new
technologies and potential applications; and&lt;br/&gt;4) to promote the
acquisition and dissemination of knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition,
the committee provides a forum for discussion among academic and professional
groups, government agencies, and private industry to enhance national and
international cooperation and exchange of
information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research and engineering developments in
geological and geotechnical engineering are driven by concerns for the natural
and built environment (including radioactive and hazardous waste isolation,
remediation, and mitigation), mitigation of natural hazards such as earthquakes
and landslides, environmentally sound recovery of natural resources, and
interest in defense structures in rock. The technological, economic, social, and
political impacts of these issues engage the attention of many government
agencies, business corporations, and public interest groups and posit the need
for the COGGE. COGGE will continue to advance the role that geological and
geotechnical engineers and related scientists play in a range of contexts in the
U.S. The committee will work to identify and oversee studies such as the recent
studies that produced reports such as Assessment of the Performance of
Engineered Waste Containment Barriers and Geological and Geotechnical
Engineering in the New Millennium. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;