* 0944286
* Collaborative Research: Geophysical Study of Ice Stream Stick-slip Dynamics
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2010,07/31/2015
* Richard Alley, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Julie Palais
* 07/31/2015
* USD 181,624.00

Winberry/0944794

This award supports a three-year study of the ongoing deceleration and stick-
slip motion of Whillans Ice Stream (WIS), West Antarctica. Understanding the
dynamic behavior of ice streams is essential for predicting the future of the
West Antarctic Ice Sheet (WAIS). Despite being one of the best-studied ice
streams in Antarctica, the surprising flow characteristics of WIS continue to
demand interdisciplinary research. Recent estimates indicate that the WIS may
stagnate within 50 years, resulting in a significant change to the mass balance
of the Siple Coast sector of West Antarctica. The reasons for the ongoing
stagnation are not well known, and are possibly linked (causally or
coincidentally) to the stick-slip behavior. Our recent work on WIS stick-slip
motion suggest that all slip events nucleate from a common location on the ice
stream, suggesting that a relatively small (approximately 10 km in diameter)
region of the exerts fundamental control over the flow of this large ice stream
(100s of km long and 100 kilometers wide). We hypothesize that this is a region
of increased bed strength and our measurements will address that hypothesis. We
will deploy a series of GPS receivers and seismometers on the ice stream to
accurately locate the nucleation region so that a comprehensive ground based
geophysical survey can be conducted to determine the physical properties of bed
at the nucleation point. The ground geophysical program will consist of
reflection seismic and ice-penetrating radar studies that will better constrain
the properties of both the hypothesized higher-friction nucleation zone and the
surrounding regions. Slip events also generate seismic energy that can be
recorded 100s of km away from the ice stream, thus, the GPS and seismometer
deployment will also aid us in relating seismic waveforms directly with the
rapid motion that occurs during slip events. The increased ability to relate
rupture processes with seismic emissions will allow us to use archived seismic
records to explore changes in the behavior of WIS during the later half of the
20th century. Broader impacts of this study include improved knowledge ice sheet
dynamics, which remain a poorly constrained component of the climate system,
thus, limiting our ability to predict the Earth's response to climate change.
The scientific work includes the education of two graduate students and
continued training of one post-doctoral scholar, thus helping to train the next
generation of polar scientists. We will expose the broader public to polar
science through interactions with the media and by take advantaging of programs
to include K-12 educators in our field work.