* 0944820
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Polymeric Membrane for Hydrocarbon Separation
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Yong Ding, PoroGen LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2010
* USD 200,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop a novel
membrane for hydrocarbon separations. The initial focus of the project is the
development of a selective membrane for efficient separation of hydrocarbons
from methane in natural gas processing and separation of hydrocarbons from
hydrogen in refinery applications. The chemically robust polymeric membrane will
be of a composite configuration comprised of a hollow fiber porous support with
a superimposed separation layer that is several hundred angstroms thick. The
nano-structured morphology of the separation layer will enable selective
fractionation of hydrocarbon molecules. The broader impact/commercial potential
of this project will be reduced energy consumption in separation and
purification of hydrocarbons in oil, gas, and petrochemical industries. The
environmental benefit is the associated reduction in emissions of green house
gases methane and carbon dioxide. The technology will effect molecular level
separation of hydrocarbons and will be capable of operation in harsh
environments and high temperatures. A large initial market with an immediate
impact for hydrocarbon selective membrane technology is the recovery of natural
gas and hydrocarbon liquids from associated natural gas (gas generated during
oil production) currently flared at remote geographic locations. Development of
the proposed technology will enable recovery of the methane and high value
hydrocarbons at the well with extensive economic and environmental benefits. The
membrane is expected to find broad utility in high value gas and liquid
separation applications including hydrogen recovery from refinery fuel gas,
olefin/paraffin separation and generic hydrocarbon fractionation.