* 0944122
* Understanding the complexity of the 660-km seismic discontinuity
* GEO,EAR
* 12/15/2009,03/31/2013
* Sang-Heon Shim, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 03/31/2013
* USD 360,280.00

The mantle represents 70% of the Earth's volume, and therefore plays a key role
in the evolution of the Earth. Since early 20th century, a seismic discontinuity
at 660-km depth in the mantle has been believed to be an important filter for
material exchange (including water and carbon-dioxide) between the upper and
lower mantle. Laboratory measurements have shown that the phase transitions in
the dominant mantle minerals explain this 660-km discontinuity. However, there
exist multiple phase transitions near this depth and the interactions among
these phase transitions are not well understood. Recent high-resolution
seismology studies reveal complex structures near the discontinuity and strong
lateral variations in the properties of the discontinuity, suggesting
interaction between mineral phase transitions occur in the mantle and providing
motivation for high-resolution laboratory measurements.

In order to measure the interactions among different phase transitions near the
660-km discontinuity, the investigators will take full advantage of recent
developments in (1) the diamond-anvil cell (a high pressure device) technique,
which allows fine control of pressure, (2) the laser levitation synthesis
technique, which allows the investigators to engineer the compositions of
starting materials similar to those expected for mantle rocks, and (3) high-
resolution synchrotron X-ray diffraction techniques, which allow detection of
the phase transitions unambiguously. The results from this study will help
geophysicists to understand the role of the 660-km discontinuity in mantle
convection and chemical differentiation. Ths proposed work is timely because
huge seismic datasets available from large digital seismic networks, such as
USARRAY, are beginning to provide high-resolution images to resolve fine-scale
structures near the 660-km discontinuity.