* 0944702
* Quantifying Surface Processes above Buried Ice in Antarctica: Implications for Terrestrial Climate Change and Glaciation on Mars
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2014
* David Marchant, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Kurz
* 07/31/2014
* USD 115,623.00

Intellectual Merit: The recognition that Pliocene and Miocene age glacier ice
lies buried beneath sublimation tills in the coldest parts of the Dry Valleys,
and likely elsewhere in the Transantarctic Mountains, opens up the possibility
of establishing multi-million year records of climate and atmospheric evolution.
The PI proposes a quantitative analysis of the Mullins Glacier, the oldest
debris-covered alpine glacier. Preliminary work suggests that ancient atmosphere
is trapped within Mullins Glacier, however, geomorphic processes, have modified
the glacier in unforeseen ways. In prior work, the PI developed qualitative
models defining these processes, and in this proposal he seeks to quantify and
test these models through quantitative modeling and higher-level data
acquisition. Questions to be addressed include: What aspects of vapor diffusion,
atmosphere-surface interactions, and till characteristics encourage long-term
preservation of buried ice? How might sublimation tills and sublimation polygons
at the ice surface influence subsurface ice loss and the composition of trapped
gases in glacier ice? Do morphometric parameters of sublimation polygons shed
light on the depth and purity of subsurface ice? If so, can these morphometric
parameters be used to map undetected buried-ice deposits elsewhere on Earth and
Mars? What can variations in the concentration/ style englacial debris in
Mullins Glacier tell us about local environmental change over multi-million year
old time scales? To answer these questions, the PI proposes numerous experiments
for Mullins Glacier.

Broader impacts: This work will quantify surface processes that modify what may
be the longest record of atmospheric evolution and climate change. This research
has relevance for understanding buried ice on Mars. The research will support a
graduate student and undergraduates. The PI will continue his successful
outreach activities with the Los Angeles Valley Community College system and in
further developing his digital image analyses lab at Boston University, which
showcases his Antarctic and planetary work in 3D to visiting students, faculty,
parents, and those interested in Antarctica in the wider community.