* 0944043
* Fundamental Magmatic Processes of the McMurdo Dry Valleys
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2014
* Bruce Marsh, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Kurz
* 03/31/2014
* USD 250,484.00

This work will explore first order principles governing magmatic processes for
most planetary magmatic systems, particularly the spatial interdependence of
physical and chemical processes. These basic principles are essential to
planetary differentiation, the bimodality of sea floor basalt and continental
granitics, modal layering in basaltic plutons, and the diversity of igneous
rocks. This research will be conducted using samples from the Ferrar Magmatic
System of the McMurdo Dry Valleys. The PIs seek to: 1) Complete a 1:100,000
geologic map of the entire Dry Valleys that traces in detail the extent and
interactions of all the sills to help understand magmatic processes recorded by
the entire system; 2) Complete analyses to establish the extent of a newly
discovered Opx-Tongue in the Peneplain sill and fingerprint the two upper sills;
3) Simulate the dynamics of sorting and self-organization of granular materials
dynamically similar to the massive slurries of the Dais Layered Intrusion. This
work is highly integrated in its use of field, theoretical, and experimental
methods to reveal and contribute to solving long-standing problems in magma
transport, solidification, and differentiation.

Broader impacts: Previous work by this PI has had broad scientific impacts on
Antarctic Earth Sciences. The results of his work have been used to design
museum exhibits, to understand ore deposition, and to understand the mitigation
of magmatic hazards. Both graduate and undergraduate students will be trained in
the course of this research.