* 0944769
* SBIR Phase I:  Sub-10 nm protective coating on high-temperature hydrogen purification membrane
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* Chung-Yi Tsai, T3 Scientific LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2010
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop a thin film
protected membrane for high temperature hydrogen purification. The much
anticipated hydrogen economy demands a robust and economical method for hydrogen
purification and production. The state-of the-art membrane material for hydrogen
purification has a major downside ? low tolerance for impurities, sulfur in
particular. The solution is an ultra-thin protective coating. The new coated
membrane will have high hydrogen selectivity and permeance at elevated
temperatures and will be highly resistant to sulfur. To ensure the success of
this project, three objectives are laid out: 1) demonstrate membrane performance
under elevated temperatures and pressures, 2) demonstrate membrane stability
with feedstream components such as carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide, water, and
sulfur, and 3) demonstrate thermal resistance under thermal cycling. The
resulting membrane is expected to exceed the goal of having a high hydrogen flux
with &gt;99.5% purity, tolerance to sulfur (100 ppm) and carbon dioxide, and the
high stability required for potential industrial
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of
this project will be the numerous benefits to its customers, the general public
and the scientific community. The new membrane technology will offer a genuine
value proposition in a number of applications, due to its high performance,
thermal stability, robustness against contaminants, cost savings and minimal
maintenance. The success of this proposed membrane will assist in enabling the
much-awaited hydrogen economy, creating market pull for users in the hydrogen
industry. This technology can readily be applied to hydrogen purification for
oil refineries and for coal gasification. The proposed membrane system will also
be invaluable to other markets, such as hydrogen for transportation, hydrogen
separation for petrochemicals, hydrogen capture from ammonia purge gas in
ammonia plants, hydrogen/carbon monoxide ratio adjustment for syngas, and
hydrogen recovery from purge stream. The success of this project will have the
larger societal benefits of reducing the dependence on foreign oil, reducing the
environmental impacts of fossil fuel use, and provide a national competitive
advantage in emerging energy technologies. Finally, the scientific understanding
gained will benefit related fields, such as catalysis, and the semiconductor,
electronics, and imaging industries. &lt;br/&gt;