* 0944705
* SBIR Phase I:  An Approach to Pigments that Provide Corrosion Protection on-Demand
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* William VanOoij, ECOSIL Technologies LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2010
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project addresses the important
problem of replacing anti-corrosion chromate-based pigments in primers for
metals. We will mimic the properties of chromate in two novel, on-demand
pigments, both added to a primer. The primer will then provide corrosion
resistance to several metals such as steel, galvanized steel and aluminum alloys
and also protection of defects in the coating due to its slow-release effect.
One pigment will consist of an inorganic particle whose surface is a cation
exchanger. We will attach corrosion-inhibiting cations to it. The other pigment
is an inorganic particle whose surface is an anion exchanger. We will attach
corrosion-inhibiting anions to it. When an electrolyte enters the coating, the
pigments will release various ions, which are effective in protecting corrosion
of aluminum and galvanized steel. When plain water enters the coating, the
pigments will remain dormant, i.e., they provide corrosion protection on-demand
only. This project will be executed in collaboration with the University of
Cincinnati, where more complex ion exchangers will be synthesized and
tested.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project is in a new coating technology that is environmentally friendly. The new
material will also be flexible, in that we can tailor the four components to a
particular metal substrate and primer. As a result, potential customers for this
technology will be numerous. Examples are the automotive industry (for car
repair finishes, and the painting line in automobile manufacturing plants), wash
primers for repair and touch-up, the shipbuilding industry, the aerospace
industry (coatings for aircraft), the coil coating (steel) industry, and many
others. Combined, these markets represent a commercial opportunity of at least
$5 billion. The societal impact will be that workers in paint-manufacturing
plants will no longer be exposed to hazardous chromate-containing materials.
This project will also enhance our scientific understanding of the mechanisms by
which coatings protect metals and how anti-corrosion pigments work in such
systems. In particular, the relationship between the hydrophilicity of the
coating and the water-solubility of the pigment will be elucidated in this
project. The mechanism by which certain inhibitors protect metals is another
focus of our study.&lt;br/&gt;