* 0944643
* Collaborative Research: Gas Transfer through Polar Sea Ice (GAPS) - Mechanisms of Turbulence Production in the Seasonal Ice Zone and its Control of Mixed Layer Ventilation
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Peter Schlosser, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Milne
* 09/30/2013
* USD 460,272.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High latitude ocean and sea ice surface fluxes of
heat, momentum, fresh water and radiatively important gases such as carbon
dioxide are critical to understanding polar, and thus global, climate processes.
Field observations of these fluxes, and the physics and biogeochemistry that
control them is hampered alternately by both the high winds and sea states
typical of polar seas, and the complex potentially non-linear transport pathways
between water, ice and air during conditions of active freezing and partial sea-
ice cover. &lt;br/&gt;This project will study, in a unique controlled laboratory
facility, the relative contribution of the physical processes that regulate gas
exchange through sea ice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A seasonal evolution cycle of
different sea-ice types found in the ice pack, namely 1) pancake ice, 2)
complete ice cover, but with leads (openings), and 3) melted ice floes with a
freshwater lens, will be simulated in a well controlled laboratory setting.
Additionally, different turbulence regimes of wind, wave effects, convection and
ice-water current shear at various levels of freezing will be studied in the
CRREL sea ice pond facility (New Hampshire).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potentially transformative nature of this
research &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The physics, and biogeochemistry of air-sea flux
exchanges in heterogeneous and multi featured environment such as sea-ice is
extremely challenging for any existing theory or computational approach. The
observational approach that the investigators are using, introduction of
chemically inert gases as deliberate tracers, has the ability to account for
several different limiting steps encountered in gas exchange through sea ice. A
multi-tracer (e.g. SF6, He, Ar, CO2...) mass balance approach has been used and
refined by these investigators over the course of prior field campaigns at less
challenging and more conventional air-sea boundaries. Preliminary results used
to investigate the ice pond experimental approach have indicated that gas
exchange through sea-ice does not scale with the amount of open water, negating
what otherwise appeared to be a reasonable approximation. The resulting
parameterization to be revealed by such studies may suggest redirection as to
what really are the rate limiting steps of sea-ice flux transfers. These
processes are important for accurate coupled Earth System Models of climate
change.