* 0944442
* SBIR Phase I:  Reinforcement of Lightweight Material Castings with Dissimilar Metals
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Clause Xu, Hans Tech
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2010
* USD 200,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to advance
the cast-on technology for the metal casting industry to produce lightweight
metal composite castings. Cast-on method is a cost effective method for the
reinforcement of casting with dissimilar metals but suffers from defect
formation such as de-bond, oxidation, and porosity at the casting/reinforcement
interface. The project combines the merits of the cast-on method and the latest
high-intensity ultrasonic processing. The use of high-intensity ultrasonic
vibration technique in the cast-on process detaches oxides and bubbles at the
surfaces of the insert, drives them away from the reinforcement/casting
interface, and enhances the metallurgical interaction of the castings with the
reinforcement metal. Furthermore, the grain size in the casting adjacent to the
bond is reduced significantly. As a result, a strong and defect-free
metallurgical bond is produced between the reinforcement insert and the casting.

The boarder impact/commercial potential of this project will be a breakthrough
technology for the cast-on process and will increase the competitiveness of the
U.S. metal casting, automotive, and defense industries in the global market,
retaining or creating new jobs. This technology can be used to reinforce
aluminum castings, magnesium castings, or castings of other lightweight
materials for replacing heavy metal components for automotive, aviation, and
defense applications, leading to significant energy savings, cost savings, and
improved emission control. The U.S. transportation industry continues to focus
on the increased use of lightweight alloys for weight reduction and energy
savings. According to the data from the United States Automotive Materials
Partnership (USAMP), a 15% weight reduction due to the use of lightweight
components improves fuel efficiency by at least 10%. Decreasing fuel consumption
by 10% reduces gasoline consumption in the United States by 10 billion gallons
per year. This would translate into energy savings of 1,150 trillion Btu/year, a
reduction of CO2 emissions by 200 billion lbs/year, and cost savings of $25
billion/year at current pump prices of $2.50/gallon.