* 0944315
* Collaborative Research:  Effects of Hydrologic Processes on In Situ Stress Transients
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2018
* Lawrence Murdoch, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Holly Barnard
* 03/31/2018
* USD 275,326.00

Understanding how water moves and is stored within the landscape is among the
most pervasive themes of hydrological research, but important aspects of the
water cycle remain poorly known. The proposed research project will address
current limitations in characterizing the water cycle and is motivated by two
related hypotheses: 1. Hydrologically important changes in water content are
sufficient to cause measurable changes in the in situ state of stress. 2.
Transient changes of in situ stress can be used to estimate hydrologic fluxes
and changes in storage over multiple scales. This investigation will develop
conceptual and numerical methods for analyzing hydrologic processes associated
with changes of in situ stress as well as instruments and field techniques for
measuring these changes. New field instrumentation will be developed to measure
total and effective stress changes with a target resolution of 1 Pa. A proof-of-
concept field test near Clemson, SC will compare high resolution stress
measurements to transient changes in water content and other processes. A more
rigorous field test will take place in Kansas, where the method will be used to
estimate changes in mass resulting from evapotranspiration and other effects in
a riparian zone along the Arkansas River. Theoretical analyses of poroelasticity
in the vadose and saturated zones will be used to evaluate how stresses are
affected by changes in water content, as well as a variety of other potentially
competing effects including barometric pressure change, subsurface geology,
earth tides, ground water extraction, regional horizontal flows, surface
impoundments, traffic, wind, temperature, etc. New field approaches are
catalysts for discovery in hydrologic sciences, and the intellectual merit of
the proposed investigation is that it has the potential to be such a catalyst
for discovery. The investigation will provide the scientific basis for new field
techniques, theoretical analyses and instrumentation that will advance the
ability to characterize key aspects of the hydrological cycle (ET, change in
soil moisture, recharge, stormflow, etc.) over scales from less than 1 m to
greater than 100 m. The techniques developed for this project will have broad
impacts by providing multi-scale data that can be used to improve: validation
and calibration of remote sensing instruments and algorithms; estimates of
melting or accumulation of snow pack or glaciers; assessment of rates of erosion
or sediment deposition; reduction of noise and resolution of tectonic strain;
assessment of rates of carbon storage; methods for scheduling irrigation;
understanding mass changes resulting from forest fires, and related.

