* 0944021
* Collaborative Research: Deglaciation of the Ross Sea Embayment - constraints from Roosevelt Island
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2015
* Edward Brook, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Julie Palais
* 08/31/2015
* USD 200,796.00

0944307/Conway

This award supports a project to use the Roosevelt Island ice core as a
glaciological dipstick for the eastern Ross Sea. Recent attention has focused on
the eastern Ross Embayment, where there are no geological constraints on ice
thickness changes, due to the lack of protruding rock "dipsticks" where the ice
sheet can leave datable records of high stands. Recent work has shown how dated
ice cores can be used as dipsticks to derive ice-thickness histories. Partners
from New Zealand and Denmark will extract an ice core from Roosevelt Island
during the 2010-2011 and 2011-12 austral summers. Their science objective is to
contribute to understanding of climate variability over the past 40kyr. The
science goal of this project is not the climate record, but rather the history
of deglaciation in the Ross Sea. The new history from the eastern Ross Sea will
be combined with the glacial histories from the central Ross Sea (Siple Dome and
Byrd) and existing and emerging histories from geologic and marine records along
the western Ross Sea margin and will allow investigators to establish an
updated, self-consistent model of the configuration and thickness of ice in the
Ross Embayment during the LGM, and the timing of deglaciation. Results from this
work will provide ground truth for new-generation ice-sheet models that
incorporate ice streams and fast-flow dynamics. Realistic ice-sheet models are
needed not only for predicting the response to future possible environments, but
also for investigating past behaviors of ice sheets. This research contributes
to the primary goals of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet Initiative as well as the
IPY focus on ice-sheet history and dynamics. It also contributes to
understanding spatial and temporal patterns of climate change and climate
dynamics over the past 40kyr, one of the primary goals of the International
Partnerships in Ice Core Sciences (IPICS). The project will help to develop the
next generation of scientists and will contribute to the education and training
of two Ph.D. students. All participants will benefit from the international
collaboration, which will expose them to different field and laboratory
techniques and benefit future collaborative work. All participants are involved
in scientific outreach and undergraduate education, and are committed to
fostering diversity. Outreach will be accomplished through regularly scheduled
community and K-12 outreach events, talks and popular writing by the PIs, as
well as through University press offices.