* 0944969
* SBIR Phase I:  Online Optic Enabled X-Ray Analyzer for Fuel Cell Manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Ning Gao, X-RAY OPTICAL SYSTEMS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2010
* USD 149,994.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to
demonstrate the feasibility of developing an online X-ray analyzer for real-time
measurement of catalyst coating thickness of gas diffusion electrode (GDE). The
electrodes in the fuel cell, either the single-element GDE, or an anode and
cathode in a complete a membrane electrode assembly (MEA), is the critical
electrochemical component for every proton exchange membrane (PEM) fuel cell.
The catalyst coating of GDE is one of the more expensive manufacturing processes
in the MEA production. However, the process is lacking an online technology for
catalyst thickness and distribution measurements. As a result, the impact of
manufacturing changes as they relate to both production and performance is not
fully understood. The unique, optic-based XRF analyzer proposed in the current
project will allow real-time measurement of the catalyst-coating thickness and
elemental distribution. It will provide timely feedback for the GDE production
process where changes or improvements can be accommodated immediately. This
would improve yield and the overall performance of the GDE products. The
objective of the project is to demonstrate the feasibility, while the ultimate
goal is to build an instrument that will be used on a GDE production line.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is the technique
developed would benefit both the manufacturing process as well as the overall
performance of the fuel cell system. Fuel cell stack efficiency can drop
significantly after a few thousand hours of use, which is part of the reason the
fuel cell system is not widely used for stationary distributed energy
generation. Thus, there is an immediate need to reduce the degradation rate and
extend the stack operating life. The measurement of catalyst coating thickness
and distribution in production can be a critical link to understand the
performance impacts of subtle production changes. Currently there is no
practical online, real-time, continuous, nondestructive method to provide this
information. The X-ray analyzer incorporates the latest X-ray optics and makes
it possible to achieve the anticipated performance with a low power and compact
system. The dual benefit of using manufacturing process control to decrease cost
and improve final product performance is attractive, enabling a more competitive
industry in the U.S. that is more efficient and has a smaller environmental
footprint than before. Further, the measurement techniques developed for the
fuel cell process can readily be applied to other similar rolling or coating
manufacturing processes.