* 0944504
* Mechanisms and Kinetics of Porphyroblast Nucleation
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2013
* William Carlson, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 12/31/2013
* USD 298,359.00

Metamorphic rocks respond to changes in pressure, temperature, and their
chemical environment by transforming existing minerals into new minerals. These
changes in mineral assemblage create a record of the rocks' history that
geologists can use to reconstruct ancient episodes of mountain building and
erosion, and to understand the causes of these events and how they occur. The
vital first step required to initiate the transformation of one mineral
assemblage to another is creation of submicroscopic crystals (nuclei) of the new
minerals, so detailed knowledge of this process of nucleation is essential in
order for petrologists to read accurately the record of Earth history preserved
in metamorphic rocks. In particular, if new minerals nucleate and grow
significantly more slowly than changes occur in pressure, temperature, and
chemical environment, the mineral transformations cannot keep pace with those
changes in physical conditions. The petrologic record may then contain gaps or
may be misread. The goal of this project is to understand the atomic-scale
mechanisms involved in nucleation of metamorphic minerals, and to quantify the
rates at which nucleation takes place in nature. This knowledge will improve the
ability of geologists to reconstruct events in Earth history that have shaped
the present-day distribution of mountain ranges and sedimentary basins,
information that is vital to locating, exploiting, and conserving a variety of
natural resources, including water, soil, industrial minerals, and multiple
energy sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the predictions of
classical theories of nucleation will be compared to observations and
measurements made of garnet porphyroblasts in diverse suites of rocks. The
research will encompass three conceptually new applications of recently emergent
technologies and simulation techniques. First, high-resolution X-ray computed
tomography and electron backscattered diffraction measurements will be combined
to determine the prevalence and common crystallographic characteristics of
epitaxial orientational relationships between garnet crystals and substrates
that may have controlled their nucleation. Second, new numerical models of
nucleation and growth processes, constrained by quantitative microstructural
data from X-ray computed tomography, will be used to determine the time
variation of nucleation rates in a diverse suite of rocks, and to estimate
relevant reaction affinities, interfacial energy effects, and steady-state
limits on nucleation rates. Third, interfacial energies for a variety of garnet-
garnet grain boundaries will be computed by means of molecular-statics
calculations, as a first step toward similar calculation of polyphase
interfacial energies directly relevant to garnet nucleation.&lt;br/&gt;