* 0944686
* Collaborative Research: Ecophysiology of DMSP and related compounds and their contributions to carbon and sulfur dynamics in Phaeocystis antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2014
* David Kieber, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Amsler
* 05/31/2014
* USD 360,347.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spectacular blooms of Phaeocystis antarctica in
the Ross Sea, Antarctica are the source of some of the world's highest
concentrations of dimethylsulfoniopropionate (DMSP) and its volatile degradation
product, dimethylsulfide (DMS). The flux of DMS from the oceans to the
atmosphere in this region and its subsequent gas phase oxidation generates
aerosols that have a strong influence on cloud properties and possibly climate.
In the oceans, DMS and DMSP are quantitatively significant components of the
carbon, sulfur, and energy flows in marine food webs, especially in the Ross
Sea. Despite its central role in carbon and sulfur biogeochemistry in the Ross
Sea, surprisingly little is known about the physiological functions of DMSP in
P. Antarctica. The research will isolate and characterize DMSP lyases from P.
antarctica, with the goal of obtaining amino acid and gene sequence information
on these important enzymes. The physiological studies will focus on the effects
of varying intensities of photosynthetically active radiation, with and without
ultraviolet radiation as these are factors that we have found to be important
controls on DMSP and DMS dynamics. The research also will examine the effects of
prolonged darkness on the dynamics of DMSP and related compounds in P.
antarctica, as survival of this species during the dark Antarctic winter and at
sub-euphotic depths appears to be an important part of the Phaeocystis? ecology.
A unique aspect of this work is the focus on measurements of intracellular MSA,
which if detected, would provide strong evidence for in vivo radical scavenging
functions for methyl sulfur compounds. The study will advance understanding of
what controls DMSP cycling and ultimately DMS emissions from the Ross Sea and
also provide information on what makes P. antarctica so successful in this
extreme environment. The research will directly benefit and build on several
interrelated ocean-atmosphere programs including the International Surface Ocean
Lower Atmosphere Study (SOLAS) program. The PIs will participate in several
activities involving K-12 education, High School teacher training, public
education and podcasting through the auspices of the Dauphin Island Sea Lab
Discovery Hall program and SUNY ESF. Two graduate students will be employed full
time, and six undergraduates (2 each summer) will be trained as part of this
project.