* 0945891
* SBIR Phase I:  An Innovative Full-Thickness Human Skin Model for Increased Throughput Screening in Drug Discovery
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* Kenneth Gratz, Stratatech Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 06/30/2010
* USD 149,383.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
develop a full-thickness in vitro human skin model in a format enabling
increased-throughput screening of compounds. The project will 1) develop culture
conditions for production of fibroblast-derived dermal equivalents, 2) use these
methods to manufacture skin models in a higher-throughput format, and 3)
characterize the biochemical, structural, and functional properties of these
tissues. Establishment of this model system will provide a consistent in vitro
test platform for drug screening, assessment of transdermal delivery methods,
dermal toxicology testing, and development of skin-specific disease models (i.e.
melanoma). The developed process improvements will facilitate automation of
tissue production and may be scalable to even smaller tissue formats.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this research resides in the ability
to provide a more reliable, accurate, and cost-effective method of determining
the effects of drugs and other chemical compounds on human skin. Biotechnology,
pharmaceutical, and consumer product companies devote substantial resources to
screening new products and their components for dermal toxicity and
permeability. Currently, testing is typically performed using monolayer cells or
animal models, despite a well-documented inability for those systems to
accurately predict drug efficacy in humans, a problem that contributes to the
costly, high failure rate of drug candidates in clinical trials. In vitro skin
models show the potential to improve screening capabilities, but current models
are expensive and relatively low-throughput. The proposed model will provide
accurate, efficient, and cost-effective chemical screening, while avoiding the
ethical and regulatory concerns associated with animal testing.