* 0945230
* EAGER:  Carbide Derived Carbons with Pore Structure and Surface Chemistry Designed for Selective Adsorption of Proteins
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Yury Gogotsi, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 08/31/2011
* USD 124,999.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Severe sepsis kills about the same number of people
per day as lung or breast cancer. Since the inflammatory response in case of
sepsis is driven by cytokines, their removal from blood brings under control the
unregulated pro- and anti-inflammatory processes driving sepsis. Unlike dialysis
and filtration, not to mention drug-based therapy, adsorption can remove
cytokines from blood plasma without introducing any other substances into the
blood. The proposed research is expected to provide a tool for better
understanding of the fundamental mechanisms governing the adsorption of
cytokines by carbon materials. The use of the results of this study in medicine
may save the lives of people suffering from autoimmune diseases, severe sepsis,
and multiple organ failure. This program will facilitate an interdisciplinary
international cooperation between the research groups working on nanoporous
carbons in Philadelphia (U.S.) and Brighton (U.K.). Exchange with the group of
Professor S. Mikhalovsky, University of Brighton, will allow graduate and
undergraduate students from Drexel University to obtain international
experience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The goal of this research
is to investigate the effect of pore size, pore shape, particle size, and
surface termination of carbide-derived carbons (CDC) on adsorption of cytokines
and other proteins. In the CDC process, the metal is extracted from a binary or
ternary carbide or carbonitride ceramic by halogens. Therefore, the structure of
the carbon can be templated by the carbide structure, with an opportunity for
further tuning by controlling the temperature and composition of the
environment. Preliminary testing at the University of Brighton has demonstrated
that CDC samples significantly outperform the best commercial carbons in the
efficiency of protein adsorption. This important breakthrough warrants
conducting further studies immediately to explore if a truly transformational
approach to sepsis can be carried out. Experimental studies will be performed on
cytokine (interleukins and TNF-alpha) adsorption kinetics as a function of the
pore size (5-50 nm) by using CDC produced from different precursors. The effects
of surface functional groups on the interaction of proteins with the carbon will
be experimentally investigated. The PI will determine the conditions for
selective adsorption of specific proteins and develop materials with the surface
termination and pore size tuned to maximize adsorption capacity and kinetics of
adsorption for selected proteins.&lt;br/&gt;