* 0945222
* SBIR Phase I:  Continuous Production of Crystalline Silicon Sheet (or wafer) for Solar Cell
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* Balaji Sukumar, Industrial Learning Systems
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl F. Albus
* 06/30/2010
* USD 148,500.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to
investigate the feasibility of a novel molten substrate fabricated from high-
density liquids of metals/alloys and slags for producing high solar quality
crystalline silicon wafer. In this innovative design a molten support system
will be used to allow molten Silicon to float and solidify by cooling. Float
silicon can then be continuously withdrawn as a crystalline sheet of highly
textured Silicon upon solidification. One of the goals of the project is to
develop mathematical models which can be used for scale-up and feasibility
studies. These models can represent instability in solidification and
crystallization front. The research will address the following important goals:
a) planar solidification and mono-crystallization; b) testing of a slag layer in
a novel three-component-three-layer process for the crystallization and
purification of Silicon; c) process modeling.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is the continuous
production of single crystalline silicon wafers at reduced cost and with
improved efficiency. The present solar technologies, some of them in advanced
stage of development and commercialization, are capital-intensive and do not
offer low cost per Watt-peak (WP). This project will show if the material
produced has the properties needed to produce enhanced quality solar cells.
Accomplishment of this multi-phase program for crystalline Silicon wafer
productions would lower the cost and attract many first-time users to solar
electricity, cater to the demands of the larger international market and further
help accomplish the task of reducing carbon emission at a much faster rate.