* 0945472
* SBIR Phase I:  Multi-wavelength Infrared thermal Detectors and Imagers
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* Jiguang Li, NANORODS,L.L.C.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2010
* USD 99,998.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a
new infrared (IR) radiation sensor technology, which will allow the development
of a new class of low-cost multi-wavelength thermal detectors which are also
sensitive to light polarization. This technology will allow radiation detection
from the near-IR to long-wave IR, a capability that is absent in competing
detectors. Amorphous silicon and vanadium dioxide has been the dominant
materials used for infrared light detection since the 1980s. The disadvantages
of such detectors are: 1) insensitivity to the spectral content and polarization
of the incident radiation, 2) difficulty in further miniaturization of the
sensing pixels. This project will use a combination of nanomaterial and
amorphous silicon layers as a new type of infrared sensing layer which can be
integrated into silicon thermal detectors and is expected to overcome these
limitations. This project will demonstrate: 1) Fabrication and integration of
the new radiation sensing layers to create a series of thermal detectors; 2)
Enhanced light absorption and spectral sensitivity at multiple IR wavelengths;
3) Size reduction of the sensing pixel to 10 microns; and 4) polarization
sensitivity for incident light at 3 micron wavelengths. The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project is the development of uncooled
multi-color thermal detectors which are inexpensive and feature spectral and
polarization sensitivity. These devices have the potential to displace expensive
photon-based semiconductor IR detectors in many applications. The proposed
technology will allow production of multi-color detectors on a single silicon
wafer as well as sensing pixel miniaturization that will tremendously impact the
fabrication cost, imaging resolution and device size. Successful
commercialization of this thermal detection technology will substantially impact
the field of low cost IR detection and imaging in applications such as fire
detection, public health, environmental monitoring, space missions, industrial
process monitoring, and security and military areas.