* 0945084
* SBIR Phase I:  Immobilization of Catalyzed Metal Oxide Nanofibers for Advanced Catalyst Support Structures
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* Gary Carlson, MemPro Ceramics Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2010
* USD 147,407.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will address the
specific technical barrier of the immobilization of ceramic nanofibers to rigid
ceramic support structures for catalysis applications. In discussions with end-
users and strategic partners, specific concerns over the usage of fibrous
supported ceramic nanofibers, i.e. the use of ceramic microfibers to form a
composite matrix, have been raised, since these types of support structures can
cause significant pressure losses during operation. There also is uncertainty as
to the durability of these materials under continued use and specific
application conditions. The ability to produce a rigid support structure that
can effectively immobilize ceramic fiber materials for usage in high-velocity
and high-temperature gas flows represents a large market opportunity. In this
Phase I project, various ceramic fiber immobilization tactics will be
investigated, including different binder materials and procedures, and the
results will be assessed in terms of bonding (immobilization) strength and
efficiency. The overall performance of the bonded materials will also be
investigated and compared to currently established standards based upon fibrous
support structures. It is anticipated that careful selection and refinement of
binders and procedures will allow for the development of a stable, rigid support
platform for catalyzed ceramic nanofibers.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be the development
of rigid catalyst structures integrating the unique properties of catalyzed
ceramic nanofibers. This will maximize the efficient use of catalytic materials,
enhance the destruction of greenhouse gases from combustion processes, and
capture harmful particulates from various gas process streams. The ability to
produce thermally stable catalyst structures not only increases the efficiencies
of many existing applications, it will create new and alternative application
opportunities that can assist in pollution abatement and decrease production
costs of specific products. One embodiment of the technology development is the
use of advanced ceramic nanofiber based materials for the treatment of small-
engine exhaust sources. The US EPA estimates that small gasoline engines account
for greater than 25% of nationwide hydrocarbon emissions and 30% of total
nationwide carbon monoxide emissions. Currently there is no sound technology to
treat exhaust emissions from these engines, due primarily to cost and
performance constraints. The technology innovation central to this proposal has
the potential of providing a solution to this environmental concern, and thereby
positively impacting the environment.