* 0945742
* SBIR Phase I: GPU-based Raster Processing Algorithms
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* Robert Cheetham, Azavea Inc
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 06/30/2010
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will test the
feasibility of using Graphics Processing Units (GPU's) for substantially
increasing the performance of raster Geographic Information Systems (GIS)
software operations. Map Algebra is a linguistic and algorithm framework for
combining and transforming raster data and is the basis for raster-based
analysis in all contemporary desktop GIS products. It is used for many types of
government and business needs including ecology, land conservation, business
siting, watershed analysis, transportation planning, hazard risk assessment,
wildfire propagation and many other domains. However, particularly when working
with large data sets, raster processing is usually too slow to support real-time
calculation for web-based applications, even when the work can be distributed
across multiple machines. It is therefore mostly consigned to workstation
environments and people trained in the techniques. This project will focus its
efforts on raster processing for server-based applications, where it is believed
that both the greatest improvements can be made, there is a substantial market
opportunity and, given the types of applications to which these techniques are
applied, great potential for positive social impact.

Most contemporary work in geographic information systems is directed at three
types of activity: a) database development; b) desktop analysis and map
production; and c) web-based display of maps for a variety of purposes. This
project is directed at enabling a far broader audience, through use in web-based
software applications, to perform sophisticated analysis with real-time results.
If successful, this will enable real-time, online calculation of open space
acquisition models, sea level inundation impact, natural hazard assessment,
military scenario planning and travel cost calculation, to name only a few
applications. These applications are currently all tied to desktop systems due
to the significant amount of time, memory and processing power required to
execute the operations. By moving these calculations to the GPU, it is believed
that at least an order of magnitude improvement in the performance can be made
and such applications could move to from the desktop to a web-based platform.