* 0945484
* SBIR Phase I:  Vibrational CD Microscopy for Characterizing Supramolecular Bio-Chirality
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* Rina Dukor, BioTools, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 06/30/2010
* USD 125,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is focused on the
creation of a new revolutionary imaging instrumentation that combines
vibrational circular dichroism (VCD) spectroscopy with infrared (IR) spectral
microscopy. VCD microscopy represents a new class of spectroscopic imaging
diagnostic capable of measuring VCD images with millimeter to sub-millimeter
spatial resolution. The recent discovery that long-range structural chirality in
protein fibrils is characterized by unusually large and distinctive VCD spectra
provides the backdrop for this project. None of the currently available
techniques can characterize the fibrillation pathway or the final fibril state
with the same ease and detail as VCD. VCD microscopy can be thought of as
circular polarization contrast microscopy that is sensitive to long-range chiral
order in localized regions of biological samples.

The broader impacts of this research are studies of the supramolecular chirality
of fibrils. This product is not a small improvement of an existing technology
but a distinctly new method of studying long-range biochirality that is more
sensitive, provides more detail, and is easy and fast to use. A secondary,
higher-impact long-term impact will be clinical research laboratories where this
innovation can be used for the detection and characterization of amyloids in
vivo, i.e. for tissue biopsies, rapid detection of amyloids and drug screening.