* 0945232
* SBIR Phase I:  Automated Configuration Management for Open Source Applications
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* Jeffrey Fischer, Genforma
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 06/30/2010
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project addresses the
challenges of installation, configuration, and management for open source
applications. Open source software can provide significant business value, but
there is a very high barrier to entry due to the technical challenges of
installing and managing heterogeneous, independently-developed components with
complex inter-dependencies. GenForma is developing a unified framework to
automate this process, replacing the labor-intensive, error-prone scripting and
manual solutions used currently. Genforma's solution is based on technology that
models the configuration settings and dependencies of application components
declaratively and uses scalable constraint solving to find optimal installation
configurations. In particular, it provides solutions (1) to determine a set of
compatible components for an open source stack, (2) to obtain these components,
(3) to install them across multiple machines, (4) to adjust configuration
settings to make the components work together, and (5) to manage the resulting
application. A graphical user interface allows a non-expert user drive this
process. This technology allows existing software to be easily deployed to cloud
computing and virtualization infrastructure and also to run it on local hardware
as if it was in the cloud.

Genforma's technology addresses the full software management life cycle (SMLC)
including selection, deployment, install, configuration, and management. The
company will bring the technology to market via prepackaged solutions for
popular open source applications. Open source software is a significant and
growing market: popular blog, content management, email, CRM, and ERP
applications can have more than 200,000 installations. If successful, the
Genforma platform will allow a new class of enterprise applications to be
developed and deployed based primarily on open-sourced technology.