* 0945992
* SBIR Phase I:  Real-time 3D Tracking and Position Measurement System Using Scanning MEMS Mirrors
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Veljko Milanovic, Mirrorcle Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2010
* USD 183,677.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
dramatically advance 3D position input and motion sensing systems with a MEMS-
based optical 3D tracking and 3D position measurements system. This sensing
system would enable real time interaction with computers, robots, and other
machinery in ways that are more intuitive, precise and natural compared to
existing technologies. Using scanning MEMS mirrors, lasers, optics and optical
sensors, this tracking system can quickly and precisely determine location,
direction, and rate of movement. Real time 3D tracking has many potential
applications. The proposed optical sensor will provide X,Y, and Z position
information of a small target object down to sub-millimeter precision in large
spaces such as a room and at update rates below 0.1ms. These might include
controllers for video games, PC interactions, industrial robot controls, crane
operations, etc. Having controllers that can follow our hands or fingers and
interpret our intentions would make human-machine interaction a more enjoyable,
ergonomic, and precise experience. Mirrorcle Technologies has been a technical
leader in the area of MEMS mirrors. However, building such a 3D tracking system
requires significant innovation in optical design, closed-loop control, embedded
computing, and packaging. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial
potential of this project is to enable a superior, more economical, and more
accurate means of interacting with machines by humans. Human machine interaction
is a necessity in our modern world. The number of machines we interact with will
continue to increase, and interactions will be increasingly complex. However,
human-machine interaction is often not pleasant and intuitive. Ergonomic
injuries caused by keyboard, mouse, and poor posture are increasingly common.
Developing capabilities for more intuitive interaction will serve a great need
for our increasingly electronic world. Adding more knobs and buttons is not the
right solution. We believe that input devices based on 3D tracking can be
developed into intuitive and natural ways for people to interact with augmented
and virtual reality environments. It may enhance our ability to work with
objects much bigger or smaller than our range of manual dexterity. Ultimately,
it can help us navigate an ever more complex computerized world.