* 0945610
* SBIR Phase I:  CoBlitz: Enabling ISPs to Leverage Network Ownership
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* Patrick Richardson, CoBlitz LLC
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 06/30/2010
* USD 150,000.00

The Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I effort proposes to provide
a software platform for service-provider-centric Content Delivery Networks
(CDNs) The broadband build-out brings the promise of emerging high-bandwidth
applications, but only if the internal capacity of the Internet Service
Provider's (ISP's) infrastructure is up to handling the load. It is not, unless
augmented with a caching substrate capable of distributing content to the edges
of the network. Existing Content Distribution Networks do not address the
problem because they are limited to the peering point at which the ISP connects
to the global Internet. CoBlitz proposes to develop a unified content
distribution substrate that overlays the full network infrastructure?from data
centers to central offices to neighborhood access points - allowing subscribers
to fully exploit their broadband connections. The CoBlitz technology has three
technical advantages: (1) it is content-neutral, handling small and large files,
web pages and audio/video streams, whole-file and progressive downloads, and on-
demand and live streaming equally well; (2) it reduces costs by minimizing the
internal bandwidth consumed, the amount of data that crosses peering points, and
the computer hardware needed to cache and serve the data; and (3) it improves
end-user experience by reducing delays and fully exploiting the available last-
mile bandwidth.

Many believe that network operators are looking for new ways to benefit from
their significant investment, the bandwidth they sell is a rapidly decaying
commodity, while content providers reap large rewards. Further complicating
matters, commercial CDN companies have approached network operators with a
dubious proposition - either provide server co-location and bandwidth to the CDN
operator for free, or else the CDN operator will place their servers outside the
operator's network and the operator will have to pay for all of the incoming
traffic across its Internet peering point. The reason this situation exists is
because few network operators have the content distribution/caching technology
they need. If successful, the CoBlitz technology - software that runs on
commodity processors - and business model has the potential to address this
significant opportunity.