* 0945296
* SBIR Phase I:  Optimized Multi-substituted Fullerene n-phase for High Performance Organic Photovoltaic (OPV) Devices
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* Henning Richter, NANO-C, INC
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2010
* USD 149,965.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project targets the
synthesis of fullerene derivatives with an isomer distribution sufficiently
narrow to enable significant improvements in OPV performance. The intellectual
merit consists in the development of methodology allowing for the scalable
synthesis of specific isomers of multiple fullerene adducts such as C60(X)n with
n= 2-3. Previous work has confirmed the predicted increase in open-circuit
voltage for higher degrees of functionalization but current density dropped in
some cases dramatically. This observation has been attributed to the
increasingly wide distribution of electron-attracting properties of isomer
mixtures resulting in electron sinks. Regio-selective synthesis of fullerene
adducts is expected to lead to the absence of local electron traps and,
therefore, to increased current density in bulk heterojunction solar cells
without affecting other properties. Reversible addition reactions will be
conducted to block reaction sites to limit the number of locations on the
fullerene sphere available for subsequent functionalization with desired
functional groups. Laboratory-scale bulk heterojunction OPV cells will be
fabricated. Power conversion efficiencies of >8% are expected by increasing the
current density in known systems and setting the stage for further improvements.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will consist in the
improvement of the performance of OPV devices to >8% enabling the deployment of
large-scale OPV power generation without the need of government subsidies.
Printing or roll-to-roll solution processing of highperformance solar cells will
be possible, providing an ultra-low-cost alternative to conventional silicon or
thin-film techniques. Solar cells at $0.50 to $1/watt-module with a life-cycle
cost of energy of 7 to 8 cents/kWh will progressively become available. Up to
now, 1.1 GW of solar PV has been installed in the US, of which 0.34 GW was
installed in 2008. As one of the few photovoltaic systems that can reach
gridparity without subsidies, or carbon credits, OPV has the potential to grow
faster, and displace an increasing fraction of the approximately 2.9 trillion
kWh/year of electricity produced in the U.S. from fossil fuels with no
greenhouse gas and pollutant emissions. Dependence of foreign energy supply will
be reduced thereby enhancing energy security and improving the country's trade
balance. Availability of specific fullerene isomers or isomer groups with
similar electronic properties will significantly impact the development of more
fullerene applications such as other printable electronic devices, e.g., thin-
film transistors.