* 0945320
* SBIR Phase I:  Three-Phase Flowmeter For Oil Industry
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Ye Mi, EN'URGA INC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2010
* USD 199,066.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will evaluate the
feasibility of developing a multiphase flowmetering and characterization system
for oil industry. New developments in reservoir management and production
techniques have resulted in the requirement for multiphase flowmeters to replace
conventional test separators. The proposed system will include three advanced
multiphase flow instruments: (1) a multi-electrode electromagnetic flowmeter
(MEEFM), (2) a X-ray attenuation technology, and (3) an electrical impedance
tomography (EIT). The first instrument will provide liquid phase velocity
information, while the latter two will provide phase distribution information.
The innovation of this development is to further improve these technologies and
judiciously combine them to realize non-intrusive online multiphase flow
measurements. The Phase I study will demonstrate the feasibility of this
development. During the future Phase II development, a solid engineering design
of a prototype flowmeter will be carried out. The success of the proposed study
will provide a reliable instrument for industrial process monitoring as well as
a useful tool for multiphase flow research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project is to meet requirements of online,
continuous and non-intrusive multiphase flow measurements in the oil industry,
as well as many other industries. The proposed flowmetering and characterization
system enables accurate monitoring of multiphase pipe flows in industry, and
aids researchers to study multiphase flow phenomena. The innovative development
will significantly improve the performance and reduce the cost of existing
multiphase flowmetering systems. Following the trend of replacing test
separators and removing test lines and manifolds in the oil industry, the
proposed multiphase flowmetering system will have a substantial economic impact
on the infrastructure and operation of oil fields. The proposed flowmeter can
also be utilized in the petroleum, chemical, food, and biochemical process
industries.