* 0945339
* SBIR Phase I:  Active Visible and Infrared Management for More Energy Efficient Buildings
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,02/28/2011
* Kenneth Dean, Gamma Dynamics LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 02/28/2011
* USD 149,873.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will demonstrate
feasibility of creating surfaces that actively manage solar heat gain by
switching between infrared transmittance and reflectivity. The ultimate
objective is to develop skylights, windows, and roofs&lt;br/&gt;that adapt to
seasonal, regional, and diurnal changes in solar flux and heating and cooling
requirements. The Phase I objective is to develop electrofluidic pigment
materials systems incorporating infrared-reflecting particles and other infrared
strategies. The infrared modulation&lt;br/&gt;performance of these new materials
systems will then be demonstrated in low cost electrofluidic modules. These
modules change the optical properties of surfaces by moving pigment from a small
area reservoir to full surface coverage in a similar manner to the way squids
change their skin color. The innovation in this work is the development an
entirely new materials system and&lt;br/&gt;method for managing near-infrared
light over a large surface area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project is to improve the energy efficiency
of buildings. U.S. building energy consumption (40% of total U.S. Energy
Consumption) can be reduced significantly by maximizing sunlight for lighting,
while effectively managing solar heat gain. Current passive technologies
(windows, insulation, paint, etc.) do not readily adapt to&lt;br/&gt;seasonal,
regional, and diurnal changes in solar flux and heating and cooling
requirements. By empowering buildings to actively manage solar heat gain, U.S.
energy consumption can be reduced by more than 1 quadrillion BTU per year, while
adding minimal cost to building infrastructure. There is also a large
commercialization opportunity in selling active skylights, windows, roof tiles,
etc. through partnerships with existing manufacturers.