* 0945346
* SBIR Phase I:  Mineral oil cooling for energy and cost efficient data centers
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Christiaan Best, Green Revolution Cooling, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2010
* USD 200,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)Phase I project proposes to
develop a high performance mineral oil submersion cooling system for computer
servers. While CPU (Central Processing Unit) over-clocking offers the potential
to increase output from existing servers by up to 30%, it will also increase the
heat generated in a small space in a non-linear fashion likely affecting server
reliability. Inefficient cooling is a key driver in data center energy
consumption, which has recently risen from 1% of US electricity to a predicted
3%. Mineral oil is better and heat dissipation than air, providing better
cooling performance to allow over-clocking of computer servers while reducing
the amount of cooling energy needed. The proposed Phase I research objectives
are to: (i) design and install a cooling system specifically for high
performance cooling; (ii) investigate and implement the best method to over-
clock servers; (iii) document server performance and cooling requirements of an
over-clocked system over a range of CPU clock speeds; (iv) document and improve
system ease-of-use and ergonomics. The anticipated technical result is to
quantify the performance and cost and energy benefits of a mineral oil immersion
cooling system for over-clocked servers.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project comes from (a) increasing server
processing power while (b) lowering energy use and (c) lowering build-out costs
of a computer data center. For computational-heavy research institutions, over-
clocking offers the potential to solve more of society's research needs with
fewer resources as computer servers would perform significantly more
computations than before. Also, lowering the energy of a large contributor to
incremental US electricity demand will greatly benefit the environment. Finally,
the build-out costs of a data center, which scales roughly in-line with power
consumption, will also be greatly reduced as cooling energy is reduced.