* 0945089
* SBIR Phase I:  Inhibition-Resistant DNA Polymerases and Other Improvements for Detection of Food-borne Pathogens.
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Milko Kermekchiev, DNA Polymerase Technology, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 12/31/2010
* USD 142,505.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes the
improvement of real-time PCR, a DNA-based rapid-detection method, for detection
of food-borne pathogens such as Salmonella. Current methods are inadequate to
accurately detect pathogens in foods such as chocolate, soft-cheese, and milk,
which are inhibitory to PCR. These foods present a challenge due to their
interference with the sensitivity of the assay. Longer, more labor-intensive
tests are required for these foods, as inaccurate detection can lead to
potentially deadly false negatives. The proposed improvements will shorten and
simplify pathogen detection for these foods. The novel inhibition-resistant
mutant enzymes and enhancers can to applied to PCR, and simplify other stages of
current protocols such as cultural enrichment (an incubation period usually
required for pathogen detection) and sample preparation. These improvements may
also allow for more rapid, accurate testing for a broad range of foods, not only
those foods known to be inhibitory to PCR.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of this research include a safer food supply, due to the faster, more
accurate detection of food-borne pathogens. This will allow food producers and
manufacturers to more quickly respond to any discovered contamination, and
facilitate immediate recalls of infected food. For routine tests, these
innovations will give testing labs accurate and reliable results, while saving
them time, labor, and money.