* 0945613
* SBIR Phase I:  Isolator with MEMS piezoelectric transformer
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* Alfredo Vazquez-Carazo, Micromechatronics Inc
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2010
* USD 149,907.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will result in a
novel isolator technology for power electronics and communications systems using
the principle of ultrasonic transmission. Optocouplers and magnetic transformers
are widely used to fulfill galvanic isolation between different parts of
electrical circuits. However, issues with low transmission rates, narrow
bandwidths and bulky sizes have motivated the investigation of alternative means
to achieve isolation. The goal of the project is to develop a micro size
isolator combining piezoelectric transformer technology with thin film
processes. The new device will allow a wide transmission bandwidth range of
20kHz ~ 20MHz in a compact size of <1 mm3. Resonance modes, overshoots, and
ringing control of the device during operation will be investigated and resolved
through the proposed research to provide stable output with minimized noise. The
final goal of the project is the development of an on-chip isolator for feedback
signal control in network system and power supply applications. The developed
technology will be provided to the existing isolator industry as a next
generation device.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to provide a MEMS
scale isolator to the electronic device industry which is more compact and
efficient compared to existing optocoupler and magnetic isolators. According to
market research reports, the optocoupler market has already reached the half-
billion dollar level and grew over US $700 million in 2008. The optocoupler
market can be divided up into various segments but the industrial segment is the
main market with 60% of the demand being for motor control and related power
needs. Communications is a broad market and power over Ethernet is a new market.
Recently there were some interesting successes with plasma panel displays - each
panel has many optocoupler inside due to the high voltage requirements. In data
processing and computers there is a general need for optocouplers at the
interface peripherals such as printers etc. These various demands will
facilitate commercialization of the proposed product. Furthermore, MEMS scale of
the suggested component can provide a breakthrough for miniaturization of mobile
devices and slim designs for consumer products, such as wireless devices
including laptop computers and communication devices.