* 0945896
* SBIR Phase I:  Instrumentation for In-situ CLEM (Correlated Light and Electron Microscopy)
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Cheryl Hartfield, Omniprobe
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 12/31/2010
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will demonstrate
the scientific and technical feasibility of an optical microscope accessory for
electron and ion microscopes to enable in situ brightfield and fluorescence
microscopy simultaneously with electron or ion imaging/processing. This directly
addresses a critical opportunity in the area of correlative light and electron
microscopy (CLEM), a fundamental application applied broadly in structural
biology for advancing understanding of health and disease. Light microscopy
provides low magnification overviews, fluorescence imaging identifies rare cells
and events (but reveals only signal location and intensity), and electron
microscopy provides high resolution to study ultrastructure associated with the
fluorescent signal. Correlative microscopy bridges the different length scales
of these methods from micron to nanometer resolution and provides the detail
missing in fluorescence images.

The broader impacts of this research are widely applicable to materials, food
science, and nanotechnology and include a dramatic new capability for biological
investigation that contributes to advancing the pace of development in
applications such as cancer treatment, drug discovery and proteomics research.
It can be fanned out at low cost through a simple accessory on broadly existing
SEM and FIB platforms. This promotes new research innovations. The significant
accuracy and time savings with in situ CLEM can speed research, enabling faster
discovery and development of biomarkers for clinical research and drug
development. The FDA estimates that just a 10% improvement in the ability to
predict drug failures before clinical trials could save US$100 million in
development costs per drug.