* 0945944
* SBIR Phase I: Heterogeneous Catalysts for Biodiesel Production in Microreactors
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* James Akse, Umpqua Research Company
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2010
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project proposes to develop
highly active heterogeneous catalyst coatings for microreactors to reduce
biodiesel production and environmental costs. This effort will improve
biodiesel's economic competitiveness and reduce our dependence on foreign oil.
Conventional biodiesel production utilizes homogeneous catalysts with high
material, neutralization, and separation costs, and which favor using low free
fatty acid (FFA) feedstock such as costly vegetable oils. Undesirable FFA
reactions generate soaps and water, complicating product cleanup. Heterogeneous
catalysts avoid these problems, but have seen limited usage due to low activity,
poor stability, and inefficient reactor designs. The development of catalytic
microreactors will avoid these problems through improved mass transfer and
catalyst site utilization, the absence of waste, and the ability to perform both
esterification and transesterification reactions. Catalytic microreactors will
increase feedstock flexibility, lower operating and capital costs, reduce
facility footprint, decrease environmental impact, and simplify scale-up. These
attributes will enable the use of wider feedstock varieties in local markets,
resulting in sustainable businesses. The Phase I effort will demonstrate the
feasibility of highly efficient heterogeneous catalytic microreactors for
biodiesel production. A prototype microreactor biodiesel production system will
be developed during the Phase II program.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will manifest itself in
several areas including improved cost competitiveness for a green, renewable
fuel, lower environmental impact to produce biodiesel, and the reduction of our
dependence on foreign oil. Commercial acceptance is growing due to the high cost
of petroleum-based fuels, improved quality and supply of biodiesel,
compatibility of biodiesel with current engine technology, public sentiment to
develop more sustainable carbon-neutral energy supplies, and concerns over
global warming and carbon footprint. Governments have responded by passing
legislation to reduce dependence on foreign petroleum, including tax incentives,
subsidies for biodiesel production, mandates for petroleum replacement, and
promotion of green fuels. Catalytic microreactor-based biodiesel production
systems will provide distinctive competitive advantages over current commercial
processes. These advantages include: (1) improved reactor efficiency; (2) lower
operating and capital costs; (3) elimination of process steps; (4) reduction of
separation and environmental clean-up requirements; (5) compatibility with lower
cost animal fats and off-grade vegetable oils; (6) smaller facility footprint;
(7) generation of less wastewater; (8) increased compatibility with production
facilities closer to feedstocks and customers; and (9) greatly simplified scale-
up to meet market demands.