* 0945620
* SBIR Phase I:  Energy Efficient BOD Removal and Denitrifcation for Recirculating Aquaculture Facilities with a Combined Bioelectrochemical Process
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Matthew Silver, Cambrian Innovation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 12/31/2010
* USD 137,760.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project investigates a
novel bioelectrochemical system for combined treatment of carbon and nitrogen in
the wastewater of re-circulating and semi-re-circulating aquaculture facilities.
The aquaculture industry is currently held-back by high levels of wastewater and
expensive treatment technologies. Elevated levels of nitrogen versus carbon in
aquaculture wastewater require several expensive and energy-intensive steps for
complete treatment. Bioelectrochemical systems (BES) represent a new technology
capable of treating wastewater in an energy-positive manner while producing
fewer byproducts than existing technologies. The project will construct and
evaluate a novel three-cell BES that can treat several of the most important
water pollutants in a combined, energy-positive step. Phase I will prove
feasibility of the technology and quantify system performance. Phase II studies
will develop detailed designs and begin pilot studies at IntAct or in the field,
pending Phase I results.

The broader/commercial impacts of this research are to demonstrate a novel
approach to aquaculture wastewater treatment with the potential to significantly
enhance the economic of re-circulating and semi-recirculating aquaculture
systems. Fish farming is emerging as a critical 21st century industry, with
global annual production already more than 60 million tons. Yet industry growth
is constrained by competition for water and the high cost of wastewater
treatment technologies. By reducing energy-intensiveness and combining treatment
processes, bio-electrochemical systems have the potential to greatly enhance the
economics of re-circulating and semi-recirculation aquaculture facilities and
the environmental sustainability of the industry.