* 0945547
* SBIR Phase I:  Towards the Next Generation Security Monitoring and Analysis Systems
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* Pavan Chahal, Vivic Networks LLC
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 06/30/2010
* USD 149,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project examines the
feasibility of creating a scalable, responsive network security monitoring tool.
The tool, based previous activity on network forensics and network security
research, monitors traffic and filters out metadata in the form of synopsis,
compresses it efficiently, and stores it online. This synopsis data is then
analyzed for symptoms associated with malware. Upon recognizing such symptoms,
the tool flags clients, managed as well as unmanaged, that have been
compromised. Captured data can be further analyzed to identify where and when
the malware entered the network, its actions since entry, and its communications
with dormant peers.

If successful, the tool developed will play a vital role in the cyber security
of defense, government, private sector, education, and other networks. Each year
significant and costly damage is inflicted upon all these institutions. Products
and services available today typically endeavor to build a shield around
networks to keep malware out. However, they fight a difficult battle and highly-
publicized compromises occur each year. This tool presumes that penetration of
networks will occur, and focuses on eliminating / minimizing damage caused post-
compromise. If successful, the tool may address a significant portion of the
damage incurred each year.