* 0945721
* SBIR Phase I:  Next Generation Displays Based on Novel Carbon Fiber MEMS Micromirrors
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Shahyaan Desai, Mezmeriz, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 12/31/2010
* USD 199,810.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims to use novel carbon
fiber-integrated microelectromechanical (MEMS) structures to develop an
innovative high definition raster-scanned projection display system for mobile
devices and other applications. Current technology relies on silicon-based MEMS
structures that suffer from poor fracture toughness and fatigue behavior, and
cannot provide the simultaneous large angular deflections and scanning speeds
necessary for projection display. Research objectives for this project include
fabricating the MEMS components, testing the prototype electronics and optics
systems, packaging the optics and electronics into a portable prototype unit,
and conducting preliminary investigations into screen materials. The anticipated
technical results will be a functional, full-color prototype demonstrating proof
of concept for a miniaturized MEMS and optics-based projection display system.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project applies to mobile device
users, offering the potential of a small, affordable, projection system that
could be embedded in almost any mobile device to produce a large, high
resolution image onto any near-by surface. Use of mobile devices has been
rapidly expanding, however the limitations of a <5" diagonal display prevent
mobile devices from achieving their full potential. The proposed technology's
carbon fiber MEMS micromirrors are the only demonstrated technology capable of
meeting the fast speed and large deflection requirements that enable mobile
projection displays capable of providing a laptop-like user experience from a
mobile device. This innovation can enhance technological and scientific
understanding via an improved method for multi-media information display and
access. Societal benefits include improved communication and transfer of multi-
media. Commercial impact is significant, as the technology could be integrated
into most hand-held mobile devices, enabling portable video-viewing.