* 0945974
* SBIR Phase I:  Automatic Formal Verification of Chip-Multi-Threaded Multicore Processors
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Miroslav Velev, Aries Design Automation
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2010
* USD 200,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will result in an
efficient and scalable method for design and formal verification of Chip-Multi-
Threaded multicore processors, where the individual cores have hardware support
for multi-threading. This method will be developed and optimized on the
OpenSPARC T2 processor, a publicly available version of the Sun
UltraSPARC&lt;br/&gt;T2?the industry?s first ?server on a chip,? packaging the
most cores and threads of any general-purpose processor available, and
integrating all the key functions of a server on a single chip: computing,
networking, security, and input/output, plus tight integration with the Solaris
operating system.&lt;br/&gt;The work will be based on extending an extremely
efficient prototype tool flow for formal verification of pipelined processors
that outperforms other approaches by orders of magnitude, while requiring
minimal manual intervention. The anticipated technical results are highly
automatic and scalable method and tool flow for formal verification of chip-
multi-threaded multicore processors, where the individual cores have hardware
support for multi-threading.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial
potential of this project will be based on the significantly increased
reliability of Chip-Multi-Threaded (CMT) multicore processors, where the
individual cores have hardware support for multi-threading. Because of power-
consumption limitations, performance can&lt;br/&gt;no longer be gained by
increasing the frequency and/or the complexity of a single core. Instead
semiconductor companies are adapting multi-core architectures, where a number of
relative simple processor cores are used to simultaneously execute many
processes. Thus, the main challenge is&lt;br/&gt;shifted to proving the
correctness of a single core with hardware support for multithreading, and then
of the composition of the cores. The innovation will enhance the scientific and
technological understanding by developing automatic and scalable technology to
formally verify complex multicore processors. The potential societal benefits
are correct, safe, and reliable microprocessors,&lt;br/&gt;which is critical,
given that millions of microprocessors function autonomously in safety-critical
applications. The potential commercial impact of the project will be
significant, since the customers will be semiconductor and Intellectual Property
design companies that develop microprocessors&lt;br/&gt;or systems on a chip.
Since verification is consuming up to 90% of the engineering effort and failing
to scale for complex designs, an efficient formal verification technology will
have significant potential for commercialization. The technology area of
application includes all market sectors that can use high-performance
microprocessors, including embedded products, and thus is unlimited.