* 0945777
* SBIR Phase I:  Enterprise Decision making using Activity Interaction technology
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* David Zhang, Bioproduction Group, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2010
* USD 195,583.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I Project seeks to develop
a Network Algorithm for efficiently running large-scale network simulations to
perform enterprise planning and risk analysis. Currently, supply-chain models
consist of only simplistic, low-detail nodes which only approximate the
facility's parameters that they represent. Because of this, it is difficult to
determine the effect of operational level changes and relationships on a
network-wide level. Research has shown that running a large-scale, supply chain
model consisting of detailed operational models will run too slowly to perform
any meaningful analysis in a timely manner. This project aims to develop a
simulation methodology that meaningfully links together highly-detailed
operational level models with its large network-scale model. Each operations
simulation will be linked by network relationships such as supply and demand,
product flows, and inventory holding centers. It is then possible to create a
matrix which stores these relational parameters that minimize the computing time
investment required.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will provide
organizations with a better understand of the risks they face both internally
and across the entire production network. Industrial mishaps, such as the
Ericsson facility fire which decimated the firm's inventory levels, have
underlined the need to understand the complex inter-relationships between, as
well as within, companies. A network simulator allows analysts to explicitly see
how facilities are interrelated and how adverse events affect not just one
facility, but the entire network. The technology has to potential to be used
across the biopharmaceutical industry and both increase quality of care to the
patient as well as reduce manufacturing costs by a similar amount.