* 0945093
* SBIR Phase I: Unified and Intuitive Modeling Software for Non-Traditional Optimization
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Robert Fourer, AMPL Optimization LLC
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 12/31/2010
* USD 143,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will address the
challenges of supporting large-scale optimization models that are most naturally
represented by nonnumerical and other nontraditional forms of objectives and
constraints. Building on the project team's experience in designing,
implementing, and marketing more traditional optimization modeling software, the
project will address the feasibility of a unified approach that enables one
natural and convenient modeling language to support a broad variety of
nontraditional model forms and solver types. In addition to considering the
design of language extensions, the research will address the creation of
interfaces for diverse solvers, particularly as it relates to issues of
automated problem detection and conversion. The expected outcome is a prototype
optimization modeling language that will alleviate frustrations with current
systems and encourage experimentation with a broader variety of solution
methods.

Optimization has increasingly become an established paradigm for modeling of
phenomena throughout science, engineering, and business. The new product
envisioned will address a significant customer need by advancing the ability of
optimization modeling languages to describe and generate problems in the ways
that are most natural to modelers.