* 0945297
* SBIR Phase I:  Design and Development of a Comprehensive Instrument for Measurement of Aerosol Size and Elemental Composition
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,11/30/2010
* Steven Buckley, Photon Machines, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Walters
* 11/30/2010
* USD 149,765.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims to enhance and fuse
the best of several technologies to achieve a highly sensitive and flexible
measurement system for both size and composition of particulate matter (PM). If
successful, this research will establish the feasibility of a device that will
sample aerosol particles at ambient pressure, size particles using light
scattering, and measure particles using a laser-initiated plasma. The envisioned
system will overcome the problems with variability and uncertainty associated
with aerosol measurements by Laser Induced Breakdown Spectroscopy (LIBS). The
goal is to provide highly accurate measurements of both coarse and fine PM as a
continuous emission monitor (CEM) for stack and/or ambient monitoring. The
longer term commercial goal is a rugged, low maintenance device with a
significant cost reduction over currently available real-time systems.

The broader/commercial impact of this project, if successful, is the
availability of a tool that will address an immediate need to continuously
monitor metal emissions from municipal solid waste and hazardous waste
combustion facilities, while quantifying speciated coarse and fine PM, important
for future EPA regulations. Such a tool will enable research in support of EPA
regulations for more stringent emission control. Furthermore, the tool can also
be a CEM used for enforcement as well as process control in hazardous waste
treatment, power generation, and other industrial applications.

