* 0945802
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of new materials for a low cost high throughput ion channel measurement platform
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* Jason Poulos, Librede Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 06/30/2010
* USD 149,770.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will support the
development of a novel ion channel measurement platform. Ion channels are
important in a wide range of physiological processes including cardiac and
neural activity. The technology is centered on inexpensively manufactured ion
channel biochips which can be shipped to the end user and indefinitely stored
until needed. This platform greatly simplifies the process of ion channel
measurement, with the potential to significantly increase throughput, decrease
cost, and eliminate the expertise necessary to perform these sophisticated
measurements. The proposed research will maximize the biochip yield and minimize
the formation time.

The broader impacts of this research are that the increased throughput and data
quality will significantly impact healthcare in terms of cost and quality of
care by reducing drug development R&D costs. The multi-billion dollar market for
ion channel drugs is actually underserved because of the lack of cost effective,
high quality, high throughput screening solutions. The company's low cost high
throughput solution will enable the cost of ion channel screening to
significantly drop. The storability, shippability, and simplicity of the
technology also opens ion channel measurement capability to a much wider, non-
specialist scientific audience and a low cost system suitable for high school
and college laboratory courses.