* 0945905
* SBIR Phase I:  Commutational Ramp Load Disk Drive Actuator
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,07/31/2010
* Matthew Green, Bluewater Technology
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 07/31/2010
* USD 148,796.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project develops a unique
and transformative ramp load hard disk drive actuator that provides significant
improvements over existing ramp load technology by increasing performance and
reducing costs. A ramp is used to park the read/write heads of the disk drive
actuator to avoid head/disk impact due to an external shock to the drive. The
project activity consists of applied research and design of a new and unique
commutational disk drive actuator that performs the ramp load/unload and seeking
operations for the arm of a hard disk drive. The commutational actuator is a
synergistic combination of a magnet/coil assembly, magnetic bias feature, and
ramp. The commutational actuator is of reduced size and cost compared to
conventional ramp load actuators that are currently used. The reduced size and
cost are facilitated by requiring the actuator arm to travel through a magnetic
transition zone which presents an uncontrollable, singular region within the
actuator arm sweep angle on the ramp. To promote travel through the
uncontrollable, singular region, a special head loading/unloading closed-loop
control algorithm that will be developed to provide failsafe operation through
this transition zone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial
potential of this project is immediate and long-term. The immediate commercial
potential is the specific application to the 500 million units per year disk
drive market for computers, servers, data backup systems, communication
technologies and many consumer products such as DVRs and cameras. The
commutational actuator is expected to have a direct commercial impact exceeding
$100 million per year, based on a realized disk drive manufacturing cost savings
of $0.20 per drive. It will also enable reduction in size of the disk drive
assembly, thus helping in further miniaturizing the hard disk drive without
impacting performance.