* 0945531
* SBIR Phase I:  Wavefront Microscopy: A low-cost implementation of high-quality microscopic phase imaging for bioscience teaching and training
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* George Rakuljic, Visualyze Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2010
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop a
low-cost, easy-to-use, image sensing attachment for standard microscopes that
provides phase imaging capabilities. The functionality of the bulk optics
typically required for such a specialized microscopy technique is replaced by
special processing of the sensor chip itself. The major challenges that must be
addressed to develop such a device involve the fundamental limitations of
currently available sensor chips in terms of both pixel size and sensor noise.
The objective of this research is to develop innovative software algorithms to
implement the proposed technology on available sensor chips. This will involve
separating the contributions of adjacent sensor elements with the goal of
maximizing resolution and minimizing cross-talk. We will then evaluate the
devices based on a standard resolution target as well as samples of microscopic
soil-borne organisms of interest for low-level teaching laboratory exercises.
Finally, the team will develop an interactive software platform for integrating
the device in an educational setting. The Principal Investigator anticipates the
development of a functional device with a resolution of at least 11 µ in the
image plane and cross-talk limited to 5% that is capable of diffraction-limited
imaging at magnifications above 40x.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project can be summarized as
follows. This proposal describes a simple method that allows microscope users to
gain access to high-quality phase imaging for viewing transparent samples. This
is important for a number of market segments, specifically research, clinical,
and industrial segments. Instead of using optical components that must be
carefully aligned by a highly trained microscopist, the imaging device simply
screws onto the camera port of a microscope. Since the required fabrication
procedures are straightforward, this device can be developed at low-cost for use
in teaching and training labs that operate on limited budgets. Digital images
are displayed on a screen that can be viewed by multiple students or trainees at
one time. Additionally, this novel image sensor is capable of displaying more
information than any standard phase imaging microscopy technique, potentially
enabling new research directions or new clinical diagnostics. The current market
opportunity includes both the sale of such devices with new microscopes,
replacing existing phase components, as well as a large amount of installed base
(microscopes currently in use) to which our device can be retrofit. Since the
camera port on microscopes is standardized, this retrofit does not pose
technical challenges.