* 0945001
* SBIR Phase I:  Precision Gravimetry Sensing
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,07/31/2010
* Robert Pinto, Enpoint, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 07/31/2010
* USD 145,610.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project addresses the
vexing problem of precise gravity estimation from airborne platforms. Gravity
variations viewed spatially offer an intuitive means for characterizing likely
oil/gas deposits, minerals, water structures, and tunnels, among many others.
The research will focus on the innovative combination of traditional navigation-
grade sensors and sensors designed for low-level seismic acceleration
measurement; the use of precision navigation for the measurement of translation-
induced acceleration; and an innovative data processing approach that
effectively isolates the vertical channel measurements to better target gravity-
induced acceleration. The research objectives include refinement of the
mathematical models for gravity estimation, development of a simulation to
predict performance, extension of an available precision navigation system to
accommodate measurements from extremely low-noise seismic accelerometers, and
data collection to support algorithmic development and performance assessment.
The result of the research will be an assessment of gravimetry using precision
navigation and seismic sensors. Moreover, the research community will receive
access to the gravimetry data collected.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project spawns from a new
technical approach to estimating gravity from airborne platforms. The use of
emerging generations of ultra low-noise sensors in a suitable processing
framework will produce price/performance ratios that are far less than exist in
the industry today. The data analyses and performance assessments that emerge
will encourage further development in the sensor community and lead to
innovation in measurement and data processing. Development of a low-cost,
effective gravimetry system will enable exploration on a global scale as
demanded by the oil and gas community and the remote sensing market. Moreover,
connecting traditional remote sensing multispectral products with gravimetry
will encourage the development of new markets and interests. A gravimetry system
that mounts in a small airframe such as an Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) and
that flies at low altitudes can produce substantially more useful gravity
measurements at finer spatial resolution and at lower cost than systems
currently available. Both commercial and military users will appreciate the
suitability of low cost airframes with far fewer operational limitations than
typical gravimetry systems.