* 0945959
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of Scanning Near Field Ultrasound Holography with Integrated Electronic Detection for Sub-Surface Nanomechanical Imaging
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,11/30/2010
* Arvind Srivastava, NanoSonix, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 11/30/2010
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will demonstrate the
feasibility of using MOSFET-embedded cantilevers for integrated electronic
detection of cantilever deflection for scanning near-field ultrasound holography
(SNFUH). This synergistic combination of the scanning probe microscopy (SPM)
platform and scanning near-field ultrasound holography will provide nanoscale
lateral spatial resolution, and has the potential for comparable depth
resolution. The performance of SNFUH has been constrained by its implementation
as part of a conventional single-cantilever SPM platform, where the low
frequency response (~600 kHz) optical detector limited achievable depth
resolution and throughput. We propose to overcome this major limitation to the
conventional SPM platform by developing an all-electronic feedback approach to
enable parallel scanning and high resolution SNFUH imaging. The core of the
proposed work lies in the "out-of-the-box" innovation of an all-electronic
MOSFET-embedded microcantilever that can be fabricated by standard semiconductor
techniques. Our preliminary design has shown excellent sensitivity and a usable
bandwidth of ~100MHz. This Phase I work will demonstrate the feasibility of high
throughput sub-surface scanning. Phase II research will focus on developing a
parallel array of MOSFET-embedded microcantilevers.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be the development
of a nanoscale imaging tool which will be immediately applicable in the
semiconductor industry for failure analysis and process development, and which
will find utility in probing the interactions of engineered nanomaterials in
biological systems. The tool will combine the ultrahigh spatial resolution of a
near field technique (atomic force microscopy or AFM) with the ability to image
defects inside optically dense materials (both soft and hard) using ultrasound,
non-destructively and in a conceptually simple fashion. The project efforts will
lead directly to the development of a highly parallel array of MOSFET-embedded
cantilever probes coupled with all-electronic feedback control for high-
resolution and high-throughput SNFUH sub-surface imaging. Furthermore, the
method of integrated electronic detection which we will develop will also find
application in existing AFM platforms, lowering their cost and simplifying their
use.