* 0945155
* SBIR Phase I: Development of Soluble Analyte Amplification for PBP2a Detection
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Robert Lawton, New England Rare Reagents
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 12/31/2010
* USD 193,080.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop a
prototype feasibility assay for low level detection of methacillin resistant
Staphlococcus aureus (MRSA) protein biomarker, Penicillin Binding Protein 2a
(PBP2a), using an innovative, patented detection technology. The company has
developed a detection technology called Soluble Analyte Amplification, or SAM, a
versatile diagnostic platform that is capable of identifying biological
molecules at currently undetectable concentrations in solution. In the US over
94,000 patients acquire MRSA bloodstream infection yearly with a mortality rate
of almost 20%. Currently, no diagnostic platforms can detect MRSA directly from
blood. The project will use the SAM technology to develop an assay that will
detect PBP2A in blood.

The broader impacts of this research are the development of the innovative SAM
technology that will serve as a springboard from which SAM will find multiple
applications in human medicine. While clinical diagnostic testing has profoundly
impacted healthcare delivery, the sensitivity of tests currently on the market
do not have the ability to detect molecules at the low levels observed early in
disease when treatment is more efficacious. Introduction of a SAM-based assay
system as a sensitive and easy to use technology for detection of proteins,
carbohydrates and other molecules of interest at very low concentration will
enhance the understanding of many diseases and lead to important advances in
therapeutics and early detection strategies.