* 0945452
* SBIR Phase I:  TBC - Test Bench Compaction for Improving the Efficiency of Full-Chip Power and Thermal Evaluation
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* Hamid Savoj, Envis Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2010
* USD 126,558.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a
test bench compactor to reduce the length of the test benches used for the power
analysis of Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) designs by up to two orders of
magnitude. Accurate estimation of the average and peak power consumptions as
well as die temperature of a design usually requires detailed simulations at the
gate level. This makes the power estimation step computation intensive and very
time consuming. The proposed test bench compactor will take a long register-
transfer level (RTL) test bench (which is representative of the typical
applications running on a chip or design) and shorten its length to reduce the
required simulation time, while preserving the spatio-temporal characteristics
of the original test bench which are important for accurate power estimation.
The proposed approach will take into account the power modes of the design and
the status of its clock and power gaters during the test bench compaction to
achieve high accuracy. It will thereby significantly reduce the time required
for estimating power consumption of VLSI circuits while maintaining the fidelity
of the power estimates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact and commercial
potential of the proposed work will have a direct impact on reducing the effort
for designing and validating nano-electronic circuits and semiconductor chips.
It will thus significantly reduce the design time and reduces the number of
redesigns required to meet the power budget by providing an accurate, yet very
fast, estimation of the average and peak power consumption/temperature of the
chips. The semiconductor industry and design houses (doing custom designs such
as microprocessor and embedded cores as well as application specific designs
such as network adapters and various codecs) are expected to greatly benefit
from such a capability, and therefore, the commercial potential of this proposed
test bench compactor is huge. There are no existing tools in the market that
utilize the proposed compaction technology and solution strategy. Finally the
proposed SBIR Phase I project will enhance fundamental understanding of effects
of the salient characteristics of application data in conjunction with the
specific micro-architectural features of target hardware on power modeling and
analysis, with wide ranging applications to performance modeling and power-
performance tradeoff analysis. &lt;br/&gt;