* 0945863
* SBIR Phase I:  Versatile Hand Held Nanosensory Pathogen Detection Device for Real-Time Diagnosis
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Agenor Mafra-Neto, ISCA TECHNOLOGIES, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Grace Jinliu Wang
* 12/31/2010
* USD 148,226.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop a
palmtop device to accurately detect and report in real-time the analytes,
pathogens and contaminants in the field. The approach is to integrate (1)
antibody functionalized conducting nanosensors; (2) an automated robotic sample
manipulation/preparation device; and (3) a low energy, high throughput,
miniaturized electromechanical system with user interface for data integration
and reporting. This project will address the nanosensory detection of Borrelia
burgdorferi, the etiologic agent of Lyme disease, the most prevalent tick-borne
illness in the United States. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader/commercial
impact of this project will be the potential to provide a device for vector and
disease management, biodetection in homeland security, health care,
agroenvironmental applications and food safety markets. It is believed that an
early detection is the best solution to prevent epidemics. In the case of Lyme
disease, current detection of Borrelia burgdorferi is slow, expensive and
requiring constant human interference and laboratory conditions, resulting in
only a small portion of the introduced pathogens actually being detected before
diseases or epidemics become widespread. This project will enable the efficient
in-field monitoring for the presence of Lyme disease and other pathogens. The
data will be wireless transferred to a centralized hub, providing decision-
makers with real-time intelligence of field conditions and allowing time for
preventive rather than crisis control actions.