* 0945303
* SBIR Phase I:  Disinfection of Spore-Forming Bacteria with Advanced Functional Surface Coatings
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Steve Kaganove, DENDRITECH, INC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2010
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims to develop potent
and durable antimicrobial coatings that effectively neutralize both vegetative
and spore forms of harmful bacteria and which are simple to manufacture. The
effectiveness of a known biocidal chemical entity is enhanced through new
discoveries on the impact of surface morphology and physical properties on
biocidal activity. The coatings utilize inexpensive, readily available
components and simple methods of application, and they will be targeted toward
fighting hospital acquired (nosocomial) infections, in general, and Clostridium
difficile associated disease (CDAD), in particular. The coatings will be tested
for biocidal activity against C. difficile spores, as well as E. coli and S.
aureus. Coating durability and effective lifetime will also be evaluated.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be to significantly
reduce costs to the healthcare system arising from nosocomial infections. While
the first and best line of defense against nosocomial infections continues to be
scrupulous hand washing and diligent cleaning of environmental surfaces, these
antimicrobial coatings will help compensate for unavoidable inconsistencies in
compliance with recommended protocols. The project may also lead to better
understanding of the mechanisms through which one class of polymer materials
posseses biocidal activity, particularly in the case of bacterial spores.