* 0945727
* SBIR Phase I:  Green Engineering Magnet (GEM) Project
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Elroy Bolduc, THE ATHENA GROUP INC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2010
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I research project proposes
to research and develop GEM (Green Engineering Magnet) in response to a national
problem of recruiting young scholars to pursue STEM studies. The question
therefore becomes: How does one actively motivate young scholars to pursue STEM
studies in a meaningful and sustained manner? GEM uses the natural youthful
attraction of green studies as a magnet to attract middle school students into
meaningful and relevant STEM studies. The GEM Project frames core STEM topics
and studies in the context of green engineering activities to provide students
with authentic experiences that motivate the learning of STEM concepts presented
in class. To achieve this goal, the project fuses together three powerful
learning technologies beginning with its immersive high-value 3-D STEM
simulators. Next, requisite data collection, display and analysis activities are
channeled through professional virtual instrument (VI) portals. Lastly,
software-enabled scenario-based learning motifs are used to integrate and
deliver content as authentic STEM activities. As a result, students will
enthusiastically pursue green challenges by making observations, measurements,
calculations, and most importantly choices based on economic and environmental
costs, just as required by real STEM practitioners. Lastly a DITA document
framework will be developed to promote efficient authoring (multi-authoring) and
content maintenance.

GEM products will support middle school general science, earth science, and
similar curricular offerings plus teachers with activities having a green
emphasis. The GEM target market consists of middle school STEM programs residing
in 14,300 districts with 1,525 administrative offices having annual expenditures
exceeding $825 trillion dollars. The widespread impact of GEM is assured through
the projected multi-tiered marketing strategy that begins with direct textbook
and teacher support. The first anticipated product is linked to It's About Time
(IAT) Project-Based Inquiry Science (PBIS)textbooks. Another tier will consist
of other contracted textbook support products. By intentionally designing GEM
content for re-use, other textbooks will be rapidly and affordably added to the
list of supported STEM textbooks. The last tier focuses on green learning
supplements sponsored by green stakeholders. Once developed, the 'must have' GEM
technology can become a significant part of the nation's middle school STEM
programs and be dominant in green engineering instances. GEM Project graduates
are also anticipated to be better prepared and interested in pursuing STEM
careers, in addition to becoming more STEM-literate citizens.