* 0945474
* SBIR Phase I:  IDT Sensors for Monitoring Wind Energy Infrastructure
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* Carl Druffner, Mound Laser & Photonics Center, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2010
* USD 149,772.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop
sensor technology to address the problem of inspection and health monitoring of
composites used in wind turbine blades used for clean electrical power
generation. Such technology will be useful for field inspection following
manufacture and transportation (where 80% of blade damage occurs), and health
monitoring during operation to avoid catastrophic blade failure. The Phase I
effort will include design and fabrication (by laser micromachining techniques)
of interdigitated (IDT) acoustic wave sensors. These devices radiate sound waves
through a material to actively detect cracks, de-bonding and fiber breakage by
listening for echoes. IDT sensors have previously been used for crack detection
in homogeneous metals. This program will focus on the challenge of adapting and
integrating these sensors into the composite architecture of wind turbine
blades. This includes characterizing the acoustic response detected for various
types of known defects, optimizing the sensors to recognize these defect, and
showing the feasibility of implementing the sensors to monitor the health of in-
service turbine blades. The result of the research will be demonstration of a
sensor that can serve as the basis for a practical system for component
manufacturing inspection and onboard health monitoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be to improve the
overall affordability of wind power generation of electricity, with the
attendant benefits to the environment and national energy independence and
security. The project will address the technologically challenging problem of
adapting a crack detecting sensor that is simple and robust in homogeneous
materials to more complicated, but in many situations more relevant, composite
materials. The project focus detection of defects in wind turbine blades which
represent just 5% of installed turbine cost, but, if defective, put the entire
system at risk. A 1.5 MW turbine costs ~$2-3M to build, and each wind farm may
include dozens of turbines. The national investment in wind infrastructure
assets that would benefit from sensor protection was in excess of $12 billion in
2008. Thus, a simple, accurate method for pre-installation detection of damage
and on-going health monitoring can have a major economic impact. A successful
acoustic wave sensor technology for composites would also have wider
infrastructure monitoring applications, as for composite bridges, towers and
pipelines. &lt;br/&gt;