* 0945681
* SBIR Phase I: Astro-Engineer: Implement Problem-based Serious Games Approach to Engage Middle School Students in Engineering Design Challenges Related to Colonizing Space
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2011
* Jamie Kirkley, WisdomTools Enterprises Inc
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2011
* USD 199,987.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I research project proposes
to design, develop and conduct usability and feasibility testing on Astro-
Engineer, a problem-based, commercial quality serious game module with embedded
scaffolds to interest and engage middle school (7th and 8th grade) students in
engineering design challenges related to colonizing space. The overall Phase I
and II components of this SBIR project will be to design, develop and evaluate
the full suite of five serious game modules with embedded mini games that serve
as learning scaffolds, as well as a Teachers Guide, to interest and engage
middle school students in learning engineering problem-solving approaches
applied to authentic engineering design challenges, applying science and math to
solve these challenges, and increasing student interest in engineering,
engineering technology and related STEM topics, courses, and careers.

By engaging middle school students in problem-based serious game modules based
on authentic engineering challenges that are mapped to academic engineering
standards and tied to the Project Lead the Way curriculum, middle school
students will demonstrate a significant increase in: 1) learning outcomes
related to specific engineering design concepts, tasks and problem solving
approaches based on challenges related to colonizing space; 2) learning outcomes
related to the ability to apply specific math and science skills to solve these
engineering challenges; 3) interest in engineering, engineering technology and
related STEM topics, courses and/or careers. While the focus for these gains is
on all students, there is a particular emphasis on reaching under-represented
populations (women, minorities, and persons with abilities). This project will
help improve the knowledge base on how to effectively design serious games for
STEM education, and specifically to teach the engineering design process, in
such a way as to support student interest and learning, and to attract
underrepresented populations in engineering. The project will test the usability
and feasibility of Astro-Engineer with two classes of middle school students
using a pre-post test, observation, surveys and interviews, and data will be
analyzed to assess impact on specific populations of interest.