* 0945277
* SBIR Phase I: Energy Storage, Electrical Distribution, and Packaging for Wireless Sensor Networks
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* Clad Christensen, Potomac Photonics Inc
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2010
* USD 149,926.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project comprises the
development and synthesis of technologies for miniaturizing the interconnection,
packaging and battery power systems used in the wireless sensor nodes of
distributed sensing systems. Laser-based approaches to making very fine feature
conductor patterns, vias, and mechanical structures in a variety of organic and
inorganic materials will be employed to substantially reduce the size of sensor
circuitry. These techniques will also provide flexibility of form factor in
sensor construction, allowing the geometry of sensing nodes to be adapted to the
requirements of specific applications. Sensor nodes developed in this project
will incorporate an advanced, rechargeable thin-film battery that exhibits an
energy storage density substantially exceeding that of any battery currently on
the commercial market. The battery technology is compatible with a variety of
energy scavenging methods, such as radio frequency, solar, vibration, and
thermal. The combination of circuit miniaturization and high-density energy
storage that will be achieved in this project is easily adaptable to most sensor
designs and will be applicable to almost any wireless sensing system.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is leveraged
by the large number of potential applications of wireless sensing technology.
After an extended incubation period, wireless sensing networks are experiencing
a surge of market growth. A market opportunity for more than 100 million sensor
nodes is projected for 2019. Potential applications come from areas as diverse
as infrastructure monitoring for bridges, roadways and pipelines, geology and
atmospheric sciences, electrical metering, parking management, patient
monitoring and medical studies, elderly care, industrial process control, crop
water management, and home automation. In the health care area alone, wireless
sensor networks could potentially produce an estimated $25 billion savings world
wide. Feasibility of many potential applications will be strongly influenced by
the availability of miniaturized sensor nodes with suitable form factors that
can be operated without maintenance for extended periods. Targeting
miniaturization and power sources, the proposed project addresses key
bottlenecks in sensor network implementation. It will have a significant impact
on these large developing markets, and well as spin-off applications in medical
and consumer electronics.&lt;br/&gt;