* 0945722
* SBIR Phase I:  TriStar, An Algebraic High Performance Communications Signal Processor
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Michael Lewis, THE ATHENA GROUP INC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2010
* USD 149,754.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will research and
develop an innovative and revolutionary core wireless infrastructure technology.
Wireless technologies impact virtually every aspect of life and require a new
high performance, low latency, low power infrastructure technology to move to
the next level. Today, communications and digital signal processors (DSPs)
achieve high performance levels by creating multi-processor designs; as a
consequence, these systems can be overly complex, costly, and power consuming.
The proposed project utilizes a high-performance communications and DSP
processor design; one based on an understanding of computer arithmetic rather
than a massive infusion of hardware. The Phase I project will (1) develop a
mathematical framework in which physically&lt;br/&gt;realizable multiplier-less
TriStar filters and transforms having user defined critical frequency or
frequencies can be derived, (2) develop a design methodology that can optimize
TriStar solutions for speed, power, complexity and/or latency; and (3) quantify
and validate the performance and packaging gains using powerful EDA tools. The
hardware implementation of the resulting multiplier-free system will achieve
superior performance, cost, and power consumption when compared to today?s best
wireless solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential
of this project is found in the rapidly increasing $200B (US) wireless market, a
market with rapidly increasing technological demands and requirements. The
proposed&lt;br/&gt;technology represents a major advance in the foundation or
infrastructure technology that underlies a wide range of communications, sensor,
instrumentation, and telemetry applications. It brings
multiple&lt;br/&gt;efficiencies to these applications, delivering improved
performance, reduced power, reduced silicon area and silicon expense, and run-
time reconfigurability. The proposed technology delivers these basic
economic&lt;br/&gt;justifications while simultaneously delivering such game-
changing benefits as extended product life cycle, and improved product
performance which can be expressed in attributes consumers prize: longer battery
life and faster wireless data rates. Commercial product release will be in a
form preferred&lt;br/&gt;by the targeted customer-base, namely as semiconductor
intellectual property (IP) cores ready for use in semiconductor chip
manufacturing. As a result, customers can rapidly and affordably develop and
evaluate new wireless solutions and scientific instruments that provide their
customers and the public with more affordable, capable, and reliable wireless
systems, devices, and accessories.