* 0945391
* SBIR Phase I:  Miniaturized Contour-Mode Intermediate Frequency (IF) Piezoelectric Aluminum Nitride MEMS Filters for Electronic Communication
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2011
* David Woolsey, Harmonic Devices Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2011
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will investigate
the feasibility of using piezoelectric aluminum nitride contour mode resonator
(CMR) filters to replace surface acoustic wave (SAW) and monolithic crystal
filters (MCFs) at very high frequencies (VHF). Despite rapid innovation in
transceiver blocks such as the radio frequency (RF) front-end and baseband
processor, intermediate frequency (IF) bandpass filter technology has been
relatively static for decades. Legacy filters, which are made from exotic
crystalline substrates, remain bulky and expensive, and cannot meet industry
demand for miniaturized high performance solutions. CMR filters, which are
processed on silicon substrates and have their operating frequency set by
lithographically defined features, can be orders of magnitude smaller and less
expensive than and offer improved performance over legacy technologies. The
research objective is to demonstrate VHF CMR filters that meet customer
requirements, and will be accomplished by improving the resonator design to
increase the quality factor, implementing filter design enhancements, and
establishing a microfabrication process suitable for&lt;br/&gt;manufacturing.
These improvements will result in filters with insertion loss less than 2 dB,
rejection greater than 80 dB, direct 50 W matching, high power handling,
excellent phase linearity, and a highly scalable microfabrication
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact / commercial potential of this
project includes contributions to technological understanding by supplementing
the body of knowledge in the fields of RF micromachined electromechanical
systems (MEMS), electro-acoustics, and thin-film fabrication technology, and by
enabling paradigm shifts in wireless transceiver design. The proposed IF CMR
filter solutions provide a compelling value proposition to communication
electronics&lt;br/&gt;manufacturers by offering up to several orders of
magnitude reduction in component size and weight, by enabling lower power
consumption and higher sensitivity via reduced filter insertion loss and higher
rejection, and ultimately, by costing substantially less than their SAW filter
and&lt;br/&gt;MCF competitors. The IF filter market understates the true
commercial potential since CMR technology is scalable to RF filters and clock
resonators and oscillators. The addressable market for CMR IF filters is $250
million annually, and includes the communications, consumer electronics,
automotive, industrial, and aerospace / military sectors. Several large
electronics&lt;br/&gt;companies have written formal letters of interest in the
proposed technology. The proposed CMR technology has broad societal impact by
facilitating the proliferation of low cost, highperformance wireless
communication devices and through job and wealth creation.