* 0945972
* SBIR Phase I:  High-Definition Pico-projector Display Engine Based on Lasers and Scanning MEMS Mirror
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,07/31/2010
* Hongbing Liu, AcuDisplay, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 07/31/2010
* USD 149,946.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes novel
MEMS and electro-optical system designs and manufacturing processes to create
world's first high definition video micro-projectors that are so miniaturized,
low-cost, and low power consuming that they can be integrated in the near future
with a variety of mobile devices, such as cell-phones and netbooks. The proposed
display engine for mobile video projectors consists of fast-modulated RGB (red,
green, and blue) lasers scanned pixel-by-pixel by MEMS scanning mirrors over a
display surface at HD (high definition) video rates. Such projected images will
not require focusing at any distance and with an incredible color range and
quality due to the use of laser light. In addition to requiring significantly
faster, larger, wider-angle scanning, and optically flatter MEMS mirrors than
available today, the proposed system may also require innovative packaging, and
faster and more power-efficient laser drivers, which are not available off the
shelf. Packaging all of the display engine components into a small form factor
will require significant efforts in optomechanical engineering and solutions in
proper heat transfer. Phase I work will provide the proof of concept studies and
design work for the display engine.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to satisfy future
needs of consumers who will demand ever-larger display capabilities in ever-
shrinking mobile devices. Pico-projectors will be used with or integrated into
computers, cell phones, PDAs, or other portable electronic devices with an
estimated market size of over $1 billion within the next 5 years. Successful
commercialization of the proposed high definition pico-projector display engine
would have many societal and commercial impacts. Display sizes would be finally
decoupled from the limitations of the mobile device sizes. Movies, business
presentations, images, social networking web sites, etc. could be more
comfortably viewed and shared. There are new possibilities in programmable
board-games, adaptive home-decoration, and others. It is believed that the high-
resolution (XGA and HD 720p) and highest power efficiency (>10 lumens/W) of the
proposed technology can fully realize these impacts and capture the markets.
This technology, in parallel to the ever-increasing availability of high-speed
networks, will in turn increase the ability to more readily share business
information and accelerate the distribution of entertainment content even more
than it has already.