* 0945139
* SBIR Phase I:  An Immersive 3D Simulator to Experientially Learn Immunobiology as a Networked System
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* Douglas Seifert, Syandus, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2010
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I research project will
build on previous work to produce a transformative learning resource: a first-
of-its-kind simulator that applies an innovative approach and advanced 3D
interactive technology to learning complex concepts in immunology. We have
already utilized our existing simulation-based learning technology platform to
convey disease state concepts and clinical best practices to physicians for
large pharmaceutical companies. A core aspect of our vision however, is to
extend this technology and approach to the study of immunology in higher
education. Like many areas of science, immunobiology involves complex systems.
We are using an engineering paradigm to create a model immune system that is
compartmentalized into elements that interact, forming a responsive whole. When
this system is brought to life through interactivity and 3D visuals, students
will experience how the immune system functions instead of reading about it. We
are working with educators and immunologists to build this simulator and market
it to colleges, universities and medical schools in order to advance the
understanding of this fascinating science. This Phase I project will result in a
software prototype and detailed technical design to support build out of the
first commercial version in SBIR Phase II.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding
the immune system is critical for advancing the battle against infectious
diseases, autoimmune diseases, cancer, asthma, and many other disorders.
Immunology is an essential component in sustaining our nation?s competitiveness
in the life sciences. It is a growing element of biology, bioengineering,
nursing, and medical school curricula, with 29 schools already offering a
dedicated immunology major. The ImmunoBiology Simulator will be accessible over
the Internet, providing broad distribution. With content oversight by
accomplished immunologists and educators, it can also be a trusted remote
resource to students at institutions that do not retain faculty members with
this expertise. The Immunobiology Simulator facilitates comprehensive
understanding of the immune system through direct experience of the interactions
between its essential parts. This systems approach is a forward-thinking one
that is becoming more essential in science as the collective volume of detailed
scientific knowledge rapidly increases. A systems approach can also be applied
to virtually any complex scientific topic using the same core technology and
expertise, allowing us to impact other areas in life science education.