* 0945316
* TC: EAGER: Modularization Supporting Extensibility for an Industrial-strength Theorem Prover
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2011
* Warren Hunt, Jr., University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2011
* USD 299,999.00

The ACL2 theorem prover has an established user community in
industry,&lt;br/&gt;government, and academia. ACL2 supports industrial-scale
verification&lt;br/&gt;projects by combining automation and controllability, but
its&lt;br/&gt;extensibility is limited: its large (10 MB), complex code
base&lt;br/&gt;requires, for soundness, that it be entrusted solely to its
two&lt;br/&gt;authors. The PIs propose to modify ACL2 radically, opening up
the&lt;br/&gt;system by making it more modular, thus enabling trusted
development by&lt;br/&gt;untrusted users while maintaining proof security. Key
challenges are&lt;br/&gt;to expose the functionality of system components, and
to separate out&lt;br/&gt;a trusted core from code that need not be trusted for
correct&lt;br/&gt;functionality, such as code implementing heuristics, I/O,
theory&lt;br/&gt;management, and interactive proof development and debugging.
Code&lt;br/&gt;refactoring is already a hard problem, especially for a system
with&lt;br/&gt;the complexity of ACL2, but in this project there is also
the&lt;br/&gt;challenge of making the resulting system modifiable in a way that
does&lt;br/&gt;not compromise logical soundness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Expected
results include an ACL2 system that can be modified soundly&lt;br/&gt;by users
according to specific needs. In particular, research on&lt;br/&gt;teasing apart
inherently sequential output from reasoning code should&lt;br/&gt;support
research on parallel reasoning algorithms taking advantage of&lt;br/&gt;modern
multi-core machines, leading to formally verified
parallel&lt;br/&gt;implementations. More generally, the system will provide a
platform&lt;br/&gt;that promotes research in heuristics for automating
reasoning. It&lt;br/&gt;will also facilitate the customization of ACL2 for use
in the&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate classroom. The resulting system will be
freely&lt;br/&gt;distributed on the Internet.