* 0945041
* SBIR Phase I:  Clean Tool: A unified approach to wafer cleaning
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* Hang Ji, Uncopiers, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl F. Albus
* 06/30/2010
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project, will develop a
new kind of wafer cleaning tool that will be useful at every cleaning step in
semiconductor processing. It will use an environmentally friendly, acoustic
technology that uses only clean water and silent sound. The tool will clean a
wafer by simultaneously detecting and dislodging the particulates from the wafer
using UPW (ultra pure water) until all particulates have been removed. Its
novelty is that this will be the first tool incorporating the endpoint
determined cleaning. It will then rinse the wafer briefly and dry it in the same
tool. In this streamlined sequence, a fully clean wafer will be available for
the next process step much more quickly, much more economically, and in much
less cleanroom space. Cleaning mechanism relies on constructively controlled
acoustic microcavitation precisely brought about at the particle location to
dislodge the particle; the cavitation implosion echo is simultaneously detected
and cleaning kept track of. This tool will be applicable to all sub-100nm
technology nodes. It will be able to detect on-wafer particulates well below
50nm.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project beyond semiconductor
application will be in precision cleaning of lithography masks, mems, solar
cells, flat panel displays, HDDs, and precision optics. Ultimately, the
principle of constructively controlled microcavitation relies on controlling the
very fundamental process of phase change, the control of nucleation -- the
ability to convert a liquid into a gas in the vicinity of a solid phase. This
should have much wider applications in a variety of chemical processing, e.g. in
the control of the boiling processes in chemical and nuclear reactors. The study
of this acoustically mediated nucleation control could form an active field/area
of research and education. Rejected wafers amount to a colossal waste of prime
resources including energy, material, and productivity time; it further amounts
to environmental degradation through the effluents and scrap generated. The use
of clean tool to prevent such wafer loss directly benefits the society at large.