* 0945919
* SBIR Phase I:  Wireless Weight in-Motion
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* Robert Kavaler, Sensys Networks, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2010
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will design,
build and test a prototype wireless weigh-in-motion or W-WIM system. The
proposed W-WIM system comprises an array of up to eight 3in cubes embedded in
the pavement. Each cube contains a MeMS accelerometer, a
microprocessor,&lt;br/&gt;and a radio that sends the accelerometer measurements
to an access point on the side of the road. Each cube is powered by a battery,
with a 10-year lifetime. The access point processes the accelerometer
measurements&lt;br/&gt;to estimate the axle load, and transmits the estimates
via GPRS to the traffic control center. The 3in cubes take up no space and can
be installed in minutes, so W-WIM systems can be deployed anywhere. By contrast,
today?s WIM systems use decades-old bending plate, piezoelectric or load cell
sensors to measure axle load. These sensors take up a lot of space, and
installing them requires shutting the lane to traffic for a long time. WIM
systems need continuous calibration to maintain accuracy. They are expensive to
build and&lt;br/&gt;operate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commerical
potential of this project is high. Transportation agencies must prevent
accelerated highway deterioration with diminishing funds for maintenance: costs
have so escalated that $42&lt;br/&gt;billion provided in SAFETEA-LU for 2009
Federal aid to highways will only be worth between $16.8 billion and $26.6
billion in 2005 dollars. One WIM station today costs $600,000 (plus support
cost). The high cost and difficulty of installation limits WIM deployment. W-WIM
systems will be priced at $60,000 per unit; since they are easy to install, they
could be widely employed for comprehensive enforcement and data collection.
W-WIM could be used on arterial streets to regulate trucks on city roads, where
WIM systems cannot be used. W-WIM could be a component in a truck weight-based
enforcement and toll system. WWIM could thus create a new market both within and
outside the US that will employ people with diverse skills in the design,
manufacturing, sales, and deployment of W-WIM systems.