* 0945136
* SBIR Phase I:  Improved Metal Oxide Magneto-Optical Indicator Films and Method of Fabrication
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,11/30/2010
* Mahavir Sanghavi, Lake Shore Cryotronics, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 11/30/2010
* USD 149,997.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is intended to
investigate the feasibility of enhanced magneto-optic thin garnet films, capable
of converting magnetic field intensity to optical data using Faraday
polarization rotation, and fabrication of such films using a novel method of
manufacturing all-dielectric metal oxides. This type of thin film is known as an
"in-plane" film because the magnetization vector lies in the plane of the
substrate and must be distinguished from the "out-of-plane" thick films that are
used in large quantities in optical communications (e.g. for isolators and
circulators), and in some electrical current sensors. With the projected film
properties and proposed system design, it is estimated that magneto-optical
imagers (MOIs) can resolve spatial magnetic features of less than 200 nm and
magnetic field strengths of less than 100 nanotesla (which corresponds to
electrical currents of less than 10 ÂµA). The MOI films are also capable of
frequency responses extending into the GHz range, making optical signal
processing applications possible.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project originates from
potential applications in imaging systems which can image damaged magnetic data
storage devices, tools for imaging electrical currents in semiconductor wafers,
and magnetic current sensors for the electrical power industry, among others.
Several applications of MOI films have been commercialized previously, but
commercial efforts have been hampered by an uncertain supply of the films.
Societal and educational benefits will include an additional tool for classroom
instruction in electromagnetics, a new method for conducting research into high
temperature superconductors, and the potential for devices which will make the
nation's electrical grid and power infrastructure safer and more reliable.