* 0945805
* SBIR Phase I:  High Resolution, Low Cost, Compact 3D Imaging System
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Brant Kaylor, Bridger Photonics, INC
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 12/31/2010
* USD 150,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will
demonstrate a novel, three-dimensional (3D) imaging system concept that combines
cutting-edge high-resolution, frequency-modulated continuous-wave (FMCW) Laser
Radar (LADAR) with powerful Feature Specific Imaging (FSI) techniques. Many
applications including autonomous navigation, object recognition, and machine
vision would benefit greatly from fast, high-resolution 3D imaging sensors.
Unfortunately, existing 3D imaging systems cannot offer the range resolution,
speed, or cost effectiveness for these applications due to required specialized
hardware such as fast-focal-plane arrays or mechanical scanning components. The
combination of broadband FMCW LADAR technology and advanced FSI techniques will
enable a 3D imaging system with unrivalled range resolution, no moving parts,
and a single detector element, and it will still offer comparable size, frame
rates, and cost as current state-of-the-art 2D imaging solutions. The research
objectives for this project include demonstrating the critical components and
performance of the FMCW LADAR unit, and combining this unit with an advanced FSI
physical design and algorithm. This combined system will be used to demonstrate
a single pixel 3D imaging system. Lastly, the feasibility of a practical imaging
system based on this concept will be assessed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project is the development of a practical,
low-cost, high-resolution 3D imaging system that has applications including
industrial machine vision, vehicle collision avoidance systems, security and
surveillance imaging systems, autonomous navigation and object recognition units
for robots. The system will therefore improve the quality and efficiency of
manufacturing, improve safety on the roadways and the workplace, provide
reliable object presence and scene change information for crucial security
needs, and advance the perception capabilities of robots. Presently available 3D
imaging systems are far too large, slow and costly for these applications. By
partnering with established industry leaders, the proposed technology will be
developed for these applications. By building key industry partnerships and
targeting ideal entry markets, estimated revenues from this product line will
grow to nearly $30M by 2014.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;