* 0945935
* SBIR Phase I: Low-cost Long-life Diamond Electrodes for Wastewater Treatment using Advanced Electrochemical Oxidation
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* John Carlisle, ADVANCED DIAMOND TECHNOLOGIES
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2010
* USD 149,985.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop
boron-doped ultrananocrystalline diamond (UNCD) electrodes for electrochemical
treatment/destruction of recalcitrant organics in industrial wastewater via
direct anodic oxidation. Boron-doped diamond (BDD) film electrodes have
generated considerable interest due to their ability to readily mineralize
complex waste streams. Other treatment methods (e.g., reverse osmosis and
activated carbon) simply concentrate toxins, which produces residuals requiring
disposal in hazardous waste landfills or incinerators. UNCD provides many
advantages over traditional diamond for electrodes (e.g., thin, low-stress,
phase-pure films). UNCD films consist of phase pure, 2-5 nm grains with
atomically abrupt grain boundaries. UNCD costs less than larger-grained BDD
films, are resistant to grain-boundary ion transport, and exhibit lower stress.
The objective of this project is to optimize the company?s existing boron-doped
UNCD technology to develop low-cost, long-lifetime electrodes to enable wide-
spread adoption of electrochemical wastewater treatment/destruction. The project
will determine the effects of surface morphology, doping, substrate and
processing methodology for UNCD electrodes to quantify costs, electrochemical
performance and lifetime for wastewater treatment/destruction.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is substantial. Thin,
boron-doped UNCD films will reduce electrode resistive losses and thereby lower
the overall power consumption for water treatment and other electrochemical
applications of boron-doped diamond. Since water quality has a great impact on
human health, enabling electrochemical water treatment through electrode
lifetime improvements and reductions in power and capital costs would be both an
attractive market opportunity and have a significant positive impact on
healthcare and energy costs. The 2007 worldwide market for ozone, an alternative
wastewater treatment technology, was $277 million and the available worldwide
market for water treatment of all types in 2010 is expected to exceed $340
billion. The market for an improved electrochemical wastewater
treatment/destruction technology for recalcitrant organics is expected to exceed
the current size of the ozone wastewater treatment market. Leveraging a greater
understanding of UNCD electrochemistry from this project would also enable
alternative applications, including low-cost point-of-use or portable water or
wastewater treatment, and water quality monitoring and bacterial disinfection to
reduce the need for chlorine, in addition to applications in the area of MEMS-
based biochemical sensors.