* 0945571
* SBIR Phase I:  LECTURETOOLS - An Integrated Textbook/Learning Management System
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* Deborah Gibson, LivingText LLC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2010
* USD 149,994.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I research project is
focussed on how to create, deliver and assess a learning environment that
integrates textbook materials with students' notes, instructors' slides,
learning objects, and the capacity to expand student inquiry and reflection. The
proposed solution is to commercialize LectureTools, a learning management system
developed and licensed from the University of Michigan, and extend it through
addition of LivingText textbook apps to produce a new system that allows
students to access textbook content integrated with in-class functionality for
note taking, student response, student inquiry and meta-cognitive tools. Users
will be able to search the combined domain of instructor lecture slides, their
own notes and the textbook in one application. The commercial LectureTools
system will provide a basic suite of functionalities including note-taking,
student response, student question and lecture upload and presentation tools and
delivery of lecture podcasts. An application programming interface will be
created that allows other developers to create and market applications that
further extend options for instructors and students. Initial applicatioms will
include a revolutionary search engine and note cloud generator that will serve
to integrate textbook content with class notes and instructor slides.

A 2006 NSF panel considered the state of the college textbook and concluded that
the current model might be broken. Moreover the panel summarized that: ' ... The
textbook of the future ... will be the organizing hub of an integrated learning
environment where the student experience is key ...'. The LectureTools package
will be attractive to higher education, continuing and on-line, and corporate
education organizations. LivingText is working closely with the University of
Michigan as a testbed and potential customer and a number of publishing
companies, including Cengage Learning, who will supply the textbook content. Key
players include 1) publishers who will potentially benefit from increased
revenue despite lower customer costs through a diminution in used book sales;
and 2) education organizations that will be able to offer a more integrated
learning environment to their students at a lower overall cost. The proposal
identifies how these players will be involved throughout the process for our
mutual benefit.