* 0945499
* SBIR Phase I : Courseload Learning Platform: Digital Delivery and Use of Course Materials in Higher Education
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Michael Levitan, Courseload, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2010
* USD 199,916.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I research project entitled
Courseload Learning Platform: Digital Delivery and Use of Course Materials in
Higher Education proposes to test the technical and commercial merits of an
innovation aimed at greatly accelerating the use of digital course materials in
higher education. It involves an industry-university collaboration with Indiana
University which will mobilize students and faculty in STEM courses to help
guide development of the set of conditions and capabilities required to build
and leverage a broader digital learning infrastructure. Phase I findings will
frame further research and innovation required in Phase II to help realize the
strong commercial potential of this idea.

The project aims to develop an innovative two-tiered approach to removing
barriers that prevent widespread use of digital course materials in higher
education. First is a novel business model that overcomes intellectual property
issues and reduces materials cost by 50%. This makes possible the second tier --
technical advancements in learning tools that enhance student attainment and
enable faculty to improve teaching methodology. Building on a Fall 2009 pilot in
the Information Systems discipline with its partner Indiana University, the
project will conduct further research in a Spring Expansion to additional STEM
disciplines, testing elements that drive viral student acceptance and improve
educational outcomes.