* 0945751
* SBIR Phase I:  Sensing and Control System for High Velocity Oxygen Fuel (HVOF) Deposited Nanocomposite Coatings
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Dennis Radgowski, Cyber Materials Solutions
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2010
* USD 147,642.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a
system to characterize the high velocity oxygen fuel (HVOF) coating process that
will enable reduction of coating variation. Recent innovations in materials
engineering have resulted superior coatings for wear protection in terms of
stress, density, and hardness. However, variation in the coating process has
limited process capability and slowed process development. This new system will
detect process variation and compensate for it before coatings are deposited and
streamline development by quickly characterizing new process operating points.
The Phase I project will focus on developing the capability to sense process
variation and identify methods for compensating for this variation. The sensor
will build on technology already developed for the plasma spray coating process
which enables rapid characterization of the process at speeds satisfactory for
production coating shops. The new system will be specifically developed to
support coatings of recently developed nanocomposite powders, for which rapid
process development and consistent application are extremely valuable.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be realized in the
$1.5 billion HVOF coating market, which is growing rapidly after 2007 OSHA
regulations limited worker exposure to hexavalent chromium. HVOF has been
validated as the primary replacement for the environmentally hazardous hard-
chrome process and the largest applications are wear coatings for aircraft
landing gear, but alternative applications include wear and corrosion coatings
for industrial equipment and biocompatible coatings for medical devices. New
nanocomposite powders are improving performance of these coatings beyond their
current capabilities but the current levels of variation in the HVOF process are
unacceptable for reliably achieving this performance. Customers for HVOF
coatings have insisted that coating suppliers implement sensors, but the
available sensors are difficult to use and the information that they provide
does not always correlate to the relevant coating characteristics. This
project's sensing and control system fills that gap by providing both an easy to
use sensor and a semi-automatic way to use the sensor data. It is anticipated
that this control system will capture the significant number of sprayers who are
required to make process improvements, but are frustrated with the available
equipment and methodologies.