* 0945687
* SBIR Phase I: A Multithreaded Storage Engine using Highly-Concurrent Fractal Trees
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* Bradley Kuszmaul, Tokutek, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 06/30/2010
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will investigate
techniques for implementing high-performance databases on multi-core computers
by focusing on how to support concurrent activity with provably good thread
scheduling in "Fractal Tree" databases. Today's databases suffer from resource
imbalances between storage bandwidth, disk-seek rate, and CPU core capacity,
leading to underperformance, cumbersome workarounds, and energy inefficiency.
The company has developed a high-performance storage engine for MySQL that
maintains indexes on live data 100 times faster than traditional engines. The
approach employs cache-oblivious Fractal-Tree indexes, which scale with storage
bandwidth rather than seek rate, thus addressing the imbalance between bandwidth
and disk-seek rate. If successful, this research will produce a database
implementation that for each query that either saturates the CPU cores,
saturates disk bandwidth, or consumes all of the inherent parallelism in the
query.

The target market comprises organizations that have very large databases and a
workload dominated by insertions and queries. There are many application areas
that do not employ databases because their performance is too slow. Orders-of-
magnitude speedup for databases can help grow the market. Applications in
finance, retail, homeland security, telecommunications, and scientific computing
will benefit from high-performance databases. Furthermore the researchers hope
to lead all database implementers into the multi-core realm. The proposed
research will further the understanding of how to schedule database queries when
data is well laid out on disk. As users' appetite for data continues to outstrip
the availability of fast memory, organizing multithreaded queries on disk-based
data for performance will only grow in importance.