* 0945723
* SBIR Phase I:  Capital Structuring Decision Support
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* Eric Page, CapSmart
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 06/30/2010
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will research and
develop a software system to model the complex and varied rights structures used
in private company finance. This system will show the behavior (such as the
economic payouts to each stakeholder) of capital structures under various future
funding and exit event scenarios. Sophisticated investors employ various
securities in complex strategies, depending on the specific company, to balance
exposures and maximize overall investment returns. Typically, these strategies
are devised using custom built spreadsheet models that are opaque, analytically
limited, and prone to undetected errors. When negotiating investment terms, this
status quo puts company stakeholders who are less experienced with capital
structuring strategies at a serious disadvantage.

This innovation research effort will build the mathematical core of a platform
that will serve entrepreneurs, students, and investors to explore and build
capital structures in a more instructive, transparent, and powerful way. The
core platform will grow into a commercial subscription web application.
Ultimately, a mature and widely-used platform for capital structuring will
enable the industry to reduce unnecessary and stylistic complexity from capital
structures, which in addition to obvious benefits will set the stage for new
models of trade and exchange of private company ownership to emerge.