* 0945987
* SBIR Phase I:  The Way Entrepreneurs Learn: Migration from Supercoach Instructor-Led Entrepreneurial Education Curriculum to Blended Learning Technology
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* Henry Ryng, inXsol, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2010
* USD 149,771.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I research project will lay
the groundwork for an Entrepreneurial Education (EE) simulation/exercises
infrastructure. Researchers have uncovered that training simulations
indispensable in closing the gap between gaining knowledge in the classroom and
application of that knowledge in the field. The operational gap will be closed
by using a simulation exercise in conjunction with the proven EE training
program already in place. Using the e-Learning modules, students will interact
with exercises that introduce worksheets and models to create an arsenal of
tools that become available resources for continuing use by the entrepreneur.
Use of these electronic forms and frameworks create new opportunities for
'virtual' mentor/learner one-on-one interaction. EE has been identified as a key
building block in the entrepreneurial process for scientists and engineers. The
project is based on the premise that technology can be used to develop
scaleable, compelling, inter-disciplinary curricula and delivery methods
providing broader access to the target audience and compression of the
entrepreneurial process duration from 'innovative idea to market
implementation'. The project will adopt proven entrepreneurial education (EE)
curriculum and by moving it to an interactive web-based infrastructure,
significant efficiencies will be provided to both the facilitator and the
entrepreneur. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The commercial potential of the product(s)
resulting from this project is significant because of the nature of the EE
market and the range of potential customers for this product. The EE marketplace
is best described as fragmented with multiple student cohorts, service providers
and funding agencies. This marketplace characteristic is, of course, both a
challenge and an opportunity. It is a challenge because of the difficulty is
making available effective and consistent coaching in a cost-effective manner.
The proposed innovation captures that expertise and bundles it with appropriate
methodologies, tools and techniques required for successful entrepreneurship.
The fragmented marketplace presents an opportunity because strategic alliances
can be undertaken to provide critical mass and momentum for a transition to
innovative curriculum and advanced delivery tools.