* 0945455
* SBIR Phase I:  Tools for Improved Friction Material Processing
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* Donald Yuhas, Industrial Measurement Systems Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl F. Albus
* 06/30/2010
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to enhance
the automotive friction material manufacturing industry's productivity and
efficiency by providing a superior measurement method for quality, consistency
and the quantification of noise influencing material properties. Friction
material manufacturing is subject to inter-material as well as inter-batch
inconsistency that is not adequately quantifiable by existing methods. These
inconsistencies adversely affect customer satisfaction, contribute to lost
business and consume engineering and testing resources. An ultrasonic-based
measurement method capable of measuring material property and consistency data
has been employed in destructive laboratory testing with success. Modification
of this method for use with intact, as-manufactured friction materials can
provide manufacturers with the quality and consistency analysis tools that are
currently severely lacking. In this program studies will be conducted to relate
ultrasonic data to friction material processing variables and to forge a
relationship between ultrasonic test data and noise performance. Ultrasonic
measurement can be implemented as both, part of a control scheme to improve the
manufacture of friction materials and as a quality assurance method to ensure
that noise-prone components do not enter the marketplace. Both lead to increased
customer satisfaction and significant gains in manufacturing efficiency.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is
improved manufacturing processes for automotive friction materials. The entire
automotive industry can attest that brake noise, vibration and harshness (NVH)
repairs often dominate warranty claims. More than $100 million is spent annually
on brake noise, vibration warranty work in North America alone. In order to
reduce such warranty and brake repair costs, more attention is being placed on
optimizing NVH performance to eliminate brake squeals, groans and other related
issues at the original equipment level. This is especially true considering new
vehicle quality perceptions are often driven in part by brake performance and
warranty repairs. Although test methods suitable for measuring and controlling
friction levels are available, methods to screen parts for the purpose of
eliminating NVH problems are inadequate, lacking sufficient specificity to allow
definitive screening for the elimination of defective components. These methods
are expensive, slow and difficult to implement. Better quality assurance test
methods are needed, which market ultrasonic measurement methods are fully
capable of exploiting. Ultrasonic methods fit a need in the auto industry that
has not been filled, despite much time and effort being devoted to NVH over the
past few decades.