* 0945261
* SBIR Phase I:  Functionally Graded Cemented Tungsten Carbide -- Process and Properties
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Peng Fan, Heavystone Laboratory, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Grace Jinliu Wang
* 12/31/2010
* USD 196,882.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop
an innovative process to significantly enhance the manufacturability of
functionally graded cemented tungsten carbide (FGM WC-Co) by utilizing a high
temperature carburization process. This technology is based on the understanding
of the thermodynamics and kinetics of liquid phase equilibrium and migration
during sintering. The approach is to exploit the thermodynamic equilibriums
among liquid Co phase and other phases and the dependence of the equilibrium on
temperature and carbon content. Co gradient is formed in this process by forcing
liquid Co to flow from the surface region towards the interior region during
carburizing heat treatment of conventional liquid-phase-sintered WC-Co.

The broader/commercial impact of this project will be the potential to develop a
high-manufacturability process for FGM WC-Co. Cemented tungsten carbide, WC-Co,
is one of the most widely used tool materials in metal machining, mining, oil,
gas, geothermal energy explorations, and other industrial applications where
extreme wear resistance is required. FGM WC-Co materials are made of WC-Co
composites with varying cobalt compositions from surface to the interior of the
material. Compared to conventional homogeneous WC-Co, FGM WC-Co offers a
combination of superior wear resistance, fracture toughness, and strength, thus
provides much more desired engineering performance. However, manufacturing FGM
WC-Co presents a difficult challenge because liquid phase sintering, by which
most WC-Co products are made today, produces homogeneous materials. This project
targets on the development of a new process that can be used to manufacture FGM
WC-Co in an economically viable manner.