* 0945928
* SBIR Phase I:  Continuous Flow Synthesis of Metal Nanoparticles
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Richard Baldwin, nanoComposix, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2010
* USD 200,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop a
continuous flow manufacturing process for the production of high concentration
solutions of unagglomerated plasmonic metal nanoparticles. Since the plasmonic
nanoparticles must be unagglomerated, they must be fabricated at a low
concentration under ultra-clean conditions. The batch-based methods currently
employed produce only dilute solutions at high cost (&gt; $10,000/gram). Here we
propose a continuous flow fabrication system that will fabricate, concentrate,
and purify plasmonic nanoparticles without introducing agglomeration. The
proposed manufacturing process utilizes no organic solvents, has a minimal waste
and disposal stream, and will result in a dramatic reduction in the cost of
plasmonic materials. By utilizing the unique optical properties of gold and
silver nanoparticles to enable near-real-time feedback on the size and shape of
the produced particles, we will be able to modify the relevant system parameters
for dynamic control of the end product. Additionally, flow reaction conditions
that are difficult to achieve in batch mode will lead to improved nanomaterials
with precisely-controlled and narrow size distributions, and uniform
crystallinity and shape, leading to immediate application
success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project will be the development of a flow manufacturing system for fabricating,
concentrating and purifying nanoparticles. This system will reduce the
production cost of plasmonic nanoparticles by a factor of 100 versus current
commercial pricing. Flow processing will allow for large quantities of
nanomaterials with the same characteristics to be produced, providing a
reproducible starting point for the manufacturing of other more complicated
nanocomposite materials. Additionally, the highly controlled reaction conditions
will yield plasmonic nanoparticles with larger scattering and absorption cross
sections, narrower resonance peaks, and highly tunable peak extinctions across
the visible and infrared regions of the spectrum. At the proposed cost point,
new applications that require substantial quantities of metal nanoparticles will
become commercially viable. Potential products include thermally enhanced
fluids, adhesives, thermal interface materials, optical filters, photonics
elements, obscurants, sensors, environmental tracers, antimicrobial surfaces and
cosmetics.