* 0945294
* SBIR Phase I:  The Development of a Cost-Effective LIDAR-Based System for Geo-Infrastructure Monitoring and Management
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* Donald Kraemer, SPLIT ENGINEERING LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2010
* USD 142,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project involves the
development of a system for monitoring the structural integrity of highway
slopes, dam foundations, and other soil and rock exposures associated with the
US infrastructure. The monitoring system will integrate state-of-the-art 3D
imaging hardware, 3D point-cloud processing software and wireless communication.
The system will be based around a cost-effective LIDAR (Light Detection and
Ranging) sensor, as well as the development of LIDAR point-cloud processing
software. The LIDAR sensor allows continuous high-resolution 3D monitoring of
rock and soil exposures from a distance. Fully automated change-detection
software will be developed to pinpoint unstable areas, providing critical
information on ground movement before, during and after
instabilities&lt;br/&gt;occur. Wireless communication allows for continuous
reporting and the issuing of warnings. The system will be cost-effective,
allowing widespread use of the technology for monitoring the US geo-
infrastructure, as well as other potential applications in mineral and material
operations, construction, hazardous waste facilities and heritage sites. There
are many challenging aspects that will advance knowledge and understanding ?
deciphering change-detection information to determine ground movement,
determining what is precursory activity to instabilities and issuing warnings,
developing a compact, cost-effective system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project include societal benefits related to
increased safety, both the safety of workers, and the safety of those that use
and are impacted by the infrastructure, such as highway drivers, rail
passengers, and people living below dams. The&lt;br/&gt;outcome of the proposed
work is a marketable product that has significant commercial potential and would
be purchased by government agencies and companies worldwide. The automatic,
realtime processing of point cloud data in the field to assess rock and soil
ground instability is an innovation that has many competitive advantages. By
being cost-effective, the commercial&lt;br/&gt;product would encourage the
widespread use of modern monitoring technologies. Competing technologies,
because of their high cost, are limited to special sites such as mining
operations. The proposed new technology has applications in other disciplines,
including mining, civil construction, manufacturing, and forestry. The proposed
monitoring system is collecting valuable&lt;br/&gt;information on rock and soil
deformation and failure that is of great interest to Universities worldwide. By
continually monitoring potentially unstable rock and soil exposures, new
discoveries and insights are likely to occur. The proposed system could be
expanded in the future to include other kinds of sensors.