* 0945481
* SBIR Phase I:  Promoting STEM Education for Students Who are Blind or Print Disabled Through the Development of the First Talking Pocket Size Scientific Data Collection Device
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Cary Supalo, Independence Science, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2010
* USD 199,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a
system to provide text-to-speech capabilities for a vital and popular scientific
device thus providing non-visual operating capacity for such a device, an
essential feature for blind/print disabled students. The proposed activity is a
collaborative venture between a well established educational company, a large
research university, and a company that specializes in increasing science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) accessibility for blind/print
disabled students. The research addresses advancing state-of-the-art educational
technologies and will provide insights into topical issues concerning STEM
education and careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project addresses this
goal by promoting STEM to students with print disabilities via a technology that
will increase hands-on accessibility during science education. Students with
print disabilities are under-represented in STEM careers. Insufficient hands-on
science learning experiences could underlie this under-representation and will
be investigated as a possible factor. Understanding such factors could
facilitate development of additional technologies and strategies for increasing
STEM representation, thus furthering NSF goals. The project will result in a
marketable product, and based on an analysis of competitive and alternative
technologies, will be in a positive position in the competitive landscape.
Commercial benefits of the project involve the creation of employment
opportunities in a STEM based educational company focused on increasing
accessibility. In addition, this technology can be used both in the laboratory
and in the home use. Potential home applications are temperature tracking of
food items, GPS navigation, and pH detection for swimming pools. Finally, the
innovation will enable data collection without sight or light. Many experiments
require dark or low light conditions and the innovation will be instrumental for
developing technologies for these experiments and in enabling future
discoveries.