* 0945580
* SBIR Phase I:  Clarify - Tutoring Listening Comprehension
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* Garrett Pelton, Carnegie Speech Company
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2010
* USD 149,982.00

The Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) research project will create
software that gives beginning and intermediate English language learners (ELLs)
a jumpstart in listening comprehension. A major problem for ELLs is simply
understanding fluent speech. Even though they may have no trouble with well-
enunciated speech, they are at a loss with the contractions and phonetic
transformations of casual speech. To address this, the project will
automatically transform well-articulated utterances into more casual, real-life
speech using innovative voice transformation technology. This controlled
variation of speaking style will help users attach new mental representations to
casual speech, enlarging their statistical representations of style variability
in English. Better listening comprehension lets users understand their teachers,
employers, customers and peers and better participate in class discussions,
handle real world situations and assimilate into an English-speaking society.
Casual speech differs from clear in more than just duration or speaking rate. It
has differences in segmental and phonetic/acoustic properties. The product
outcomes will show that presenting all of these variations by transforming clear
speech into truly casual form is much more effective for long term, real-world
relevant learning outcomes.

The market for English language learning products in targeted sectors represents
a massive revenue opportunity for providers of scalable, effective and
affordable language training solutions. This market includes: business process
outsourcing (BPO)/call center: $2B, US education: $260M, global education: $2B
to $3B and consumer market of about $100B. Although there are many products that
deal with reading and writing and some with speaking, there are few products
that target listening comprehension skills in a methodical way. This presents
first-movers into this sector with an immediate and significant business
opportunity. The project will create a novel listening comprehension product and
market it alongside companion products so that a complete suite of answers are
available to students who wish to converse with a native speaker of English. The
algorithms developed will be language-independent so that other products can be
developed for other languages as well.