* 0945752
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Glass/Glass-Ceramic Material for Electronics Packaging
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* Jeb Flemming, 3D Glass Solutions, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2010
* USD 149,436.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
address electronics packaging constraints, the limiting element in system cost
and performance for further advancements in commercial and defense electronics.
Traditional packaging approaches to address the needs in these markets,
including FR4, liquid crystal polymers, and Low Temperature Co-Fired Ceramics,
are running into fundamental material limits. Market needs are pushing for
smaller package volumes, higher density interconnects, in-package thermal
management and ultimately optical waveguide capability. This proposal will
investigate the feasibility of using an innovative glass ceramic material as a
packaging solution for these electronics applications. This material is
processed using first generation semiconductor equipment in a simple three- step
process and the product can be formed into glass, ceramic, or regions of both
glass and ceramic. This Phase I study will focus on three tasks. First,
demonstrate the material can be used for high-pressure microfluidics (1500 psi)
for enhanced thermal management. Second, the glass ceramic will be fabricated to
demonstrate 10µm, 50µm, 100µm high density copper interconnects at various
pitches. Third, investigate the material's ability to be used as a waveguide
medium by determining the maximum angle and minimum arc-length to produce an
optical waveguide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial
potential of this project is to target the technical limitations and cost
constraints associated with state-of-the-art electronics packaging. These
constraints have garnered new recognition and importance to manufacturers. Over
the last decade, packaging was considered a second-order issue after integrated
circuit development, but increasing costs and substrate material limitations
have brought it to the forefront. This proposal will directly address these cost
and material constraints. The current market for traditional electronics
packaging exceeds $6B a year, but is facing not only performance, but
environmental challenges. The European Union, as part of their Reduction of
Hazardous Substances directive, has highlighted the risks of halogen containing
material, such as FR4 that is used in electronics packaging. This glass ceramic
material contains zero halogenic elements and can be recycled. While the primary
market potential is significant, there are intriguing secondary markets for this
material in optoelectronics, MEMS, medical, nanotechnology, and biological
applications.