* 0945993
* SBIR Phase I:  Computer-assisted instructional program to teach functional life skills to students with language and cognitive disabilities
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* Christina Whalen, TeachTown, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2010
* USD 149,987.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will focus on
development of evidence-based, computer assisted instruction (CAI) to provide
training in life skills that are the underpinnings for science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) proficiencies. The outcomes of this research
will provide functional STEM skill training in a manner that is more cost-
effective, provides more consistent treatment delivery, requires less staff
training, and is more accessible to children with special needs. Accessibility
to curriculum through CAI allows for better prompting, shaping, reinforcement,
data collection and reporting, and individualization of treatment. In addition,
CAI has been proven to be more effective than traditional teaching in many
situations, and to be extremely motivating for many students.

It is anticipated that this product will be a breakthrough in the way schools
provide functional life skills teaching to 3 million students with cognitive
impairments in grades Pre-K to 12. These skills are the underpinnings of STEM -
science, technology, engineering and mathematics that are a greatly under-served
yet mandated curriculum area for schools. Current approaches often rely on
certified school staff or contract specialists individually to deliver
interventions and manually record results. The project if successful will impact
evidence-based, standards-based, and computer-assisted intervention so as to
improve consistency, quantity, and quality services per dollar spent. The
product will motivate students with personalized interactive lessons and game-
quality rewards, and will support school districts, teachers, and therapists
with automated progress tracking and comprehensive teacher and administrator
reports. Additionally, the product will be portable thus enabling home and
school use, with on-line shared notes and progress reporting to improve school-
home communication.