* 0945402
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel 3D Measurement and Imaging System
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,03/31/2011
* Paul Banks, TetraVue, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 03/31/2011
* USD 200,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will demonstrate
the feasibility of a high resolution 3D imaging system, based on a new
technology that allows simultaneous 3D coordinate measurement and high
resolution imagery using the same off-the-shelf CCD or CMOS sensor. Although
stereoscopic 3D images and movies have existed since for over 100 years in
varying degrees of quality, only recently have technologies been developed that
are able capture accurate 3D coordinates of points on surfaces, objects, and
structures. Accuracies for single points to less than 1 mm have been achieved,
but such systems produce no images and must assemble a collection of single 3D
points over time, with significant errors and no motion permitted. This project
will demonstrate a high resolution 3D camera that produces real-time 3D imagery
and video with sub-mm accuracies at each pixel. The Phase I effort will verify
the predicted performance of key components and measure the range resolution
using a simplified optical system. Phase II will then construct a 3D camera
prototype and demonstrate the promised performance.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is that many industries,
from aerospace to industrial surveying to movie and game special effects, have a
need to record and measure objects and scenes in three dimensions. Current
technology used to capture the 3D coordinates of objects and surfaces is slow,
difficult to use, and either can only be used on static objects or requires
special suits and sound stages with very low resolution. In spite of the
difficulty and associated high cost, the value of 3D data is such that its use
is growing in many sectors. This project will demonstrate a high resolution 3D
camera with the ability to simultaneously acquire 3D data and imagery 100X
faster with higher accuracies and simplified operation, which could dramatically
reduce the cost of 3D data. While this makes a large impact on the current
markets, the capability to have high resolution images of moving objects with 3D
coordinate measurements at each pixel enables a large number of new markets such
as 3D biometrics, security, cost-effective digital heritage preservation, real-
time measurement of 3D trajectories, robotic vision, etc. This is a disruptive
technology for 3D data acquisition with tremendous broader potential.

