* 0945799
* SBIR Phase I:  New Plant Based Benign Actives for Sun screen and Cosmetics Applications
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Namita Deo, Nature's Secret Solutions Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2010
* USD 200,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will demonstrate the
feasibility of plant-derived actives for sunscreen and other cosmetic
applications. Recent research has raised concerns that the chemicals used in
sunscreens and cosmetic products may be related to health problems, and their
accumulation may also be an increasing threat to aquatic life. This research is
focused on six plant extracts that have been shown to absorb UV light and
scavenge free radicals 100 times better than currently available antioxidants.
This feasibility study will include: i) isolation and identification of the
active molecule(s) responsible for the beneficial properties; ii) investigation
of the toxicity and stability of the molecule(s); and iii) identification of one
or more active molecule(s) for use in all natural sunscreen/cosmetic products.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader/commercial impact of this project, if
successful, will be the availability of all natural sunscreen/cosmetics products
devoid of negative side effects that synthetic analogs may bring. Commercial
interest in effective natural sunscreen/cosmetic products have been validated
with leading companies in cosmetics and personal care. Moreover, if successful,
the increased scientific knowledge of natural extracts from this project may
also find applications in nutraceuticals, and may contribute to cures and
prevention of free radicals linked diseases. Industrial applications may also
benefit from this work in applications such as UV stabilizer for polymers and
pigments. &lt;br/&gt;