* 0945021
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:  Specialized Pastoralism and Social Stratification: Analysis of the Fauna from Chalcolithic Tel Tsaf, Israel
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2010,05/31/2011
* Natalie Munro, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2011
* USD 14,998.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Natalie D. Munro, Austin C. Hill will study the
emergence of social complexity during the Chalcolithic period in the southern
Levant. The Chalcolithic period in this area is a key transitional period
between the egalitarian, village-based agricultural social systems of the
Neolithic and the hierarchical, socially-stratified urban social systems of the
Early Bronze Age. To date, however, few studies have examined the changes in
subsistence strategies that may have triggered this fundamental shift in social
organization. Social change in the Levantine Chalcolithic will be identified
using a number of lines of zooarchaeological evidence for food production and
consumption at the Middle Chalcolithic site of Tel Tsaf, Israel.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will address the timing of the development
of social ranking and differentiation in the Levant by examining changes in food
production and management systems. Although many have argued for the presence or
absence of emergent chiefdom level political systems in the Levantine
Chalcolithic, there have been relatively few attempts to document the degree of
social differentiation within specific sites. Similarly, no research to date has
yielded conclusive answers to the question of the degree to which secondary
animal products, such as dairy, wool, and labour, played a role in Chalcolithic
economies. Finally, although the role that feasting can play in creating and
maintaining social categories is widely agreed upon, few studies have adequately
identified the presence and function of feasts at specific sites in the past.
Issues of social complexity will be investigated using three independent lines
of zooarchaeological evidence. First, herd production strategies will be
identified to investigate the degree of centralization of production and the
presence of secondary products specialization. Second, the spatial patterning of
fauna will be documented across architectural features and public spaces to
characterize the degree of social stratification. Finally, analysis of the fauna
from individual contexts will be used to identify ritual and feasting behavior
at the site. Feasting is a key social mechanism in complex societies that is
often used to create and maintain individual prestige and group political
boundaries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Impacts of the research include contributions
to the field of anthropological archaeology by incorporating cross-disciplinary
techniques, advancing understanding of the development of complex societies, and
generating international collaboration. The spatial analysis portion of the
study utilizes Geographic Information Systems (GIS) data collection and analysis
techniques that were developed primarily in the field of geography and until a
decade ago were rarely utilized in archaeology. This research is part of a
slowly growing trend toward high-resolution site level spatial analyses in
archaeology. The analysis of the fauna from Tel Tsaf has already and will
continue to provide valuable opportunities for student training in animal bone
identification. Undergraduate volunteers with sufficient experience will have
the opportunity to gain experience by helping with specimen identification in
the zooarchaeology laboratory at the University of Connecticut.