* 0945692
* SBIR Phase I:  Ultra High Temperature Microwave Processing of Ceramics
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,09/30/2010
* Holly Shulman, Ceralink Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 09/30/2010
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop microwave
thermal containment packages for processing of ultrahigh temperature (UHT)
nanomaterials using microwave energy. The Phase I work will also assess the
strength and wear resistance of key materials processed with this method.
Microwave work above 1800 Â°C is severely limited by lack of availability of
suitable thermal packaging for microwave systems. Microwave processing offers
low-cost, energy-efficient, and rapid fabrication for nano-powders and sintered
products. Microwave heating has been demonstrated to yield fine grained products
without the shape and size limitations of spark plasma sintering. This research
will enable scientific exploration of these benefits for UHT materials by
developing a set of thermal packages for reliable, reusable, UHT microwave
processing. Using high temperature microwave frequency dielectric data,
modeling, and laboratory experiments, packages will be designed and tested.
These thermal packages will provide critical data to evaluate microwave
processing at ultrahigh temperatures, as a prerequisite for the design and
construction of commercial UHT microwave systems. In conjunction with Florida
International University, we will sinter commercial silicon carbide powders, as
well as mixtures of in-situ carbon nanotubes and silicon carbide.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be the development
of ultrahigh temperature microwave processing systems. This technology will have
a commercial impact in several industries, including aerospace, armor, thermal
barrier coatings, and heat sinks. This is a largely unexplored area in materials
science with the potential to harness the advantages of nanomaterials for high-
performance structural applications. Microwave heating has the potential to open
new markets for UHT products by lowering the cost of manufacturing. Microwave
sintering is extremely energy efficient, reducing by over 50% the energy and
carbon footprint of UHT materials manufacturing. The combination of scalability,
freedom of geometry, and cost reduction differentiates microwave processing from
competing technologies such as spark plasma sintering, hot pressing, and hot
isostatic pressing. Much of the published UHT microwave research is difficult to
validate or reproduce, and no commercially available solutions exist. This
proposal will result in the generation and dissemination of new data on UHT
microwave processing, which will further educate industrial professionals - as
well as undergraduate and graduate students - in the innovative area of
microwave materials processing.