* 0945200
* SBIR Phase I:  BioBased Coatings for Corrosion Protection
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* SHILPA MANJURE, Northern Technologies International Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Maria Josephine Yuen
* 06/30/2010
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is designed to prepare
and evaluate novel biobased corrosion protection coatings derived from modified
soy oil that quickly cures upon exposure to atmospheric moisture yielding smooth
protective films. This cure mechanism is based on the well known room
temperature vulcanization of the reactive silicone and is applied here by
grafting reactive silane onto the unsaturated fatty acid residues of the oil
triglycerides. This approach provides a convenient one-component package and
does not require reactive diluents, UV or oxygen for cure initiation. It does
not incorporate alkyds or require epoxidized soy oil. Preliminary results show
that crosslinking occurs relatively fast without requiring any volatile
coalescing agents and the films are completely cured. Good adhesion to
stainless-steel was observed and physical properties (hardness, tensile
strength, elongation, etc.) of the coatings are expected to be easily controlled
by the concentration of the grafted silicone component. The presence of reactive
silane is particularly suitable for corrosion protection since it acts as a
moisture scavenger as well as improving the adhesion with the metal surface. It
is anticipated that successful completion of this work will replace petroleum-
based materials with biobased materials in corrosion protection
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project is to provide permanent, organic coatings derived from renewable
resources to offer clean technologies to the public. These biobased coatings are
targeted for corrosion-prevention applications such as gas and liquid
transmission pipelines, construction rebar for bridges and buildings, industrial
equipment, etc. Corrosion of metallic structures has a significant impact on the
US economy. Results of a NACE study (2002) shows that the total annual estimated
direct cost of corrosion in the U.S. is a staggering $276 billion -
approximately 3.1% of the nation's Gross Domestic Product. Successful
implementation of Phase I &amp; II of this project will have the following
technical, commercial, environmental and economical impacts: improved corrosion
protection and ease of application, low capital investment, reduction in VOC/HAP
and carbon footprint, preservation of fossil fuel resources, reduction in
corrosion related costs to the industry, and creation of up to an additional
five jobs for sales, manufacturing, and technical support of this newly
developed product.