* 0945248
* SBIR Phase I:  Accurate and Scalable Traffic Estimation and  Traffic-Aware Routing
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* Scott Jarr, TrafficRNA
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 06/30/2010
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop a system
that has the potential to reduce the amount of time and fuel spent by people in
road traffic. Leveraging academic research results, this system will incorporate
three technologies to provide an end-to-end solution to the traffic problem: 1)
software to gather position data from mobile smartphones and a method to process
massive amounts of this noisy data (in conjunction with existing bulk traffic
data) to produce accurate traffic estimates in real-time, 2) a method to predict
traffic delay distributions on road segments using probabilistic graphical
models, and 3) a traffic-aware routing engine that uses an efficient and dynamic
stochastic routing algorithm, which provides routes that reliably maximize the
probability of arriving within a deadline.

Traffic is a significant societal problem that affects people on a regular
basis. The existing ecosystem for traffic solutions is both complex and
inefficient, but the massive disruption being caused by mobile smartphones has
the potential to change this in the next few years. The current market demand
for traffic subscription services and their renewal rates validates the market
for more advanced traffic-aware applications. As an operator of a mobile web
service and a provider of the key enabling technologies, the company plans to
build revenue by: 1) an ad-supported and value-added service model for consumers
running a mobile application, 2) technology licensing to strategic partners, and
3) public/private partnerships with regional governments. The first model
provides direct customer access with a predictable and controllable revenue
stream. The second and third models provides a large data collection footprint
and significant upside penetration of services. If successful, the company has
the potential to provide significant societal benefit.