* 0945795
* SBIR Phase I:  A Universal Wafer-Level Capping Process for MEMS and Microdevices
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,03/31/2011
* Jay Mitchell, ePack, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 03/31/2011
* USD 199,718.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project provides a
universal capping technology for microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) and other
microdevices. The technology will allow for thousands of moving MEMS devices to
get protected from the environment in an inert gas or vacuum. The cap wafer
technology itself has already been developed-the focus of this project is to
develop a wide range of solder alloy bonding technologies which will allow for
strong bonds, good electrical connectivity to the devices and vacuum/hermetic
seals with virtually zero leak rates for a wide range of processes and device
functionalities. The bond strengths will depend on the metal deposition
conditions, the thermal budget before and after bonding and chemical reactions
between each material (gold-indium, nickel-tin, silver-indium, silver-tin,
copper-indium, etc.). Electrical characterization will involve optimizing the
deposited metal stack in order to achieve low electrical resistances, optimized
chemical potentials for ohmic contact and low paracitics. Initially the bond
uniformity will be characterized by inspection, but will eventually be
characterized with hermetically/vacuum sealed sensors allowing for fine leak
rate measurement (<10-15 cubic centimeters/second) and the characterization of
outgassing (desorption of atoms from the microcavity surfaces), in order to
characterizing the yield of functional hermetic/vacuum packages.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to provide a
universal packaging technology for microelectromechanical systems (MEMS).
Packaging (providing electrical connectivity and environmental protection) is
generally the most difficult part of bringing MEMS to market. The MEMS market is
expected to grow from $8 billion in 2008 to $15 billion by 2012. An
approximately $11 billion portion of this market can benefit from cost efficient
wafer-level packaging. A wide range of industrial and academic researchers are
developing packaging solutions for emerging MEMS markets including radio
frequency (RF) switches, microfluidics, micro-batteries, infrared (IR) sensors
and biomedical devices. The technology in this project will provide a universal
packaging solution for all of these devices. This will have several effects on
the market: 1) It will allow for these emerging MEMS devices to be cost
effectively packaged helping them get to market, 2) it will simplify the value
chain for production allowing MEMS designers to choose the optimal
process/manufacturing house without consideration of their capping technology
and 3) it will enhance innovation by allowing researchers to focus on the
functionality of the MEMS device itself without having to consider the package
design.