* 0945017
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Antioxidants to Improve Thermo-Oxidative Stability of Biolubricants and Biodiesel
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* Ashok Cholli, Polnox Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2010
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
design, develop and commercialize cost-effective, high performance, innovative
antioxidants for sustainable alternate bioenergy fuels, in particular, for
biodiesel and biolubricants. Oxidative stability of oils derived from bio-
sources is inferior as compared with those derived from fossil fuels. This is a
key issue for the alternate energy industry. It is expected that the proposed
antioxidants will prove to be very effective in improving thermo-oxidative
stability. This enhanced stability will result in an extended service life. The
current commercial antioxidants are not effective in face of the challenge posed
by plant-derived bio-oils, and the performance of these antioxidants does not
necessarily increase linearly with concentration. There is a need to design and
develop next generation antioxidants, which are more effective than those that
are available today. This proposal addresses the design and testing of new
macromolecular antioxidants to provide better protection against oxidation in
bio-energy fuels and lubricants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader/commercial
impact of this research project will be in the development of a product that
plays a key role in reducing the nation's dependence on imported oil by
developing higher quality alternate fuels. By improving the oxidative stability
of bio-based oils and fuels, it will be possible to make viable products to
compete against petroleum based products that are used in automobile and other
industrial lubricant applications.