* 0945280
* SBIR Phase I: Commercialization of the CEENBoT Educational Platform for K-16
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* Dennis Deyen, CEENBoT, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl F. Albus
* 06/30/2010
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I research project focuses
on the demonstrating the technical feasibility and a commercialization path for
a well-established educational robotics platform. This innovative Computer and
Electronics Engineering Robot (CEENBoT), is a hands-on tool to teach basic to
intermediate engineering skills by assembling a programmable robot. It is being
developed to meet the global educational challenge by reaching thousands of US
students, especially under-represented minorities and women. This platform
places an engineering and educationally stimulating technology in student hands
at an early age to increase interest in school and after school STEM experiences
promoting advanced learning. The robot platform will allow students and
commercial customers to customize software and accessories to their particular
interests and applications. An adaptable hardware platform will be investigated
to ensure compatibility with current and emerging technologies allowing the
educational robot to be used for several years in a student's curriculum.
Proposed product feasibility research will include: suitable power sources,
solar power adaptability, programmable power/sleep settings, intelligent plug-
and-play sensors, lightweight chassis for GPS navigation over turf and Internet
connectivity for diagnostics and upgradeability. During the period of the grant
a professional design team will show feasibility while advancing the technology
and expanding the manufacturing base.

The CEENBoT educational platform is an outgrowth of an NSF CCLI grant to
stimulate university level engineering students. Due to its success in
generating enthusiasm at the university level, the platform is being introduced
into grades 5-12 educational settings under two additional NSF grants: Discovery
Research K-12 (cyberinfrastructure-based formal education curriculum
development) and an ITEST scale up (informal educational use of the robot in 4-H
clubs and summer camps). In preparation for increasing CEENBoT demand under
these two grants and the further penetration into university ECE programs, the
decision was made to commercialize the CEENBoT educational platform. The broader
impact is the creation of a K-16 educational robotic platform for formal and
non-formal educational programs (especially for inner city schools) that will
provide an ongoing stimulation to increase students entering STEM fields. The
proposed research will include investigation of a flexible educational robot to
teach logic and programming concepts at an early age. Total US market potential
for educational robots is 417,650 units annually with an $83.5 million gross
revenue potential. Unit sale price is targeted at $200 with $835,000 annual
revenue.