* 0945037
* SBIR Phase I:  New ABPP Probes and Sample Preparation Methods for Biomarker Discoveries
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Feng Tao, Omic Biosystems, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 12/31/2010
* USD 187,496.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to address a
key challenge facing modern proteomics - identification and quantification of
low abundant biologically functional proteins in small size, dilute and/or
archived samples using mass spectrometry (MS)-based analysis. A combined use of
novel chemical biology and sample preparation strategies is proposed to tackle
this challenge. The set of specific reagents to be developed composes specific
Activity Based Protein Profiling (ABPP) probes, cleavable high affinity solid
support conjugation for quantitative target enrichment, and stable isotopic
labels for MS identification and quantification. An enabling sample preparation
method employed prior to the MS analysis will also be optimized for the ABPP
probe labeling. At the completion of the project, including a Phase II study on
broader ABPP labeling applications, commercial kits will be made available for
life science laboratories that conduct proteomic studies.

The broader impacts of this research are, 1) it is a major step forward in
advancing MS-based proteomic studies and biomarker discoveries based on
functional low abundance proteins found in small size biospecimen; and 2) the
successful commercialization of this technology and associated products will
expand the breadth of possible studies using ABPP based quantitative proteomics.
The technological and societal benefits of these products will become apparent,
when these products enable new biomarkers discoveries, and the newly identified
biomarkers are used in addressing fundamental biological questions, accelerating
the development of new clinical diagnostic tests and new therapeutic agents.