* 0945652
* SBIR Phase I:  Developing a Multi-Functional Nanoparticle-Enhanced Filter Media for Decentralized Water Purification Systems
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* Chengyue Shen, Hydroqual Inc
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2010
* USD 149,881.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will investigate a new
enhanced filter media for decentralized water purification systems. Whereas
implementation of ultraviolet (UV), membrane, or ozonation systems at water
treatment facilities is capital-intensive and potentially infeasible for smaller
plants, decentralized systems, such as point-of-use (POU) and point-of-entry
(POE) devices, are treatment options that are relatively inexpensive and provide
additional protection for consumers. Recent studies have shown that
nanoparticles of the reactive element zero-valent iron (ZVI) can adsorb and
inactivate viruses and other microbial pathogens in water. In this project, we
will develop a process to create high-surface area coatings of nano-ZVI onto
granular media to enable a superior POU filtration product. By incorporating
this new material, we can significantly improve the ability of POU/POE devices
to remove viruses, other microorganisms, and other contaminants (e.g. arsenic,
lead, and disinfection byproducts) from drinking water. In Phase I, we will
develop a process to coat nano-ZVI onto filtration media, characterize the
media, and test the resulting filter with respect to key organic and inorganic
contaminants.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be a new filter
technology which will perform as well as, or better than, existing technologies
(e.g., ultraviolet, reverse osmosis, and nanofiltration), but which is cheaper
to manufacture. In 2005, the US market for household water treatment products
was $2.6 billion, with the European market forecasted to reach $1 billion by the
year 2014. Once successfully demonstrated, the proposed innovation will offer
consumers with considerable benefits including reduced health risks and greater
water supply security for homeowners and military personnel stationed in remote
locations, enhanced portable water treatment capabilities for campers and field
workers, and potential new job opportunities in the water treatment technology
manufacturing industry. One of the major advantages of the proposed innovation
is that it builds upon existing POU/POE technologies. It would, therefore, be
familiar to customers and could be marketed as an ?improved? product.