* 0945475
* SBIR Phase I:  Smart Thermal Barrier Coating for Gas Turbine Surface Temperature Monitoring
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Xiaomei Guo, Boston Applied Technologies, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2010
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project focuses on developing a
novel thermographic phosphor thermometry technique, combined with a thermal
barrier coating (TBC) material, for monitoring gas turbine surface temperature
and TBC condition (i.e., to monitor the coating for spallation and
deterioration). Design of efficient and low-emission power generation gas
turbines requires detailed knowledge of the temperatures, heat fluxes and flow
regimes experienced by hot-gas path (HGP) components under realistic operating
conditions. Hence, there is an urgent need for innovative and non-intrusive
experimental techniques suitable for accurate measurement of surface
temperatures in excess of 2500 K for HGP components in high-temperature regions
of the gas turbine, where conventional techniques cannot be applied. In this
project, a unique upconversion phosphor thermometry technology will be developed
which will overcome the issues confronting widely-used down-conversion
thermometry techniques. The proposed temperature sensing mechanism is
independent of variations in the excitation power and environmental conditions,
and hence is especially suitable for hazardous gas turbine applications. The
broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be significant, because
gas turbines are used to power aircraft, trains, ships, generators, and ground
vehicles. Almost all manufacturers in the aerospace, transportation, and energy
generation fields would benefit from the technology developed in this project.
If successful, this Phase I project will directly result in an enabling
technique for non-intrusive monitoring of temperature and surface conditions of
materials experiencing extremely high-temperature environments. The data
gathered by such a technique will also add to the scientific understanding of
high-temperature combustion and fluid flow processes.