* 0945528
* SBIR Phase I: ENGAGE: An Online MultiPlayer Game for Math Proficiency
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* Jerry Chaffin, Arcademics, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2010
* USD 149,890.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I research project is aimed
at evaluating the impact of using multi-player educational video games in the
classroom to improve student engagement in elementary school math subject areas,
and developing an educational game system that enables progress monitoring and
tailors game content to student needs. Multi-player educational video games can
provide practice of high-leverage skills in an engaging virtual environment
while collecting progress. Currently, US students lag behind their counterparts
in other developed nations when measured on mathematics proficiency.
Additionally, there are gaps in math achievement among numerous demographic
groups, at least partially due to non-availability of materials and an inability
to provide specialized, differentiated instruction. To close these gaps, new
avenues of instruction, assessment, and progress monitoring are needed to
connect with, and engage modern technologically- and socially-driven students
and get them interested in practicing mathematics at a young age. Of the 53
million K-12 students in the US, 93% play video games, with multi-player gaming
being the fastest growing and most engaging segment. The competitive aspects of
multi-player video games, if used in classroom settings with educational
content, will increase student engagement, time on task, and motivation,
yielding higher math proficiency.

In light of the Response to Intervention (RtI) mandates set forth by the IDEA
2004 legislation, combined with the need for schools to utilize progress
monitoring tools and research-based interventions for at-risk students, the
market potential for high-quality, web-based practice/assessment applications
are expanding. The product solution proposed here is unique both in theory and
implementation: being grounded within adaptive-questioning assessment theory
provides a more accurate measure of student performance and a more consistently
challenging and engaging environment for the student, and the multi-player,
computer-based implementation creates a number of benefits not currently
available commercially. In our system, students will play competitively and
collaboratively in a variety of multi-player games, and teachers will receive
detailed reports of student progress, and be able to customize content for
differentiated student groups. This software will be offered as an online
subscription service and accessed through school computer labs or students'
personal computers. Teachers, schools, districts, and parents of students will
subscribe to our service to fulfill the RtI mandates and provide an enhanced
learning environment for their students. There are over 90,000 elementary
schools in America in 14,000 districts, making education one of the largest and
most stable markets in the country.