* 0945429
* SBIR Phase I:  Agile Humanoid Healthcare Robot with Puck-Based Power Regeneration
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* William Townsend, Barrett Technology Inc
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2010
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes a
robotic solution to ease the growing shortage of nurses and related healthcare
workers. The envisioned robot will have a small-footprint, 2-wheel balancing
base; a pair of dexterous manipulator arms with hands; a prismatic-joint
extendable spine allowing the arms to reach down to the floor or up to a
cupboard; and sensors for low-level balancing and high-level navigation. The
main innovation is the use of power regeneration in the passively-backdrivable
joints and the wheels to maximize battery run times, which is a deficiency in
competitive concepts. This project will enhance the scientific understanding of
how to harvest regeneration power flows in the context of a high-number-degree-
of-freedom robot. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential
of this project will help ease a coming healthcare crisis while protecting
dignity for the rapidly growing population of the elderly and infirmed.
Continuing improvements in life-prolonging medical science show every indication
of accelerating and will balloon the percentage of elderly in the general
population. Even with the present recession, there is already a labor shortage
of both nurses and physicians, and the shortage is projected to grow worse over
the foreseeable future. While this problem is only beginning to stress the
system, it is important to develop the necessary technology now, before the
problem becomes overwhelming. &lt;br/&gt;