* 0945954
* SBIR Phase I:  In Vitro 3D Lung Tissue Model for Drug Discovery and Toxicity Screening
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Glauco Souza, Nano3D Biosciences, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 12/31/2010
* USD 199,489.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is the
development of a lung tissue model based on a new cell culturing platform
utilizing nanoparticle-based reagents and magnetic fields to levitate tissue
samples and allow three-dimensional (3D) growth. This method naturally grows
tissue at the air-liquid interface and is well suited for co-culturing, which
are crucial for an accurate in vitro lung model. The application and market for
this product will be drug discovery and toxicity screening. In the early stages
of drug development, candidate compounds are screened for efficacy and toxicity
in in vitro model systems. Currently, these tests are performed in high-
throughput assays using two-dimensional (2D) tissue, but 2D culturing alters
cellular responses and often leads to misleading results. Subsequent tests in
animal models are costly, ethically contentious, and sometimes inaccurate since
model organisms may not faithfully reproduce human responses.

The broader impact of this proposal follows from the potential to use the tissue
model for improved in vitro efficacy and toxicity assays to reduce the cost of
drug development. The reduction of animal testing is also an important goal for
ethical reasons. In addition, a lung tissue model that recapitulates natural
tissue properties and responses can also find application in toxicity screening
of environmental, cosmetic, and industrial factors. The current worldwide
expenditure for animal toxicity testing is over $10 billion/yr, and replacement
in vitro methods are already over $200 million/yr and growing rapidly. An
improved lung model will have significant impact in these areas.