* 0945287
* SBIR Phase I:  High-Performance Polymer Nanocomposites Containing Functionalized Few-Walled Carbon Nanotubes
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* Mei Lu, Xintek, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Grace Jinliu Wang
* 06/30/2010
* USD 149,500.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop
high-performance polymer nanocomposites containing functionalized few-walled
carbon nanotubes (FWNT). First, the synthesis conditions for FWNTs will be
optimized to identify the best FWNTs for composites application. Second, the
FWNTs will be functionalized to a high soluble degree with a unique technique
without destroying their perfect graphite structure so that the intrinsic
properties will be retained. Then the functionalized FWNTs with different
loading will be well dispersed into a polymer matrix to fabricate FWNTs/polymer
nanocomposites. Finally, the mechanical and physical properties of the resulting
nanocomposites will be evaluated with correlation to the FWNT loading ratio and
dispersion degree.

The broader/commercial impact of this project will be the potential to obtain
FWNT/polymer nanocomposites with superior physical, thermal and mechanical
properties. The FWNTs have advantages over multi- and single-walled carbon
nanotubes such as high structure perfection and thermal stability respectively.
The incorporation of FWNTs into light weight polymer matrix will enhance both
physical and thermal properties of the FWNT/polymer composites. This technology
is of commercial importance in developing high-performance and light-weight
polymer nanocomposites which will have wide-range of end users including
aerospace, packaging, building and construction, electronics, medical equipment
and sports goods etc.