* 0945206
* SBIR Phase I:  Conductive Shielded Carbon Nanotube Probes
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Vladimir Mancevski, XIDEX CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2010
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will demonstrate the
feasibility of manufacturing electrically shielded, conductive carbon nanotube
(CNT) probes for use in scanning probe microscopes (SPMs). The Phase I work will
demonstrate fabrication of electrically conductive scanning probe CNT tips with
enhanced electrical characteristics, electrical shielding of scanning probe CNT
tips, and performance of electrically conductive and shielded scanning probe CNT
tips for key electrical probing applications. Success with the proposed research
will enable production of CNT-based electrical probes that overcome long-
standing problems with commercially available tips, which are not adequate for
advanced electrical profiling applications. Since resolution and contrast of
topographic and electrical properties are both dictated by tip geometry and
composition, new higher resolution probe tips must be developed. Specifically,
metal-coated silicon tips utilized for atomic force microscope (AFM)-based
electrical measurements rapidly wear out during operation and their quality and
performance cannot be assessed during the measurement. Additionally,
commercially conductive AFM tips generally have larger tip diameters, which
limit the resolution of the measurement to hundreds of nanometers. The targeted
spatial resolution for these conductive CNT probes is in the 1-10 nanometer
range required for advanced applications.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be realized in the
form of new commercial products already in demand for industrial and scientific
applications, including applications in the semiconductor industry. Conductive
shielded CNT probes enabled by the project will meet an urgent need within the
semiconductor industry for ultra-high resolution electrical measurements.
SEMATECH has underscored this need by supporting research and development of
this technology, in anticipation of use by their member companies. Electrically
shielded CNT probes will be an enabling technology for making electrical
measurements needed in nanoscience and nanotechnology. Example research areas
where these devices will find application include materials science (e.g. for
electrochemical probing to measure energy storage and conversion at solid-liquid
interfaces or for electromechanical energy conversion research for
supercapacitor development), biology, medical research, and forensics.
Electrically shielded CNT probes will also enable bioelectromechanical
measurements at the molecular level (e.g. electromechanical imaging in a liquid
environment for biological applications including protein unfolding spectroscopy
and electromechanical cell imaging), providing a capability which is not
provided by any other commercial SPM probe.