* 0945807
* SBIR Phase I:  An Environmental Geology Game for Discovery-oriented Science and Mathematics Education
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Otto Borchert, WOWIWE INSTRUCTION CO.
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2010
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I research project aims to
solve a growing need for environmental science education. The project focusses
on the development of a dynamic, group-based, immersive virtual environment
(IVE). The primary innovation of the project lies at the intersection of three
fruitful lines of research. First, IVEs show improved learning gains in science
classrooms. Second, group learning is increasingly important, both from an
employer's viewpoint and an educator's viewpoint. Finally, the fast-paced,
immediate nature of our society requires individuals to respond quickly and
effectively to dynamic events. The combination of these three will lead to a
new, and potentially more intrinsically motivating, method of teaching
environmental science. A study will be performed to determine the efficacy of
the approach in terms of both learning outcomes and attitudinal measures, using
high school students in a controlled laboratory setting. The 'degree of casual
adoption' among high school students will be assessed through the 'landing site'
developed for a related project. At the conclusion of the project, the IVE will
be a fully-contained experimentally validated software package feasible for
Phase II distribution to a number of markets.

In the recent OECD international study of developed countries, the US ranked
21st in the percentage of the population with a high proficiency of
environmental science skills and knowledge. This presents a marketable need for
experimentally validated pedagogical software solutions that align with state
and national standards. Meanwhile, environmental issues are reaching the
forefront of national thought. This provides unique commercial opportunities for
environmentally focused IVE software. Key players in the market include
educational publishers and software developers. Competing technology is mainly
non-immersive video clips, simple one-off activities, or in the best case,
static games with a single outcome. Our solution is better than products
developed by these companies because it leads the way by bringing three emerging
technologies to bear on an environmental science curriculum. This project is
tailored to take advantage of the One-to-One Initiative arising in states such
as Michigan and Maine, through a combination of exit screens and landing sites
with potential to be accessed by thousands of students per year. The software
developed from this project will be purchased by high school students interested
in environmental science and 'green' issues currently topical, and by parents
interested in providing their children a more complete and socially relevant
science education.