* 0945642
* SBIR Phase I:  Inexpensive, low-power, pressure-sensing multi-touch input devices for flexible displays
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* Ilya Rosenberg, Touchco, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2010
* USD 0.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will address the
core hardware and software issues necessary to yield a fully functioning multi-
touch pressure-sensing screen by putting an Interpolating Force-Sensitive
Resistance (IFSR) based sensor behind an electronic paper display. IFSR has
significant advantages over other currently-available multi-touch solutions.
These include low cost, low power consumption, native multi-touch capacity, the
ability to sense touches from any object or stylus, flexibility and form-factor
scalability. Because of its flat form factor and pressure sensing ability, an
IFSR sensor can be mounted behind a thin, flat display, providing a commercially
viable multi-touch input solution for large and small e-ink based devices. The
research for this project includes five components: 1) layering and integration
of an e-ink display, IFSR sensor, and circuit board; 2) custom design of a
fully-integrated single sensor driver chip to replace the current analog
multiplexer, two shift registers, and two buffers; 3) development and
implementation of an efficient sensor scanning algorithm to enable micro-Ampere
power consumption; 4) research and testing of CPU-efficient techniques for real-
time identification of functional touches by fingers or styli, and rejection of
palms and other non-functional touches.

This innovation directly addresses the challenges faced by existing multi-touch
solutions when applied to electronic paper displays, including cost, power
consumption, ability to sense both fingers and styli, and the lack of
backlighting, which hinders above-screen sensing technologies. If successful,
the resulting design and techniques will fill the technical gap that denies
multi-touch input from the large existing market of e-book reader devices. Since
the results can easily be generalized to devices with other types of flexible
displays (notably OLED screens) they have the potential to open up a whole new
market space for thin, affordable, multi-touch input displays benefiting retail,
commercial, industrial, and public-sector end users.