* 0945105
* SBIR Phase I: Metabolomics of Human Embryonic Stem Cells to Predict Teratogenicity: An Alternative Developmental Toxicity Model
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Paul West, Stemina Biomarker Discovery, inc.
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 12/31/2010
* USD 199,255.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
develop a highly predictive model for assessing the potential of compounds to
cause birth defects in the developing human embryo using human embryonic stem
(hES) cells as the test substrate. The project proposes to use hES cells and
metabolomics to understand the impact of drugs and other chemicals on the
development of the human embryo. These cells have the ability to differentiate
into any cell in the body and as such, offer the opportunity to study defects in
development in a way never available prior to the isolation of hES cells from an
embryo. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this research are to
increase the safety of compounds and to prevent birth defects resulting from
exposure to drugs or other chemicals during pregnancy by more accurately
predicting the potential for compounds to cause birth defects. Compound exposure
is responsible for 4-5% of all birth defects, yet this is the most preventable
type of birth defect. Currently, animal models are used to predict birth
defects, however these tests are costly, time-consuming, and are only 60%
predictive of the effect on human development. These animal models are the same
tests that have been used for more than fifty years to predict the effect of
drugs like Thalidomide and Accutane which have caused numerous birth defects in
humans. More accurate screens are needed to predict if exposure to specific
environmental chemicals or drugs will be hazardous to development.