* 0945953
* SBIR Phase I:  Mammography Analysis and Reporting System
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* armin moehrle, MEDKEN LLC
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 06/30/2010
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes a next
generation radiology workstation incorporating a process of integrating analysis
and reporting of breast imaging for the detection of cancer. Each year, breast
cancer is found in 180,000 people in the United States causing 50,000 deaths. It
is believed that ten to thirty percent of the instances of cancer visible in
mammograms are missed, resulting in up to 54,000 undetected cases of breast
cancer every year. This error rate results in unnecessarily high mortality rates
and increased financial costs. Previous studies have shown that pointing
gestures support thought and language generation. The proposed new system not
only keeps the eye on the image but also acknowledges the radiologist's frequent
pointing at specific areas, facilitates accurate visual comparisons, and allows
direct annotation of images. The reading process becomes more transparent,
resulting in improved diagnostic accuracy and consequently a higher survival
rate.

The current mammogram error rate provides ample incentive for improving the
reading and reporting process, both, as a societal and commercial enterprise.
Fifty million diagnostic breast exams are performed each year at more than 8,000
North American health care institutions. Mammographic studies previously
consisted of X-ray images; now they are augmented with thousands of magnetic
resonance images (MRI) and ultrasound images. Rapidly evolving imaging
technology creates a steady increase in the number of images that have to be
analyzed. The proposed system will help radiology centers maintain reporting
throughput while reducing error rates, and be offered to radiology centers on a
fee-per-report basis. If the new system increases throughput while maintaining
quality, the cost-saving argument will be validated, and radiology centers may
pay a portion of the savings to the service provider. If throughput remains
constant but with an increase in the quality of the diagnosis, the insurance
companies may offer higher compensation rates for centers using the new process.