* 0945245
* TF-SING: Energy-Efficient Design in Wireless Networks Using Cooperative Communication
* CSE,CCF
* 06/10/2009,08/31/2014
* Jie Wu, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2014
* USD 292,001.00

This research involves one of the key challenges in wireless networks: how to
take advantage of new advances at the physical layer to push for new design at
the upper layers. The approach used is hitchhiking-based cooperative
communication (CC) that takes advantage of the physical layer design that
facilitates the combining of partial information. A node can receive several
partial signals and combine these signals to retrieve the complete signal.
Through effective use of partial signals, a packet can be delivered with fewer
nodes and/or less transmission power at each node. The investigator proposes a
new weighted graph model that can capture the nature of CC. One key concept
proposed is the new notion of ?link? and ?path? on which other graph
terminologies can be defined.

Based on this new graph model, the research focuses on two types of power-
efficient design under CC: (1) Power saving protocols that put wireless nodes
into periodical sleep states while maintaining global ?domination? of active
nodes. (2) Power control for transmission energy consumption by adjusting
transmission ranges while maintaining global ?connectivity?. With these, this
research presents a promising and unique way of applying this graph model to
energy-efficient design in wireless networks. This research also involves the
design of a general methodology of localized solutions and applies it to address
various energy-related optimization problems under CC. The central theme of this
research fits well with the objective of the SING program on fundamental
theoretical and algorithmic studies involving coordination and communication.
The insights and results of this research are expected to provide guidelines for
energy-efficiency for a wide range of wireless network applications.

