* 0945433
* 2010 Gordon Research Conference and Seminar on the Origin of Life, to be held January 10, 2010 through January 15, 2010, in Galveston, Texas
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Nancy Gray, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 12/31/2010
* USD 5,000.00

The origin and early development of life, whether specifically on Earth or
possibly elsewhere in the universe, remain great unsolved scientific problems.
At the 2010 Gordon Research Conference (GRC) "The Origin of Life", investigators
will present interdisciplinary, cutting-edge research designed to improve our
understanding of origins while allowing increasingly realistic scenarios for
major events in life's history. The conference will underscore the rich
diversity of perspectives while addressing a variety of key questions. Does life
uniquely reside on the Earth or is it found elsewhere? Speakers will present and
examine the most recent results of studies on Mars. How might an RNA world have
emerged and led to modern living systems? Speakers will discuss recent advances
in understanding self-replicating systems and the prospects for developing model
synthetic living systems. What was the earliest life on Earth like? Using
insights gained from genes and genomes, speakers will examine the nature of the
last common ancestor, the possibility of actually reconstructing ancient
proteins, and the early development of the translation machinery. What can the
deep carbon cycle tell us about origins? Speakers will examine abiotic synthesis
and deep microbial life. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On the weekend immediately
preceding the main conference, a Gordon Research Seminar (GRS) for young
investigators will be held. Approximately 30-50 students, postdoctoral
researchers, and new faculty members will gather with a small number of senior
mentors. The participants will present their own research on origins and most
will stay for the extended conference. The "Origin of Life" conference and
associated GRS will foster an environment that attracts the brightest and most
interactive members of the scientific community. Since its first incarnation in
1982, the "Origin of Life GRC" has been held 16 times and proven to be a unique
open forum focused on identifying, refining, and solving new interdisciplinary
problems in the origins field. The GRC and GRS are unique in bringing
astronomers, geoscientists, physicists, chemists, and biologists of various
types together to share their ideas and approaches to origins questions. With
its focus on the subject matter, the GRC fosters the genesis of new
constellations of collaborators and intense intellectual discourse. Networking
opportunities are abundant as a result of the weeklong schedule with its
emphasis on discussion time, and this networking fosters interactions between
young investigators and more established researchers. As a result, the
conference will provide unique training opportunities for scientists at
different career stages. GRS participants will select one of their own to
present his or her work at the GRC. Participants will include underrepresented
groups and will come from around the world including countries in Asia, Europe,
and the Americas.