* 0945666
* SBIR Phase I:  Bioinformatic FPGA Appliance
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* Vincent Natoli, Stone Ridge Technology
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 06/30/2010
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will investigate
the technical and commercial feasibility of a Bioinformatic computing appliance
based on FPGA technology. DNA sequencing machines output enormous volumes of raw
data with steady year-by-year increases. The initial data processing stages of
alignment and mapping are computationally intense and currently present a
significant and growing bottleneck. It is believed that an opportunity exists
for a new solution that addresses the growing data deluge and computational
strain that it introduces. The company proposes to create an appliance using an
open-source algorithm for the purpose of a feasibility study. The research
objective of the work is to create a powerful and optimized engine for this
algorithm that is easily operated by a user through an intuitive web interface.
The work will be implemented on a PCI-e based FPGA computing board with two user
FPGAs. The application will be optimized to make use of specialized features of
the chip. The anticipated result is a Bioinformatic appliance running at 50x to
100x faster than the standard CPU implementation and at lower power and with a
smaller physical footprint.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the
proposed activity include the potential commercial value and the enhancement of
research that will result from wider dissemination of DNA sequencing technology.
Full advantages of DNA sequencing are not realized and progress has been slowed
by the lack of an efficient and capable processing stage. Traditional solutions
using clusters present users with a difficult administration problem. FPGA
technology can reduce the size and the power consumption of the data processing
stage significantly, making it available to and useful to more companies, labs
and health care facilities. The technical and business risk associated with the
overall vision of this effort brings with it the possibility of significant
commercial impact across the industry. &lt;br/&gt;