* 0945505
* SBIR Phase I: An Internet-based Emotional Connectedness and Monitoring Device and Service for the Elderly
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* Paul To, emota.net
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 06/30/2010
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will prototype a
new class of assistive technologies to improve quality of life and wellbeing of
the elderly and to reduce overall burden of aging costs on social and private
health systems. Today's telehealth solutions focus on medical aspects and ignore
social and psychological needs. Research has shown that social isolation
significantly increases health risks. If successful, the proposed innovation
research will result in the commercialization a social and emotional
connectedness platform designed to help elderly, their caregivers, and their
friends and family stay actively in touch and involved in their care, as well as
providing emotional and physical support for the caregivers. The feasibility
study will prove the efficacy of the approach through a series of in-vivo
ethnographic field studies.

This proposed approach to geriatric care has the potential to shift the context
from medicine and monitoring to fulfilling core emotional and social needs. The
company believes there is a significant market for consumer-oriented, social-
based, self-care solutions that can integrate with professional medical
monitoring solutions. To validate the strategy, the company has held discussions
with potential strategic partners to pilot test the solution at the end of Phase
I to gauge marketability and impact. The company believes that commercial
success could kick start a marketplace for similar, emotional-connectedness
solutions and technologies that would benefit the lives of the elderly, and
other groups as well.