* 0945497
* SBIR Phase I:  Adaptive Filter Bank Modulation for Ubiquitous Landline-Based Broadband Access
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Oren Eliezer, XW, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2010
* USD 200,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project targets
significantly increased throughputs and distances for broadband access over
landline infrastructure in both urban and suburban/rural environments. For many
underserved areas, it will offer the only low-cost broadband access alternative
to costly, inefficient satellite coverage. In the physical-layer communication
system being developed, conventional Fourier Transform (FT) based Discrete-
Multi-Tone (DMT) techniques are replaced with the more spectrally efficient
Wavelet-based Adaptive Filter Bank Modulation (AFBM) patented technology. A key
aspect of this innovation is in the adaptive nature of its modulation method,
optimizing use of available channel capacity. The project will comprise both in-
depth theoretical analysis, at the algorithmic level, as well as implementation
challenges, where innovation at the architectural level is expected to minimize
system cost and power consumption. The theoretical research will target spectrum
utilization maximization in the constrained copper-wire channels, which is
enabled by the adaptive features of the technology combined with a novel
approach to the wavelet-basis selection and its use in the modulation. Based on
preliminary analysis and experimentation, it is anticipated that this project
will result in the doubling of areal coverage, or doubling of throughput at
fixed distances, compared to competing copper-wire solutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project will be to enable broadband service to the approximately 20 million
households in the US, primarily rural, which cannot receive broadband service
over existing infrastructure, other than expensive, inefficient satellite
service. With this system solution, a large majority of those households could
be provided with AFBM-enabled broadband access. Furthermore, AFBM will enable
telco providers to better compete in areas where cable exists. Deployment will
be via a business model that is to be a fabless semiconductor supplier to
multiple telco equipment manufacturers, who have conveyed their pressing need
for the throughput and range performance enhancements offered by this
technology. Service providers indicate strong demand for high-data-rate "triple-
play" service as an improvement over VDSL2, and also for T1 replacement in the
cellular backhaul infrastructure, in addition to the need for rural long-reach
solutions. Societal benefits include providing broadband service to previously-
unreachable homes. In addition, AFBM, protected by several patents, can serve as
a platform technology in wireless, coax, and power-line applications.
Collaborative research with local universities will serve to steer academic
research in this field towards the actual needs and interests expressed by
service providers, thus advancing the related fields in communication theory.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;