* 0945388
* SBIR Phase I:  A Ground-Based Sensor Array for Wake Vortex Detection
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* Dominique Fourguette, Michigan Aerospace Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2010
* USD 149,981.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to develop
a low-cost, easily-deployable sensor suite capable of providing the entire flow
velocity field of wake vortices produced by airplanes near airports. Large
aircraft produce strong air vortices at their wingtips, a significant hazard for
smaller following aircraft. Without observing the vortices, aircraft must be
widely-spaced on takeoff and landing. Current systems for airport wake-vortex
measurement, such as wind anemometers, Radar Acoustic Sounding Sensors (RASS)
and pulsed Light Detection and Ranging (LIDAR), do not capture the detailed
flow-field of the vortex, so hazardous situations like counter-rotating vortices
may not be detected. The new technique is based on the use of a sensor suite
located at specific points near the runway to map the vortical flow. This Phase
I effort includes a demonstration of the concept using existing laboratory data
(consisting of 2-D mappings of vortical wall flows), and trade studies and
design of the sensor suite. The sensor concept will be prototyped and tested in
Phase II in an airport setting. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project will be increased safety during
take-off and landing, especially for small aircraft. Present practice is to
allow a fixed amount of spacing after a particular aircraft type to allow the
vortices it produces to dissipate, plus an added safety margin. The ability to
directly observe the vortices will allow following distances to be based on
actual conditions, allowing adaptive spacing, thus enhancing safety. In
comparison with competing, more complex and more delicate LIDAR and radar-based
systems, the low cost of this instrumentation will allow smaller airports, not
just the largest ones, to be equipped with this technology. Such smaller
airports using this capability can increase their flight capacity, thus
potentially relieving larger hubs, especially if an emergency evacuation were to
be declared. Larger airports can use the technology to increase overall safety,
especially for smaller aircraft, allowing them to land and take off with
confidence amongst the larger airliners. This effort will also increase our
understanding of vortical wall flows, ubiquitous in windy conditions combined
with rugged terrain. Derivative versions of this equipment will be useful for
other applications, such as for emergency teams required to operate in
hazardous-access, windy conditions.