* 0945019
* SBIR Phase I:  Real Time Anesthesia Monitor
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Andrew Freedman, Aerodyne Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2010
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project proposes to develop a
clinical monitor for propofol (2,6-diisopropylphenol), an intravenous anesthetic
drug widely used in general surgery and as a sedative agent in the intensive
care unit (ICU) because of its favorable safety profile and rapid onset and
weaning characteristics. Currently, the effectiveness of propofol-induced
anesthesia is only assessed symptomatically. Two independent research groups
have recently demonstrated that propofol concentrations in human exhaled breath
following intravenous administration are proportional to the blood
concentrations. Therefore, pulmonary propofol concentrations could be used as a
control variable for closed-loop anesthesia. This Phase I project proposes to
study the feasibility of monitoring pulmonary propofol concentrations with a
compact and real-time optical device by directly measuring the characteristic
spectral features of propofol. The work will focus on a proof-of-principle
demonstration and a determination of the ultimate sensitivity of the technique.
The possibility of chemical interferences will also be studied. The ability to
quantify propofol concentrations reliably and economically could also have broad
applications in propofol pharmacokinetics and many clinical
investigations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current technique for monitoring
propofol levels in anesthetized patients is by blood samples analysis; a
technique that is not only expensive and invasive, but does not provide real-
time feedback. If successful, the proposed work will lead to a real time monitor
of propofol levels in the bloodstream that could be deployed in hospitals,
medical centers and even individual physician offices in order to improve the
efficacy of the anesthesia and decrease the risk of sudden patient mortality.
Compared to the expensive and bulky proton transfer mass spectrometer, which has
been used in research to detect pulmonary propofol, the proposed device is
expected to be smaller, less expensive, easier to operate and maintain, and
comparable in sensitivity.