* 0945759
* SBIR Phase I:  Low Noise Loosely-Coupled Wireless Power Transfer System with Single Transistor Differential Drive
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Ryan Tseng, WiPower, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2010
* USD 191,900.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is intended to
develop a differential drive system capable of powering a mid- to long-range
wireless power delivery system. Conventional drive circuits create significant
quantities of noise and interference that prohibits the proper operation of
wireless delivery systems. Due to the transmitting function of a wireless power
system, the implications of this noise and interference are significant and
limit the usability of most wireless power systems. A differential drive circuit
used to power the wireless power transmitter greatly reduces noise by relying on
an oscillating signal to transmit power between transmitters and receivers. This
oscillation reduces the magnitude of noise of each oscillation, but more
significantly pairs and therefore cancels noise generated system as a whole.
With careful tuning and alignment, these oscillations are correlated, canceling
the noise and reducing the noise generated. Designing a differential drive to
power the circuit allows a variety of wireless power systems to meet all
regulatory requirements and transmit power to handsets and other electronic
systems without excessive interference. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project is to allow for widespread adoption
and integration of wireless power delivery systems. Prior limitations on
commercial exploitation of wireless power have been limited by regulatory
limitations and the excessive noise created by these systems. Using a
differential drive, permits a variety of transmitters and applications to be
developed, as well as increase the potential range of wireless power. In
addition to passing regulatory requirements, the differential drive system
permits wireless power receivers to be integrated into a variety of electronic
hand-sets that were previously impossible. The differential drive will reduce
interference, such that prior applications such as mobile phones, laptops, and
other handhelds can now be powered wirelessly. The implications of this
project?s goals are significant in expanding the range and usability of wireless
power. Reductions in noise and interference will improve usability of wireless
power systems, and increase adoption in both the consumer and military
electronics fields.