* 0945691
* SBIR Phase I:  Realtime Markerless Scene Tracking on a Smartphone
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Nicholas Napp, MoveableCode inc.
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 12/31/2010
* USD 170,300.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will determine
the feasibility of robust, markerless, real-time tracking of a scene on a
Smartphone for use in Mixed Reality (MR) applications. The problem to be solved
is the expense and complexity of MR systems, thereby enabling the mass market
adoption of MR applications. Existing high-end MR solutions require specialized
equipment and custom hardware. Such equipment is expensive and not widely
available. Existing Smartphone MR applications are inexpensive, but rely on
fiduciary markers or known targets from which a Natural Feature Tracking
training data set has previously been created. This imposes significant
constraints on the deployment of MR applications: the location must be prepared
in advance; or the consumer must change their behavior i.e. they must obtain a
printed marker and bring it with them whenever they intend to use the MR
application. The proposed innovation eliminates these challenges by using
commodity hardware (a Smartphone) and markerless tracking. It enables solutions
that are affordable, flexible and ideal for broad market adoption.

High-end MR solutions are expensive and competing Smartphone offerings rely on
the use of markers or pre-trained data sets. These restrictions present a clear
barrier to mass market adoption. The proposed approach eliminates these
obstacles, enabling broad adoption of MR applications. There is significant
potential for commercialization of the innovation as a component of an MR
application.