* 0945996
* SBIR Phase I:  Plasma Enhanced Chemical Vapor Deposition of Hydroxyapatite Coatings
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,09/30/2010
* Cody Farnell, Plasma Controls, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2010
* USD 149,984.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop the use of
plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD) as a method of applying
hydroxyapatite (HA) coatings onto next-generation titanium alloy implantable
biocompatible materials. PECVD is attractive as a method to address key
drawbacks of conventional coatings and application methods. The hydroxyapatite
coatings will be analyzed to determine key physical properties: adhesion
strength, topography, composition, and crystallinity. A suite of biological
evaluations will also be performed to demonstrate osseo-integrative behavior. It
is anticipated that hydroxyapatite coatings with excellent adhesion strength and
crystallinity, ideal for long term implant fixation, will be
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader/commercial impact of this project,
if successful, is the availability of new coating methods and materials that
would improve load-bearing orthopaedic implant effectiveness and longevity. In
general, longer-term implant components are needed as patients receiving
implants are younger and living longer. The expected outcomes of this research
are improved materials and processing methods that will reduce the frequency of,
or the need for, revision surgeries that can be painful, costly, and less
effective with repetition.