* 0945983
* SBIR Phase I:  Refrigeration Microvalve
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Zachary Gray, Wyoming Silicon, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2010
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase 1 project will develop an
active microvalve for control of refrigerant fluids. Intended for use in
refrigerators and air conditioners, the device will meet or exceed stringent
industry standards for reliability, efficiency, and cost. The transfer of a
promising academic piezoelectric actuator to industry is a key objective. The
intellectual merits of this project are found in two main areas: 1) the
monolithic integration of a high-stroke, high-force piezoelectric
actuator&lt;br/&gt;with a high reliability silicon microvalve substrate, and 2)
the study of novel fluid flow path geometries, including venturi-like passages,
intended to achieve a variable restriction with proportional control, reduced
acoustic noise, and reduced susceptibility to clogging. Significant challenges
are anticipated in both areas. However, the successful fusion of these efforts
will result in a groundbreaking microvalve well suited for energy-efficient,
active refrigerant control for all refrigeration and air
conditioning&lt;br/&gt;applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project includes the development of an
integrated, component-level microvalve designed for high-volume manufacturing. A
further goal is to develop a manufacturing infrastructure on US soil, taking
advantage of opportunities in rural America, particularly focused on Wyoming.
Societal benefits include the obvious benefits of significant energy savings.
Refrigeration energy efficiency improvements of up to 20% are possible, while
improvements of at least&lt;br/&gt;30% in air conditioning are anticipated.
These savings rival the anticipated savings from LED light sources. In the US
alone, even a 5% efficiency improvement in refrigerators translates to an annual
savings of 7.8 billion kWh, or $780M at ten cents per kWh. This produces a long-
term impact on reduced&lt;br/&gt;environmental emissions, reduced need for new
power plants, and increased capital for other vital expenditures. Medical
applications are anticipated in the areas of drug delivery, especially for
insulin.