* 0946726
* Demonstrating the Impact of High Performance Computing to Academic Competiveness
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2009,02/29/2012
* Stanley Ahalt, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 02/29/2012
* USD 299,351.00

Demonstrating the Impact of High Performance Computing to Academic
Competitiveness&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computational simulation and analysis are
essential to business competitiveness, engineering design, and scientific
discovery. Federal investments, many states, campuses, and businesses make
investments in high performance computing for the support of computational
simulation and analysis. These corporate entities, campuses, states, and the
federal government need to understand and predict the costs associated with
these programs as well as the return that can be expected on these
investments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to develop
and provision a new cyberinfrastructure (CI) service, and to use the developed
service to explore a range of benefits that may be conferred upon an institution
or a region when an investment is made in high performance computing. Various
sources of data, including the Top 500 list and NSF funding records, but also
including funding records from other federal agencies, census data, and economic
data from various sources including annual reports and stock market indices,
will be integrated and presented as a web application that is publically
accessible. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;The developed
CI service will be a web-based database and knowledge base application that will
document the impact of high performance computing (HPC), including the impact on
competitive funding at U.S. academic institutions. The CI service will also
document and demonstrate the impact of HPC on economic development and economic
competitiveness at the state, regional, and industrial sector level. This
project will generate a web-based application that is not currently under
development elsewhere. Given the current economic climate, this project will
meet a current need of cyberinfrastructure to demonstrate the return on
investment and the driving economic reasons for investing in high performance
computing and, more broadly, cyberinfrastructure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact: &lt;br/&gt;This project has the potential to transform research and
educational activities by creating a new vision for HPC at academic institutions
and to state and corporate partners. The vision will promote and encourage new
levels of training, funding, and partnerships to support HPC, a cornerstone of
computational science and engineering. This proposal combines interdisciplinary
data from a variety of sources in novel ways not previously explored. We
anticipate several types of collaborative opportunities emerging from this
exploratory grant in areas that include science policy, economic development,
data mining, and data analytics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will be of
interest to computational researchers, funding agencies, and institutional
research officers who must choose how to allocate funds for support of research
in tight economic times. The project will also be of interest to state and
federal funding officers who set policy for science funding, and who are looking
for ways to create economic incentives at the state level. Finally, the project
will be of interest to state and regional economic development officers and
business analysts who will be able to use the results to quantitatively
understand how HPC and CI can impact regional economies and corporate
investment. Techniques for data analytics will be developed and applied in the
project that will generate topics for interdisciplinary research projects in
computer science, business management, and economics.&lt;br/&gt;