* 0946372
* EAGER Proposal for Research in Measurement and Modeling: Dynamic STEM Assessment through Epistemic Network Analysis
* EHR,DRL
* 08/15/2009,06/30/2012
* Andre Rupp, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* James S. Dietz
* 06/30/2012
* USD 320,000.00

The investigators propose to develop a new method of STEM assessment--epistemic
network analysis (ENA)--that focuses not only on whether students master
specific scientific facts, math skills, or engineering concepts, but also on
whether and how students link the skills, knowledge, identity, values, and
epistemology of a STEM practice into a coherent way of thinking about complex
STEM problems. The approach links assessment data to modeling using tools
similar to social network analysis.

The investigators describe ENA as potentially transformational because it is in
its early stages, and involves a radically different and interdisciplinary
approach to the problems of STEM assessment.

The researchers will use data collected from two epistemic games, Digital Zoo
(engineering) and Urban Science (urban planning), both funded by a previous NSF
award. For each game, the investigators have data from 12 players in Grades 8
and 9 from the Madison, Wisconsin area. These data will serve as proof of
concept for the development of the assessment prototype and for the development
of the statistical methods that are necessary to make a social networking
component possible. Two outcomes of this research can be expected: (1) a proof
of concept prototype method for assessing a network of knowledge that students
bring to a given problem, and (2) the methods and measurement development that
makes such assessment systems possible and potentially useful in other contexts.