* 0946430
* Mesozoic mammals from South America: their impact on mammalian evolution, phylogeny, and  time calibrations.
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2010,10/31/2014
* Guillermo Rougier, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* David Mindell
* 10/31/2014
* USD 184,030.00

Mesozoic mammals are rare and known mostly from Northern continents. The PI has
made a unique collection of Mesozoic and early Tertiary mammals from South
America (SA) that includes exquisitely preserved cranial and postcranial
material, as well as isolated teeth, mandibles, and ear regions. These fossils
represent a dramatic improvement in the quality of specimens and an increase of
more than 500% in the total number of known SA Mesozoic mammals. The new
materials range in age from the Middle Jurassic (170MY) to the early Paleocene
(58MY) from five different localities in Patagonia, Argentina, and include the
first record of mammals (with some new groups) for the early Late Cretaceous
(Turonian) in Gondwana. This collection represents the best evidence to date for
tackling the Mesozoic/early Paleocene diversification of Mammalia in SA and its
impact on mammalian evolution. The proposal will produce detailed descriptions
of the new specimens and will generate a comprehensive morphological data matrix
including all major relevant Mesozoic mammals surveying all major traditional
character systems (dental, cranial, and postcranial) in addition to new data
such as enamel microstructure and Computer Tomography. The impact of different
subsets of fossil data on evolutionary histories will be analyzed and compared
with molecular data to explore agreements and discrepancies. The new data will
provide additional insight into the early evolution of mammals. This project
will have as an important component the training of a graduate student and the
participation of undergraduates in research opportunities. Casts of the
specimens will be donated to major collections, and an exhibit will be prepared
for routing to multiple museums and similar institutions. Information on the
results and general popular information will be made available via the web,
while more technical data and illustrations will also be accessible on-line via
MORPHOBANK. The PI and students plan to participate in science education
programs open to students of every level, but with an emphasis on K-12 teachers
following the success of recent projects organized by the Kentucky Academy of
Sciences.