* 0946795
* EAGER Collaborative Research: The Basalt-Hosted Biosphere Observatory at North Pond, Advanced Instrumentation for Transformative Science
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2011
* Keir Becker, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Janecek
* 09/30/2011
* USD 149,154.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The immediate goals of this project are to acquire and build
two instrument packages that will be interfaced with IODP borehole
observatories, known as CORKs, as part of the Mid-Atlantic Ridge Microbiological
Experiments (MARME) program. This international program utilizes novel
interdisciplinary approaches to elucidate the linkages and rates of exchange
between the hydrological, geochemical and microbiological components of the
oceanic subsurface. The instrument packages are essential for achieving the
over-arching goals of MARME to determine the origin and nature of microbial
communities in situ within basaltic basement of 7-8Ma age below an isolated
sediment "pond" on the western flank of the Mid-Atlantic Ridge at 22N, known as
North Pond. The microbial communities of North Pond will be characterized in the
context of their hydrogeochemical environment. This site was chosen because 1)
the basaltic basement is suitably young (&lt; 10 Ma) to harbor active
microorganisms, 2) the sediment cover over the basement rock is sufficiently
deep to permit good penetration of the drill bit, 3) the site has been drilled
several times before during DSDP and ODP legs, thus information exists regarding
the hydrology and geochemistry of the system. This project feeds into a much
larger multi-disciplinary study of the deep biosphere within crystalline rocks
that addresses important questions such as 1) nature of microbial communities in
young ridge flanks? 2) mechanisms of microbial growth in such environments? 3)
What is the role of microbes in mineral weathering under oxidizing and reducing
conditions? 4) source of inoculum for this bacterial community? 5) How microbial
community composition and physiology is affected by the subseafloor
hydrogeology? Questions as these are most effectively addressed through the use
of long term subseafloor observatories, which permit in situ fluid, thermal, and
chemical conditions to re-establish after the initial disturbance from drilling.
This project is one part of a much larger research effort that is divided into
three major phases, including a site survey as the first phase, which was
completed in January, 2009. The drilling expedition will be the second phase,
during which 3 sealed borehole observatories will be installed as part of an
IODP-sponsored cruise (IODP 677 Proposal, Full). This project will directly
support the third phase, which is to deploy and recover seafloor instrumental
packages to be interfaced with the CORKs that will 1) measure fluid flow in the
system by monitoring formation fluid pressures and temperatures, and 2) deploy a
GeoMICROBE Sled for collecting fluid samples from specified depth horizons
within the CORKs for microbiological and geochemical analyses over 1 ? 5 year
time scales. The pressure and temperature measurements provide the basic
constraints of the in situ hydrological and thermal conditions from which all of
the in situ microbiological and modeling experiments are designed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The MARME project and associated IODP
drilling would be the largest coordinated investigation of the deep marine
biosphere since IODP leg 201, which focused on marine sediments. This project
will utilize novel and multidisciplinary approaches that will significantly
advance our understanding of the deep marine biosphere in the basement rocks of
the Mid Atlantic Ridge. Relative to marine sediments, the basaltic basement
poses more challenges for obtaining quality samples for microbiological
analysis, and the use of CORK observatories for such studies is essential to
move this discipline forward. As such, this project meets many of the primary
scientific objectives of the IODP. The foundation laid by this project will
provide the necessary infrastructure and momentum for future observatory-based
investigations of the deep biosphere. It will support numerous undergraduate and
graduate research projects, and foster collaborative research and educational
exchange across three continents, Asia, North America and Europe.