* 0946374
* West Coast Winch Pool
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2009,12/31/2012
* Thomas Althouse, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Hawkins
* 12/31/2012
* USD 780,555.00

ABSTRACT

31 July 2009 Proposal Number: 0946374 Institution: Scripps Institute of
Oceanography PI: B. Appelgate Co-PI: T. Althouse

This proposal requests funding to enhance the UNOLS West Coast Winch Pool which
supports scientific operations aboard vessels in the US academic research vessel
fleet as well as other US government-owned research vessels. The bulk of the
funds provided will purchase portable winches and other components to support
science operations at sea. This year?s funding request for the West Coast Winch
Pool will include administrative and maintenance support for the pool in general
as well as purchase of the following items:

1. Slip Ring for existing 0.681 fiber optic winch 2. Two (2) Deep Sea Mooring
Recovery Winches

These winches and handling systems will support a wide variety missions on all
UNOLS vessels. The UNOLS West Coast Winch Pool, and corresponding East Coast
Winch Pool at WHOI, will also serve to ensure that the equipment meets current
UNOLS standards, provides commonality of design, and provides proper
maintenance, administrative and logistical support to the academic fleet and the
science community at large.

Broader Impacts: The PI addressed the Broader Impact and Intellectual Merit of
the proposed UNOLS West Coast Winch Pool. The shared-use equipment purchased,
and the administrative structure established to support the equipment, will
provide improved services to both the vessel operators and the scientific
community. The Winch Pool structure will also ensure proper maintenance of
equipment, commonality of design, compliance with current standards, and
efficiencies to NSF with regard to logistics, tracking and oversight of shared-
use assets. The research projects supported have been individually peer-reviewed
for scientific merit. Scripps participates in a large number of outreach
programs including open house events, student tours, and hosting of government
officials, dignitaries, and science communities while its vessels are in foreign
ports.

