* 0946656
* Conference on Computational and Mathematical Methods in Science and Engineering, CMMSE 2010; May 2010, Madison, Wisconsin
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2010
* Bruce Wade, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Rosemary Renaut
* 08/31/2010
* USD 22,016.00

The Principle Investigator and his colleagues propose to organize the
international conference Computational and Mathematical Methods in Science and
Engineering (CMMSE 2010) on May 26--28, 2010 at the University of Wisconsin-
Madison, Madison, Wisconsin. This is the tenth in a series of conferences, with
previous meetings held in Chicago, Illinois and Milwaukee, Wisconsin, USA;
Kastoria, Greece; Alicante (twice), Gijon, Madrid, and Murcia, Spain; and
Uppsala, Sweden.&lt;br/&gt;CMMSE 2010 is organized on the principle that
excellent applied mathematics of the Keynote Plenary Speakers and a core of
10-20 Special Sessions attracts participants from a wide variety of related
specialties to share their ideas and results for the latest advances of
computational and applied mathematics. Presentations center around the themes of
the special sessions, and there will be poster sessions, opportunities for
emerging researchers and a session on future directions led by experts in the
various fields of research. &lt;br/&gt;Extensive efforts will be extended to
attract significant participation from graduate students and emerging
researchers, especially women and minorities. Graduate students and young
researchers will have opportunities to present their work and learn about open
problems, thus enhancing their careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the
midst of the various successful annual conferences there remains a niche for
unifying, cross-cutting, interdisciplinary gatherings, where specialists can
have exposure to diverse fields, a chance to meet new people in or near their
individual areas of research, and participate in special sessions different
from, but still close to, their own interests. The CMMSE conference series
fulfills that important role in the field of computational mathematics.
Computational mathematics, numerical analysis, and mathematical modeling have
come to be regarded as an incredibly valuable part of the scientific process,
complementing in an essential way theory and experiment. Computational
simulation truly enhances the study of complex systems of science and
engineering to enable&lt;br/&gt;breakthroughs for modern technology. In seeking
better and better results from simulations, the computational mathematician
or&lt;br/&gt;scientist needs not only capacity to carry out simulations, but
also innovative ideas and foundational analysis for algorithms. &lt;br/&gt;This
conference represents a rapidly growing multidisciplinary approach in scientific
research with connections to business, economics, the sciences, engineering,
mathematics and computer science through academia as well as industry.