* 0946313
* New Steps in NAD+ Metabolism
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Charles Brenner, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/2011
* USD 343,257.00

Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD+) and its reduced and phosphorylated
forms, NADH, NAD+P and NADPH, are among the most fundamentally important co-
enzymes in all living cells. From the study of NAD+, the nature of cell-free
fermentation was demonstrated, functions of co-enzymes in enzyme-mediated
transformations were elucidated, vitamins were identified, biosynthetic pathways
discovered, and important new mechanisms of gene regulation uncovered. NAD+ is
now recognized not only as a co-enzyme for hydride transfer enzymes but also as
a consumed substrate of enzymes found in all three domains of life.
NAD+-consuming enzymes include ADPribose transferases (ARTs), poly(ADPribose)
polymerases (PARPs), sirtuins, and cADPribose synthases, which produce
nicotinamide plus and an ADPribosyl product in the course of modifying proteins,
forming ADPribose polymers, deacetylating protein lysine residues, and cyclizing
ADPribose. Thus, living cells have developed a variety of strategies to salvage
NAD+ precursors and to synthesize NAD+ de novo to keep up with the vital demands
of hydride transfer enzymes and NAD+ consuming enzymes. Though many of the most
famous vitamin, pathway and enzyme discoveries in the NAD+ field are associated
with classic works from 1905 to 1958, a series of creative, original and
potentially transformative discoveries in the last 5 years have led to
recognition of nicotinamide riboside and nicotinic acid riboside as additional
NAD+ precursors in yeast that are converted to NAD+ via the nicotinamide
riboside kinase pathway and also by nucleoside-splitting coupled to nicotinamide
and nicotinic acid salvage. In work that upsets the accepted view of NAD+
metabolism as a stagnant set of long-known reactions, new data indicate that
there is a specific transporter for nicotinamide riboside import and there is a
novel pathway induced by vitamins and regulated by glucose that breaks down NAD+
to nicotinamide riboside and nicotinic acid riboside. Aims: 1) The specific
transporter for nicotinamide riboside will be identified and characterized,
making use of a novel and general method to determine the copy number of any
yeast protein. 2) A novel pathway that degrades NAD+ to nicotinamide riboside
and nicotinic acid riboside will be identified and the mechanism of its
regulation by nicotinic acid, nicotinamide and glucose will be determined. 3) A
25 minute family educational experience using baker's yeast to demonstrate basic
principals of bioscience will be developed and implemented at the Montshire
Museum of Science. This museum enrichment activity will develop expertise among
museum staff, provide bioscience knowledge and encourage inquiry to museum
visitors of all ages, and encourage science as a career choice to young, mostly
rural, museum visitors. Scientific Impact: The function of redox enzymes,
sirtuins and ADPribose transfer enzymes depends on import and metabolism of NAD+
precursors, regulation of which is under nutritional and developmental control
in all eukaryotes examined. Discovery and characterization of new, regulated
steps in yeast NAD+ metabolism will enlighten the process by which this model
eukaryote alters its metabolic biochemistry in response to changing nutritional
conditions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Dating back to the
characterization of the first enzymes and co-enzymes, yeast has been
tremendously important in elucidation of the chemical and biological principles
of life. By developing and implementing a museum-based learning experience on
yeast as a living organism, this project will enrich the biology education of
rural children, while also showing that graduate students of diverse backgrounds
and learning styles make critical contributions to advanced knowledge.