* 0946162
* SBIR Phase I:  Nanocomposite Membranes for Solvent-Resistant Nanofiltration and Reverse Osmosis
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Jason Holt, NanOasis Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2010
* USD 149,960.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop a
scalable process for producing a highly selective, solvent-resistant
nanofiltration membrane (SRNF). While numerous nanofiltration membranes exist
for use in aqueous systems, few such membranes are available for filtration in
organic solvents. The objectives of this proposal are to fabricate a solvent-
resistant nanocomposite membrane with enhanced organic solvent flux and
selectivity, and to demonstrate the stable performance of such a membrane under
realistic testing conditions. Scalable methods of membrane synthesis will be
developed, and it is anticipated that such membranes will have a factor of two
improvement in permeability relative to current solvent-resistant membranes.

The broader/commercial impacts of this research are thousands of TWh of energy
saved, avoiding billions of tons of CO2 emissions, while simultaneously reducing
the volume of solvents consumed and discharged into the environment and in many
cases improving the quality of end products. Huge volumes of solvents are used
in the production and refining of products spanning the nation's largest
industries including petroleum refining, biofuel and biochemical production,
chemical synthesis, pharmaceutical manufacturing and production of foods such as
edible oils. The vast majority of solvent separations are today implemented by
energy intensive thermal distillation techniques because sufficiently robust and
high performing membrane technology does not exist. The potential market value
of membranes and energy savings is at least $5B annually.