* 0946315
* Radiative Transfer in Absorbing Aerosols and Snow Grains: Theory and Experiment
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/2010,05/31/2016
* Kuo-Nan Liou, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Edward L. Bensman
* 05/31/2016
* USD 1,000,000.00

This project is an evolution of the Principal Investigator's longstanding
research on radiative transfer properties of ice, and turns attention to the
absorption and scattering of light as altered by contamination of ice particles
and snow grains by black carbon (soot) and dust particles of various sizes,
shapes and composition. A combination of laboratory experimentation, numerical
simulations and theoretical approaches will be applied to this investigation,
which will in-part hinge on a geometric photon tracing method to better
determine radiative scattering properties of contaminated ice at both visible
and infrared wavelengths. A systematic analysis will be undertaken to improve
physical understanding and insight into computationally efficient methodologies
deriving snow albedo (i.e. energy reflectance) from a radiative transfer model
representing both single and multiple snow layers that include a variety of
combinations of snow grain size and shape, black carbon/dust-snow mixtures, and
realistic variations of the incident angle of solar radiation.

The intellectual merit of this work relates to providing a firm theoretical and
model-based foundation for reducing uncertainties in climate system forcing
associated with changing atmospheric and snowpack conditions.

Broader impacts will derive from improved ability to anticipate rapid changes in
snowcover via improved model predictions and associated improvements in water
resource management in sensitive areas, including but not limited to glaciated
mountains and polar regions, as well as through student education at both
graduate and undergraduate levels.