* 0946278
* Environments, Movements, Narratives in the Circumpolar North: Final BOREAS Conference
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* John Ziker, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 08/31/2011
* USD 236,355.00



This project supports the final BOREAS conference?October 28-31, 2009?to be held
in Rovaniemi, Finland, at the Arctic Centre of the University of Lapland. This
meeting is the capstone of the first major international collaborative research
program in Arctic Social Sciences and Humanities (BOREAS), started in 2003
through a collaboration between the European Science Foundation, NSF, and the
Canadian Social Science and Humanities Research Council. This proposed Final
Conference focuses on relationships between people and environments in the
circumpolar North, with a strong emphasis on understanding the experience of
local peoples living in the North. The objective of the conference is to discuss
results; expose students and scholars outside BOREAS to the program?s innovative
approach; and plan future research in the northern regions. In particular,
support for the travel expenses of associated project partners, graduate
students, indigenous consultants, and local scholars is being requested,
alongside student and local institutional assistance for organizational
purposes.

The BOREAS final conference hopes to demonstrate the relevance and leading role
Northern research has in global agendas. Within the BOREAS international
collaborative research projects (CPRs) there are significant contributions to
the global discussion of the social and cultural effects of climate change.
Explicit multidisciplinary approaches of BOREAS CRPs are contextualizing
research on northern environments and specifically on climate change. Currently,
several BOREAS projects are examining pre-historic social-cultural adaptations
to environment and rapid environmental change, adding insight and comparative
data on processes that are being observed today. BOREAS projects are also
investigating the social and cultural context of climate change and its
challenges to the social structure of Northern communities. Rural northern
peoples having undergone the social and political changes of various colonial
periods, are now faced with new external forces of change - rapid climate change
and globalization. Research from the North has much to contribute to the dialog
about global processes and their implications for social and cultural dynamics,
such as: rural community relocations due to environmental changes, warfare,
environmental degradation, and economic migration. Other BOREAS research project
investigate subjects such as: missionization ? the cultural and metaphysical
construction of reality and the political economy of religion/ and world view;
the history of state policies toward land use and environment, enumeration
programs, and how these affects ethnic identity, environmental awareness, and
nationalism; with how people map their communities, their homes, and their
environments - how culture creates geographic reality; and others.

Challenging the pervailing image of a static Arctic, the conference will explore
the importance of movements (both seasonal and long-term), especially those
associated with the creation, permanence and dissolution of communities, and
ways in which these are mapped in ancient and new social forms; human engagement
with a given or changing environment finds expression in narratives (histories,
philosophies, mythologies, arts and other forms). The research to be discussed
at the conference includes?indeed, goes beyond?the recording of human techniques
of local ecological adaptation in extreme environments by exploring the
philosophical and spiritual foundations of such knowledge in the circumpolar
North. In addition, BOREAS studies have aimed to trace the dynamics that shape
the transmission of knowing about sustainability in a fragile world, and the
ways that science and ideology create conceptual landscapes of the Arctic that
help keep this region open for colonization and military reconnaissance, as well
as nature conservation.

The BOREAS final conference, ?Environments, Movements, Narratives in the
Circumpolar North,? will bring together junior- and senior-level scholars with
students and indigenous scholars from all of the seven BOREAS CRPs. Previous
conferences and dissemination activities have involved only selected personnel.
The student participants will be chosen based on a student essay indicating how
their participation in the BOREAS conference will further their interest/careers
in science along with a recommendation from a professor or other mentor. The
students? essays will be judged by the conference organizing committee, and the
student participants will be chosen on the basis of that judgment. In order to
increase the participation of underrepresented groups, the BOREAS researchers
will advertise this opportunity to students through groups serving minority
students such as, the Alaska Native Science & Engineering Program (ANSEP),
Advancing Hispanics/Chicanos and Native Americans in Science (SACNAS), and
others, such as ArcticNet.

This final conference will provide opportunities for new partnerships,
synergies, and cross-cutting publications and will showcase Northern research at
the forefront of social science and humanities disciplines ? the way it was a
century ago following Franz Boas ? coincidentally, on the heels of the first
International Polar Year in 1882-83, when Boas introduced a social science
agenda into studies of sea ice.