* 0946411
* Augmentation to Ensure a Successful ATOMMS Demonstration and Evaluation
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2010,05/31/2013
* Dale Ward, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 05/31/2013
* USD 1,952,495.00

This project involves the design, development and integration of a new active
limb sounding method modeled after the successful Global Positioning System
(GPS) Radio Occultation (RO) sounding technique. The difference is that the new
method is not constrained to operate with radio frequency sources specifically
allocated for GPS applications. Instead, source frequencies in the microwave are
chosen relatively close to atmospheric absorption lines in order to maximize
detection of single atmospheric constituents, such as water vapor. Both sender
and receiver operate on those frequencies. The operational concept is low Earth
orbiting (LEO) satellite platforms flying both transmitter and receiver, each
occulting one another. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is called The Active
Temperature, Ozone and Moisture Microwave Spectrometer (ATOMMS). In theory,
ATOMMS will profile tropospheric and middle atmosphere water vapor and middle
atmosphere ozone to 1-5%, temperature to 0.5K, and geopotential heights to 10-20
m, all with ~200 m vertical resolution, in both clear and cloudy air. This
performance will improve significantly with averaging. ATOMMS is self-
calibrating, which eliminates long-term drift. The success of this project is a
necessary step toward space-based LEO ATOMMS measurements.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Principal Investigator (PI) is modifying his earlier
ATOMMS design by increasing the number of high band tones from 2 to 4, upgrading
the instrument electronics and making commensurate changes in the retrieval
system. These upgrades will provide the information needed to isolate, quantify
and mitigate several recently recognized key sources of error. With 4 high band
tones, the PI will be able to investigate and hopefully explain any
discrepancies and surprises that are to be expected in a first time measurement
demonstration such as this. Specifically, the 4 high band tones will provide the
information to (i) isolate and reduce amplitude scintillations due to turbulent
fluctuations in the imaginary and real refractivity, (ii) quantify and reduce
residual biases left after incomplete removal of ice cloud scattering using only
two tones, and (iii) quantify errors in spectroscopy that are otherwise likely
to limit the accuracy of ATOMMS-derived profiles. In addition, 4 high band tones
will increase the likelihood of acquiring useful measurements even if a tone
were to fail during a flight and allow the PI to demonstrate profiling N2O and
H3NO and the 18O/16O isotopic ratio of water vapor. Without the information from
four channels of high band data in the aircraft to aircraft demonstrations the
PI would be unable to quantify several critical errors leaving the assessment of
ATOMMS incomplete and its ultimate performance uncertain.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ATOMMS observations will fulfill crucial needs for
atmospheric, climate and geospace scientists, by providing new sources of
global, high vertical resolution, highly stable and accurate data important to
their research. The observations will serve mission agencies in weather and
chemical weather forecasting and would be a key element in the international
Global Climate Observing System (GCOS). In regard to education and training,
several junior scientists, including the co-PI, will help to conduct this
research.