* 0946463
* A Biomedical Imaging Acceleration Testbed
* ENG,EEC
* 12/15/2009,11/30/2013
* David Kaeli, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Jackson
* 11/30/2013
* USD 1,300,000.00

Biomedical imaging generates enormous amounts of data - a CT scanner can
generate more than 5GB of raw data in 20 seconds - timely extraction of useful
information from raw data requires a new computing paradigm. Graphical
Processing Units (GPUs) have been used to accelerate many of these applications,
but there remain a number of challenge associated with the current state of the
art in biomedical imaging acceleration: (1) As each new many-core computing
platform comes on the market, the ability to leverage this class of platforms
turns into a time-consuming process and generally requires extensive knowledge
of the underlying system hardware to extract all the potential performance
available. (2) As new biomedical imaging applications are developed, each
programming task becomes a repetitive time-consuming effort. What is needed is a
methodology to semi-automatically parallelize biomedical imaging codes that can
leverage a set of available libraries (the libraries need to be available in a
format that can be easily remapped to the most current hardware). (3) Presently,
there is a lack of an effective strategy to perform a cost/performance benefit
analysis that could be used to justify moving a biomedical imaging application
to a new hardware platform. There is also the question of whether multiple GPUs
could provide advantages to a particular
application.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This effort will develop a
testbed that can aggressively address these three issues. The activity will
leverage the extensive knowledge base available within the Center for Subsurface
Sensing and Imaging Systems (CenSSIS), an ERC at Northeastern University
(CenSSIS), and Engineering Research Center (ERC) to accelerate a range of key
biomedical imaging applications/algorithms. The goals are: (1) develop a
methodology for rapid parallelization of biomedical imaging applications by
following a set of prescribed steps, and then applying best practices in GPU
programming, (2) produce a rich library of parallelized biomedical imaging
codes, (3) provide the capability to "right-size" a multi-GPU system to best
meet the goals of any biomedical imaging application, (4) deliver these
capabilities in a web-based framework that will allow a larger community to
leverage the technology available in this Testbed. The project will develop a
distributed Testbed where each partner will provide either biomedical imaging or
GPU parallelization expertise (or both). The outcome should include a new set of
parallel libraries for the biomedical research community, as well as a Testbed
model that can be replicated across other research communities that require
acceleration using many-core platforms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
The broader aspects of this proposal include having an accompanying educational
program on biomedical acceleration, which will leverage the availability of the
Testbed hardware and software. The broader impact of this work (if successful)
would ultimately be a seamless high performance computing system for scientists
in biomedical imaging who can focus on their respective projects (rather than
investing time to learn about technologies that would help them utilize hpc
systems.) This project will directly engage students and researchers from
underrepresented groups. This project will also leverage the ongoing Research
Experiences for Undergraduates programs within CenSSIS, which have provided rich
summer experiences for undergraduates from minority-serving institutions,
providing a pathway to pursue graduate research in high performance computing a
biomedical imaging.