* 0946439
* EAGER: Characterization and Modeling of Nanoscaled Semiconductor Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Marvin White, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 08/31/2011
* USD 150,000.00

EAGER: Characterization and Modeling of Nanoscaled Semiconductor Devices Marvin
H. White Lehigh University Abstract We propose a EAGER program to apply a new
approach to study low-field carrier mobility in high-K, nanoscaled,
semiconductor MOSFET devices ? devices with Coulomb scattering centers in the
high-K dielectrics. This concept will permit the evaluation of lowfield carrier
transport in nanoscaled devices with a two-terminal structure rather than the
fabrication of a three-terminal device structure. We will use two hetero-
insulator device structures: (1) a nonvolatile, ?charge-trap?, nanoscaled MANOS
semiconductor memory device with programmable charge storage and (2) a metal
gate, high-K, nanoscaled MOS transistor with fixed charge in the high-K
dielectric. The intellectual merit involves the integration of research and
education to explore lowfield, carrier transport in high-K nanoscaled devices
with a simple two-terminal conductance and capacitance measurement, thereby,
alleviating the need to fabricate three-terminal devices complete with ohmic
contacts. We will characterize the influence of Coulomb charge in experimental
high high-K devices on carrier transport by varying the sign, magnitude and
position of the charge. Two terminal measurements will be compared with three-
terminal measurements on completed device structures. The experimental and
theoretical studies involve device physics, chemistry, materials science and
modeling at the nanoscale. The broader aspects in our program will advance
diversity in the nanoelectronics workforce and provide intellectual technology
transfer, integration of research and education, and promotion of partnerships
with the industrial sector of the economy. We have developed excellent
educational and outreach programs to increase diversity with opportunities in
nanoelectronics, especially semiconductor devices ? an important area to
maintain US leadership in a global economy. Our research provides an excellent
vehicle for minority student outreach and partnerships with industry. The
transformative nature of our research lies in a new approach to model low field
transport with simple two-terminal structures, which can be easily fabricated in
the laboratory without extensive photolithographic equipment. The concept is
applicable to the study of carrier transport in a broad range of emerging
nanoscaled devices and will aid rapid and innovative advances in the technology