* 0946131
* SBIR Phase I: Geo-photonics - Monolithic Integration in Silicon of Geometrically Diverse Photonic Components for Access, Datacom and Interconnect Applications
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Mehdi Asghari, Kotura, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 12/31/2010
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project advances the field of
silicon photonics which is emerging as a new, low cost, low power interconnect
technology in applications as diverse as Active Cables for High Performance
Computing to 100 Gb/s Ethernet transceivers for network centers. Like any new
technology, silicon photonics has significant challenges incorporating disparate
functions. To date the performance and size of optical building blocks are
compromised by the wafer selection and the fabrication process. Some building
blocks, wavelength multiplexers, for example, are best designed with waveguides
in the 3-4 microns range for low loss and easy coupling to the outside world.
Other building blocks, modulators for example, require waveguides of a single
micron to keep their size small. The objective of this project is to address
this integration challenge and demonstrate full feasibility for monolithic
integration of optical components requiring vastly different geometrical and
dimensional needs for light management on the same silicon wafer. In particular,
modulators and multiplexers will be integrated onto the same chip.

The broader impact / commercial potential of this project can be similar to the
revolution witnessed in the semiconductor industry in the past few decades. Here
innovation has enabled the semiconductor industry to grow to more than $250B in
yearly sales. This has fueled dozens more businesses in high technology,
software, communications, entertainment and health industries creating millions
of jobs and a huge portion of the wealth in the U.S. and around the world.
Silicon photonics brings a new level of innovation to semiconductor industry by
incorporating optics onto the chip itself. There are two key problems with
electrical paths: they are power hungry; and, only one lane wide. By contrast,
optical signals can be separated into colors or wavelengths with each wavelength
carrying its own signal on a waveguide re-used by many other optical signals.
Muliplexers (WDM) are used to separate and combine wavelengths; modulators are
used to encode the signals. Geo-photonics will take silicon photonics to a new
level. This technology platform will replace electrical interconnect with
optical ones in the next generation of Ethernet computers, network centers,
storage and video servers, terabit routers, and supercomputers. It will ensure
U.S. leadership in this new category of semiconductors.