* 0946379
* Workshops for continuation GPS monitoring of tectonic, atmospheric, hydrologic, and volcanic processes in Mexico.
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2010,09/30/2012
* Meghan Miller, UNAVCO, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 09/30/2012
* USD 49,915.00

This award is to convene a workshop for US, Mexican, and international
participants to initiate the planning phase for a 70-100 station continuous GPS
network suitable for studying tectonic, atmospheric, hydrologic, and volcanic
processes and hazards in Mexico. More than 50 existing continuous GPS stations
in Mexico already constitute a backbone of the proposed new network. A key
objective of the workshop is to assemble the individuals and institutions
currently operating these sites to discuss the rationale and strategy for
combining the existing GPS instruments with new GPS and ground-based metrology
instrumentation and borehole strain meters to create a powerful tool for basic
research, hazards monitoring, and applied work in Mexico. The workshop will
support 18 U.S. scientists and students from the solid Earth, atmospheric, and
hydrologic disciplines, and additional Mexican participants for the three-day
workshop. The workshop will be held at a Mexican venue, in Puerto Vallarta.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The international scope of the workshop and its
multidisciplinary scientific objectives give the workshop unusually broad
implications, ranging from seismic hazards for large areas of southern Mexico,
including Mexico City, to atmospheric, surface, and ground water budgets in dry
areas of northern Mexico and the southwest U.S. The workshop will provide a much
needed forum for the individuals and institutions that operate continuous GPS
stations in Mexico to address the scientific, practical, and societal benefits
of merging their operations into a unified GPS network with open data sharing
and standardized equipment and communications and to address the needs of
agencies engaged in hazards monitoring and response.The workshop will thus take
the first, critical step toward leveraging the roughly one million US dollars
that have already been invested in CGPS in Mexico to construct a unified and
sustainable solid Earth and atmospheric imaging tool. The workshop will foster
new collaborations between Mexican, US, and other scientists who attend.