* 0946735
* EAGER:  Interrogating Plant Volatile Reports About the Environment
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Xudong Fan, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 08/31/2012
* USD 311,980.00

Plants rapidly detect and respond to changing conditions. This makes them
sensitive indicators of environmental events. Odors, or "volatile organic
compounds" (VOCs) are actively emitted by plants in response to stresses,
including drought, disease, and insect attack. The mix of VOCs provides a
"fingerprint" of what the plant has experienced. VOCs can attract beneficial
enemies of pests attacking a plant. For example, parasitic wasps are drawn to
plants being eaten by the insect the wasps are seeking. VOCs are also thought to
"cue" neighboring plants about imminent danger. Healthy plants exposed to odors
from damaged or diseased plants initiate defense responses that may help them
survive. VOC concentrations are very low, so all experiments on their ecological
roles have so far been done indoors. No one has yet sampled VOCs functioning in
open air, or in natural settings. This project will produce a new VOC-sampling
and analysis instrument capable of characterizing plant response "fingerprints"
in open air. This project will employ a novel chemical sensor based on laser
photonics and microfluidics, called an opto-fluidic ring resonator (OFRR). The
OFRR requires a sample volume of only 20 nano-liters and so can detect and
identify VOCs at extremely low concentrations. In a series of experiments done
with purchased odors and then with real plants, the OFRR will be refined to
analyze plant VOCs at concentrations well below the current state of the art.
The device will be used to demonstrate for the first time that VOCs emitted by
one plant really do travel to and turn on responses in another plant in open
air. Besides confirming a long-held and important scientific hypothesis, this
project offers numerous valuable technical applications. These include the
ability to sense pests damaging individual plants for economical spot-treatment,
using plants as monitors of environmental quality, understanding complex plant-
insect interactions, and post-harvest food quality and safety assessment. The
project will train undergraduate and graduate students in a unique
engineering/biology interaction, and will serve as an important component of the
Bond Life Science Center's extensive science education and outreach program.