* 0946412
* CIAN's New Testbed for Optical Aggregation Networking (TOAN)
* ENG,EEC
* 12/01/2009,11/30/2010
* Robert Norwood, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 11/30/2010
* USD 600,000.00

The new Testbed for Optical Aggregation Networking(TOAN) augment the capacity
for innovation of the Center for Integrated Access Networks (CIAN), an
Engineering Research Center, headquartered at the University of Arizona This
testbed will synergistically complement the existing CIAN testbeds at the other
CIAN partner universities: Columbia University ("cross-layer optimization"), at
the University of Southern California ("optical data introspection"), and at the
University of California, San Diego (main testbed for "transmission/processing"
and planned extension for "data centers"). These test sites offer cutting-edge
performance in their respective areas of specialization. The new flexible,
multi-node, and heterogeneous traffic "network emulator" will provide much-
needed networking-oriented testing capabilities for CIAN researchers as well as
for affiliated institutions and industry at very moderate cost. This benefit
derives from the fact that TOAN is not designed for ultra-high transmission
speed and data throughput, but rather for demonstrating and testing network
functionalities. It will focus on a transparent aggregation domain with
interfaces to residential access areas and data centers, to neighboring domains,
and to the core/backbone. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of TOAN
lies in its unique approach of combining functionalities (transmission,
processing, monitoring, control) that are currently spread out over multiple
test sites within a unified laboratory-style, flexible, affordable, and
manageable setting. Typical specifications for emulating a multi-node
aggregation network have been derived in collaboration with CIAN industrial
affiliates, whereby relevant targets have been set such as 6 nodes / 40G data
rates / 200 km link lengths / 400 km ring length over heterogeneous transmission
media with the need for adaptive impairment compensation and/or impairment-aware
switching and routing. This platform will provide much-needed networking-
oriented testing capabilities for CIAN researchers as well as for affiliated
institutions and industry. These include. impairment-aware cross-domain traffic
engineering and functionality tests of CIAN-built devices with respect to
cascadability and network stability, to mention only a few of the features that
CIAN industrial affiliates have suggested CIAN implement. This end-to-end
network topology will allow for experimentation with the various trade-offs in
the implementation of impairment compensation and switching in dynamic network
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the proposed new testbed is
threefold: (a) Engineering research: The uniqueness of a lower-layer optical
networking platform which provides emulation of network functionalities rather
than the one-dimensional concatenation of transmission segments or the isolated
demonstration of various processing tasks only. (b) Industry collaboration: As
requested by the Site Visit Panel, TOAN will further stimulate collaboration
with industry (matching industrial contributions demonstrate interest).
(c)&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate Education: the testbed will be utilized to establish
a semester-long, seminar-style "open lab" in order to attract incoming
engineering freshmen to optical communications, to familiarize them with
advanced network tests, and to recruit the best students as future CIAN
undergraduate research assistants. The functionality of the testbed will be
increased over time as new subsystems are introduced giving more ability to
monitor and control various network configurations. Overall, the testbed will
speed up the capacity of CIAN to provide practical and useful networking
innovations for industry.