* 0946339
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  IPY: Testing the Polar Gateway Hypothesis: An Integrated Record of Drake Passage Opening &amp; Antarctic Glaciation
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Howard Scher, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Isern
* 08/31/2011
* USD 94,880.00

This project studies the relationship between opening of the Drake Passage and
formation of the Antarctic ice sheet. Its goal is to answer the question: What
drove the transition from a greenhouse to icehouse world thirty-four million
years ago? Was it changes in circulation of the Southern Ocean caused by the
separation of Antarctica from South America or was it a global effect such as
decreasing atmospheric CO2 content? This study constrains the events and timing
through fieldwork in South America and Antarctica and new work on marine
sediment cores previously collected by the Ocean Drilling Program. It also
involves an extensive, multidisciplinary analytical program. Compositional
analyses of sediments and their sources will be combined with (U-Th)/He,
fission-track, and Ar-Ar thermochronometry to constrain uplift and motion of the
continental crust bounding the Drake Passage. Radiogenic isotope studies of
fossil fish teeth found in marine sediment cores will be used to trace
penetration of Pacific seawater into the Atlantic. Oxygen isotope and trace
metal measurements on foraminifera will provide additional information on the
timing and magnitude of ice volume changes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts include graduate and undergraduate
education; outreach to the general public through museum exhibits and
presentations, and international collaboration with scientists from Argentina,
Ukraine, UK and Germany.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
is supported under NSF's International Polar Year (IPY) research emphasis area
on "Understanding Environmental Change in Polar Regions". This project is also a
key component of the IPY Plates &amp; Gates initiative (IPY Project #77),
focused on determining the role of tectonic gateways in instigating polar
environmental change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;