* 0946067
* SBIR Phase I:  Value Innovation Teaching  Toolkit
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* Richard Lee, Value Innovation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2010
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) research project will develop a
software-as-a-service toolkit for innovation processes and service oriented
educational simulation for the value innovation process, applicable to both
business educational needs and to the crucial college and K-12 demographic,
where the core of STEM education takes place and where the principals of
innovation should be directed if they are to properly influence future business
innovators. Innovation, even more than entrepreneurship, is crucial to US
competitiveness in the current global business environment. However, the current
education and business environment lacks both a formal set of deployable tools
that can facilitate the innovation process and a means of providing outcome
testable training and education on innovation. Both are crucial to not only
implementing processes of innovation, but to facilitating an innovation culture
in an organization. The education will leverage the suite of service oriented,
web-based tools that can be used to support an organization's innovation efforts
with minimal impact on the organizations existing innovation or information
technology structure.

Innovation is one of the hottest topics in business today, with CEO's
understanding that it's the engine driving their company's organic growth.
However, most organizations do not have the knowledge or skill base to apply the
concepts of innovation to their business' practices. This lack can be attributed
to two problems: first, the company's employees often lack a basic understanding
of innovation owing to a deficiency during their formal education and, second,
the company lacks a usable set of tools that make an innovation process easily
adaptable to the organization's situation and needs. The Value Innovation
Teaching Toolkit addresses both unmet needs. By providing an educational
simulation applicable to both business training needs and the educational needs
of students in formal STEM programs at the university and K-12 level, the
toolkit will provide the learner with an innovation learning environment that is
outcome tested. Additionally, our toolkit will provide a suite of web-based
tools that will facilitate the innovation process with minimal impact on an
organization's current IT infrastructure.