* 0946740
* EAGER: SMA Z-Pinned SMP Cored Sandwich Structure for Self-Healing Impact Damage
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2010
* Guoqiang Li, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 09/30/2010
* USD 30,000.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this EAGER project is
to explore a novel concept - shape memory alloy (SMA) z-pinned sandwich with an
integrated, grid stiffened shape memory polymer (SMP) based syntactic foam core
for healing impact damage autonomously, repeatedly, and efficiently. In this
study, SMA z-pins will be used to achieve autonomous programming and transverse
confinement of the SMP foam core. The following will be conducted: (1) select a
compatible SMA and SMP pair so that the designed functionality can be achieved;
(2) fabricate SMA z-pinned hybrid smart sandwich panel; (3) conduct programming;
(4) conduct repeated low-strain rate impact test and self-healing test; and (5)
determine the residual strength and self-healing efficiency.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will contribute to the integration of
research results into education, graduate student mentoring, involvement of
student in lab experiments and curriculum development at both Louisiana State
University (LSU) and Southern University (SU). It will enhance the research and
education infrastructure by reforming syllabi of composite materials classes.
One graduate student will be directly involved in this project. The
opportunities for under-represented minorities will be promoted by directly
exposing minority students to this research through seminars and class teaching.