* 0946779
* Acquisition of a GC-TOF Mass Spectrometer
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/2010,01/31/2013
* Mark Arnold, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 01/31/2013
* USD 225,405.00

With this award from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities:
Departmental Multi-User Instrumentation program (CRIF:MU), Professors David F.
Wiemer, James B. Gloer and Lynn Teesch from the University of Iowa will acquire
a high resolution gas-chromatograph time-of-flight mass spectrometer (GC-TOF-MS)
capable of carrying out experiments with electron ionization (EI) and chemical
ionization (CI) sources. The instrument will be used to support research
activities such as: 1) isolation and structure determination of bioactive
natural products from fungi; 2) studies of manganese-mediated coupling reactions
for the synthesis of natural products; 3) studies of Pd(II)- and
Ni(II)-catalyzed synthesis of aminoglycosides and other biologically active
carbohydrates; 4) studies of dearomatization approaches to the synthesis of
carboxylic and heterocyclic natural products; and 5) characterization of
synthetic terpenoid phosphonates and schweinfurthin
analogues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;GC-TOF-mass spectrometry is an important
technique for obtaining accurate molecular weights on large molecules, with high
sensitivity. Use of a GC-TOF mass spectrometer with easily exchanged ionization
sources is a standard technique for the study of chemical reactions. The
instrument is capable of using volatile or semi-volatile samples that can be
introduced through the gas chromatograph. An autosampler will accommodate
multiple sample experiments. Solid samples will be introduced either on the
heated direct insertion probe or on the direct chemical ionization probe. This
research will have a significant impact in a number of areas, especially
chemistry, natural products and biochemistry. This instrument will be an
integral part of teaching as well as research.