* 0946398
* Collaborative Research: Genetic and Divergence Mapping of Barriers to Gene Flow Across a Butterfly Hybrid Zone
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Peter Andolfatto, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 08/31/2011
* USD 215,624.00

Understanding the process of how new species form (speciation) is central to
modern biology. Species are most commonly identified as groups of animals that
are reproductively isolated from other such groups. This collaborative project
will use two swallowtail butterfly species, Papilio glaucus and P. canadensis,
and a discrete zone where hybrids of these two species can be found (a hybrid
zone), as a model system to study the genetic basis of reproductive isolation.
These two species differ in several ecologically important traits that are
linked to their sex chromosomes, yet are still partly capable of forming fertile
hybrids. These features allow study of the genetics of reproductive isolation
between these species in the context of these ecological differences. The
research will produce a genetic map of the Papilio X-chromosome and will
identify regions of the X-chromosome that are linked to ecologically important
traits. The degree to which natural selection in the hybrid zone prevents
between-species exchanges of genetic material that is closely linked to these
traits will be tested.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Papilio swallowtails are a common
and easily recognizable butterfly in North America, and will serve as a publicly
accessible tool for the study of speciation. This work will significantly
contribute to genetic resources for butterfly and moth researchers. Insights
gained by the proposed research will be broadly applicable to understanding
speciation in a wide variety of plant and animal groups. In addition, publicly
available software will be developed and made available to facilitate the study
of speciation by other researchers.&lt;br/&gt;