* 0946610
* Collaborative Research: CRI: CRD: Open Research Testbed for Underwater Ad Hoc and Sensor Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,07/31/2013
* Milica Stojanovic, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 07/31/2013
* USD 100,001.00

Proposal #: CNS 07-08498 07-09946 07-08420 &lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Preisig, James C
Ye,Wei Stojanovic, Milica&lt;br/&gt; Lee, Freitag Heidenmann, John
S.&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Woods Hole Oceanographic Inst U Southern California
Mass Inst Tech&lt;br/&gt; Woods Hole, MA 02543-1041 Los Angeles, CA 90089-1147
Cambridge, MA 02139-4307&lt;br/&gt;Proposal #: CNS 07-09005 07-08938
07-08467&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Cui, Jun-Hong (June) Levine, Brian; Kurose,James F.
Freitag, Lee&lt;br/&gt; Rajasekaran,Sanguthevar;Shi, Zhijie;Willett,Peter
K.;Zhou,Shengli &lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Connecticut U of
Massachusetts WHOI&lt;br/&gt; Storrs, CT 06269-1133 Amherst, MA 01003-9242 Woods
Hole, MA 02543-1041 &lt;br/&gt;Title: Collab Rsch:CRD/IAD:Open Research Testbed
for Underwater Ad Hoc and Sensor Networks (ORTUN)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
collaborative project, developing the first open testbed infrastructure for the
underwater networking community, enables open access with the capability to
conduct experiments remotely. The infrastructure, based on open research
platforms, consists of a testbed that enables wide and systematic experimental
evaluation and comparison of underwater acoustic networks. The work, involving
this rapidly deployable testbed that can be shared by the underwater networking
community, aims to demonstrate the ability of the facility to facilitate field
experiments. The project represents a higher-level collaborative that arose from
two collaborative groups. One group developing the facility, the other working
mainly on the experiments utilizing the facility. The testbed is expected to be
a buoy-based system that can be easily taken to different environments. When
operational, these systems will be deployed 5 or 6 times a year. The
infrastructure will consist of two types of nodes with different capabilities.
The first type of node of the rapidly deployable testbed will offer a fixed
physical layer capability using acoustic modems such as the WHOI micromodem or
the ISI S-modem to implement a physical layer with limited reconfigurability
interfaced to a reconfigurable network processor. This network processor will
support algorithm/protocol implementation and testing at higher network layers.
The Network functions on the Fixed Physical Layer testbed will be hosted by a
Gumstix processor which will then communicate with physical layer modems such as
the WHOI Micromodem or USC/ISI S-modem via a serial port. Ten to fifteen fixed
physical layer nodes will be built including up to 3 gateway nodes. Each gateway
node of the testbed will be equipped with wireless RF communication enabling
real-time monitoring and control of network performance. The fixed physical
layer nodes will be smaller and more easily deployed than the second type of
node which is the all-layer node. The all-layer node is a more capable node that
will ultimately support algorithm/protocol implementation and acoustic data
collection at all networking layers. In addition to the equipment included in
the fixed physical layer nodes (i.e., a gumstix network processor and the
ability to support relatively fixed physical layer modems such as the WHOI
Micromodem and the ISI S-modem), the all-layer nodes will also include a general
purpose data acquisition system (D/A and A/D) with substantial disk storage and
in-situ processing capability. The MIT r-modem software will be implemented on
this general purpose hardware and, along with MATLAB, will enable user
implementation and testing of algorithms and the gathering of acoustics data at
the physical layer in addition to the testing at higher network layers that it
will share in common with the fixed physical layer nodes. Three to five all-
layer nodes will be built. The rapidly deployable testbed, using two types of
nodes with varying capabilities, should significantly enhance research at all
network layers while setting the stage for future infrastructure
improvements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many research groups investigating
fundamental questions about how to design such networked systems that utilize
acoustic communications in complex underwater environments have had their
overall effort significantly slowed by the lack of common means to test and
compare protocols under realistic environmental conditions. This infrastructure
responds to the need for consensus on analytic or simulation models for
underwater networks where researchers need the ability to gather experimental
data under real world conditions in order to make progress.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The network stack will be modular by design with sockets
used to enable cross layer control and communication. The physical, MAC, Network
and Application layers will be populated with sample components to enable users
test their own algorithms or protocols without having to populate the entire
stack. Users will be able to write modules to test their own algorithms or
protocols at different layers and selectively replace the sample modules with
their own. While the development of the modular architecture and sample modules
for the network stack will be done with close coordination between all
participating institutions, the lead institution for the layers that will be
provided are Physical Layer (MIT for the all-layer system, WHOI for the Fixed-
PHY system), MAC Layer (USC/ISI), Network Layer (UConn, a geo-routing protocol),
and Application Layer (UMass, a DTN routine service). The open characteristic of
the testbeds and their usefulness for conducting research will be demonstrated
by the members of the team (primarily UConn and UMass as described above) and a
few selected outside participants. In addition, acoustic receptions suitable for
physical layer research will be made available to the general research community
via the Internet. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This work enables the
essential capability of research groups to examine fundamental research
questions and their potential solutions in the real world. The infrastructure
will directly benefit many on-going research projects in this field A large
number of potential users in the community may benefit from this testbed
infrastructure. In addition to the significant research impact, the
infrastructure is expected to make a very strong educational impact as well,
supporting classes bringing remote access to field experiments to students for
whom traditional experiments would have been too costly. The infrastructure can
accelerate research and education in the underwater networking field.