* 0946447
* CRIF:MU Construction of a Spectometer for Ultrafast Absorption and Emission Studies of Nanostructures
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2012
* Libai Huang, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 12/31/2012
* USD 397,535.00

With this award from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities:
Departmental Multi-User Instrumentation program (CRIF:MU), Professors A. Graham
Lappin, Gregory V. Hartland, Libai Huang, Prashant V. Kamat and Masaru K. Kuno
of the University of Notre Dame will construct a laser spectrometer system and
use it for ultrafast absorption and emission studies of single nanostructures
including investigations of the photophysics of carbon nanotubes and studies of
materials with low fluorescence quantum yields, such as semiconductor nanowires,
CdTe NWs, and even non-fluorescent materials, such as metallic
nanowires.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultrafast spectrometers use modern laser
technology to study molecular phenomena on very short time scales such as
femtoseconds. Very fundamental processes in chemistry, biology and materials
science (e.g., bond breaking and formation, electron transfer, molecular
dynamics and others) occur on ultrafast time scales. This acquisition will
exploit the versatility of the instrument in the growing field of ultrafast
spectroscopy applied to nanomaterials. Fundamental research will be performed by
graduate students, select undergraduates, and postdocs as part of their academic
experience. This will provide training and experience in the growing field of
ultrafast methodology with state of the art instrumentation.