* 0946373
* Proposal to Establish an Industrial Research Opportunities Program
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2009,04/30/2012
* Frank Huband, American Society For Engineering Education
* Standard Grant
* Esther Bolding
* 04/30/2012
* USD 2,665,991.00

Proposal: 0946373&lt;br/&gt;PI Name: Frank L. Huband&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This
award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public
Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The U.S. economy is facing enormous
challenges, creating jobs that will produce significant technological and
scientific innovation and create new opportunities for business growth is of
utmost importance for future economic recovery. Given the challenges that the
country faces today, there is an urgent need to transform the economy with
science and technology. Research challenges include energy independence, climate
control and the development of credible economic models for a successful and
sustained recovery of our economy. It is very important to have scientists and
engineering looking for the next great discovery, creating jobs in cutting-edge
technologies and making informed investments that will help industries succeed
in a global economy. Of primary importance is the development of industrial
R&amp;D opportunities for the next generation of technology leaders in an
environment that will stimulate innovation and
invention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The American Society for Engineering Education
(ASEE) proposes to establish an Industrial Postdoctoral Research Program that
will provide forty recent PhD's the opportunity to conduct research in an
industrial setting. This pilot program would be a partnership between the
federal government and various industrial sponsors. Companies that have
expressed a strong endorsement and support for this activity include the
following: Agilent, Autodesk, Boeing, The Dow Chemical Company, Faraday
Technology, Hewlett Packard Laboratories, IBM Research, Intel Corporation,
MathWorks, Northrop Grumman, and SAP Lab. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Industrial
Research Opportunities Program will aim to encourage the involvement of creative
and highly trained engineers in areas of great interest and relevance to the
nation as we face current economic challenges. With the U.S. leadership focusing
more on the potential contributions of academic research and development efforts
to enhance the competitiveness of the U.S. industries, this program will provide
a mechanism to facilitate the technology transfer of academic research to the
corporate sector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The U.S. economy is facing great
challenges and stimulating business growth and creating jobs is integral to
aiding economic recovery. The U.S. must create jobs in cutting edge technologies
and make key investments to respond to the research challenges of today.
Training a new generation of technology leaders is integral to increasing the
U.S. competitiveness in the global economy. Therefore, it is critical to provide
promising scientists and engineers with appropriate research settings, and to
support and motivate their pursuit of the next great discoveries. ASEE's
Industrial Research Opportunities Program will contribute to technological and
scientific innovation and help ensure industry success in the global economy.