* 0946404
* CAREER:Excited States Properties of Semiconductors and Nanostructures: Methodology Developments, Practical Applications, and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2016
* Peihong Zhang, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 05/31/2016
* USD 450,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY This CAREER award supports computational research and
education that will advance accurate and efficient calculations of quasiparticle
and optical excitations in a variety of bulk materials and nanostructures.
Excited state properties of semiconductors and nanostructures are currently
subjects of intensive investigation in response to future demand for energy-
related optoelectronic applications, such as solar cells and solid-state
lighting. A first-principles understanding of excited state properties of
semiconductors and nanostructures would enable the full potential of these
materials to be realized for technological applications. A quantitative first-
principles description of excitations in solids including both electron-electron
and electron-hole correlations also remains a major fundamental challenge. This
research will address current difficulties in calculating the excited state
properties of materials with the general goal of developing new methods and
techniques for systems containing strongly localized electrons and improving the
efficiency and convergence of excited state calculations. Specifically, the
methodology development includes: (1) combined generalized Kohn-Sham and GW
approaches for more accurate accounts of the effects of semicore electrons on
the valence electronic properties, (2) new techniques to improve the convergence
of the GW calculations, and (3) more efficient interpolation techniques for
evaluating the kernel that appears in the Bethe-Salpeter equation. These new
developments will then be applied to the study of excited state properties of
important systems such as III-nitrides and II-oxides, including bulk materials
and nanostructures, as well as defect-related excited state properties. The
educational activities of this CAREER award include student training and new
course development in computational materials science. A web-based interactive
tool for visualizing various solid state properties will be also developed. This
project will be incorporated into the successful ?Physics and Art? project in
the Department of Physics at SUNY Buffalo, which targets both physics students
and general public to promote physics education. The long-term goal of the
outreach activities is to promote the awareness of the general public on the
urgency of energy-related problems and research. This goal will be achieved by
public presentations and demonstrations, as well as by establishing and
nurturing international collaborations on energy-related research. NONTECHNICAL
SUMMARY This CAREER award supports computational and theoretical research and
education that will enable more accurate and efficient computer calculations of
how materials produce and interact with light. The reliable calculation of
optical properties of materials starting only from the identity of the
constituent atoms and their arrangement remains a formidable challenge to the
field. The methods and techniques to be developed in this research activity are
aimed at overcoming these challenges. Computational tools and techniques
developed will be applied to semiconductor materials and nanostructures which
have energy-related applications such as solar cells and solid-state lighting.
The research will help not only in providing an atomic-scale understanding of
experiments, but also in exploiting the full potential of these materials in
energy-related optoelectronic applications. The computational techniques and
tools contribute to the cyberinfrastructure of the broader materials research
community. The educational activities of this CAREER award include student
training and new course development in computational materials science. A web-
based interactive tool for visualizing various solid state properties will be
also developed. This project will be incorporated into the successful ?Physics
and Art? project in the Department of Physics at SUNY Buffalo, which targets
both physics students and general public to promote physics education. The long-
term goal of the outreach activities is to promote the awareness of the general
public on the urgency of energy-related problems and research. This goal will be
achieved by public presentations and demonstrations, as well as by establishing
and nurturing international collaborations on energy-related research.