* 0946418
* EAGER:  High Output-Power Nanogenerators for Manufacturing Self-Powered Nanosystems
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Zhong Wang, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 09/30/2013
* USD 206,890.00

Developing wireless nanodevices and nanosystems are of critical importance for
sensing, medical science, defense technology and even personal electronics. It
is highly desired for wireless devices and even required for implanted
biomedical devices to be self-powered without using battery. It is essential to
explore innovative nanotechnologies for converting mechanical energy (such as
body movement, muscle stretching) and vibration energy into electric energy that
will be used to power nanodevices without using battery. This is a key step
towards self-powered nanosystems. An innovative approach is proposed for
converting nano-scale mechanical energy into electric energy by piezoelectric
zinc oxide nanowire arrays, and the core of the research will focus on raising
the output voltage and the manufacturing of the nanogenerators. The technology
makes it possible to harvest energy supplied by mechanical movement/vibration,
heart beating, food steps, noises, light wind. This proposal is to develop this
invention into a manufacturable technology for practical applications. The
proposed research will greatly impact the education and training of
undergraduate and graduate students. The research will provide an excellent
opportunity for us to recruit undergraduate students from under represented
groups to participate in a project at the frontier of nanoscience and highly-
relevant to the need of the society. The research program and results will also
be used to help K-12 school teachers and students through several outreach
programs organized by the two participating institutes. It also gives us the
support to fully involve undergraduate students in our on-going research.