* 0946000
* SBIR Phase I:  Ultra Low Power InAsN Semiconductor Transistors
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,11/30/2010
* Matt Kim, QuantTera
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 11/30/2010
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will demonstrate
the viability of a new III-V nitride semiconductor alloy and bipolar transistor
structure with the potential to enable ultra low power device operation in
applications requiring both RF and digital electronics. Increasing power
efficiency has been a major issue for portable and high performance electronic
devices and the use of specially designed thin-film device structures on silicon
or GaAs substrates can make a huge impact in applications ranging from
microprocessors to wireless electronics. This proposal will develop and
commercialize ultra low power nitrogen-based semiconductor transistors that will
have a large impact on power consumption in the realm of high-performance
personal communication electronics. The ultra-low voltage transistors offer an
exciting opportunity to achieve ultra low power electronic device operation.
Thus, the proposed device embodiment has enormous potential for applications in
next generation portable and wireless technology requiring high performance
while minimizing power consumption. This program will begin with device design,
material synthesis and materials testing and end with proof-of-principle p-n
junctions and transistor action demonstrations of our device.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this project
will allow a new generation of transistors which have advantages over existing
silicon-based and GaAs-based devices with regard to reduced power consumption ?
thus this new transistor embodiment could impact the entire electronics
industry. The potential societal and most importantly the commercial impact of
the project will allow the development of the next generation portable,
wireless, mobile internet and assistive technology devices to become ever more
functional since they will require significantly lower turn-on voltages so as to
minimize power consumption while sustaining operation over longer periods of
time. The market sector would include the chip manufacturers, aging population,
mobile electronics users, the military, and portable electronic manufactures
that require reduced power consumption amplifiers. This low voltage transistor
innovation will enhance scientific and technological understanding of the basic
material physics of ultra small energy bandgap materials which can be used in
many other applications as long wavelength detectors and lasers.