* 0946723
* EAGER - Nanostructured Plasmonic Contacts for Enhanced Efficiency in Organic Photovoltaic Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Sang-Hyun Oh, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 08/31/2010
* USD 99,998.00

0946723&lt;br/&gt;Holmes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
development of low-cost renewable and sustainable energy sources is the foremost
challenge facing humanity. While solar energy conversion is currently too costly
to compete with fossil fuel sources, organic photovoltaic cells (OPVs) will
redefine this energy balance. OPVs can be processed using high-throughput
methods, and have demonstrated efficiencies &gt;6%. The proposed research
outlines a new approach to overcome the exciton diffusion bottleneck that limits
OPV absorption efficiency. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Thin film
OPVs based on graded donor-acceptor heterojunctions (GHJs) will be incorporated
into plasmonic nanocavity arrays to increase the absorption and power conversion
efficiencies of these devices. The use of a plasmonic nanocavity permits
subwavelength confinement and resonant enhancement of the optical field. The
combination of a GHJ OPV with a plasmonic nanocavity array has the potential to
be transformative by enabling a high level of tunability and control over the
film microstructure and internal optical field distribution to realize high
efficiency. A new architecture combining optical field enhancement from a
plasmonic nanocavity array is introduced to overcome the exciton bottleneck and
maximize absorption in OPVs. This enhancement is attractive since it is long
range, enhancing absorption throughout the organic active layers. The use of a
nanocavity permits the spectral response of the enhancement to be tuned to
overlap with active material absorption. The OPVs proposed in this work will
utilize GHJs to realize exciton dissociation. The novel use of a GHJ is
attractive since it balances the need for efficient exciton diffusion (large
interface area) with efficient charge collection (graded pathways for
transport). The growth of GHJs is tunable, enabling a range of compositions
through which to correlate morphology, exciton/charge transport, and
performance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Graduate students associated
with this project will acquire an interdisciplinary spectrum of knowledge
ranging from nanofabrication and plasmonics, to molecular photophysics and OPV
performance. Students will also be educated in renewable energy, understanding
the position of OPVs in the broader energy landscape. Discussions of
photovoltaics and plasmonics are already being integrated into various
undergraduate and graduate courses taught by the PIs. Undergraduate research
opportunities will be enhanced through continuing relationships with the
University of Minnesota UROP program and the National Science Foundation REU
program. These activities are complemented by plans to disseminate results from
the proposed work to industry via on-campus workshops and an industrial
affiliates program.