* 0946900
* Collaborative Research: The SuperDARN Upper Atmosphere Facility - Operations, Community Support, and Science from the Polar Cap to Mid-latitudes
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2009,09/30/2013
* Joseph Baker, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Robinson
* 09/30/2013
* USD 2,349,894.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Super Dual Auroral Radar Network
(SuperDARN) is a network of HF radars that provide global-scale and continuous
measurements of the high latitude ionosphere and upper atmosphere in both the
northern (14 radars) and southern (7 radars) hemispheres. SuperDARN utilizes
coherent radar backscatter techniques to track the ExB drift of ionospheric
plasma. The observations can be combined to generate patterns of plasma
circulation that express fundamental aspects of the coupling of energy from the
solar wind into the magnetosphere-ionosphere-atmosphere system. Information on
electric field dynamics and plasma structuring is routinely available on spatial
scales of a few tens of kilometers and temporal scales of seconds. The radar
data also generate information on the occurrence and characteristics of
ionospheric irregularities, atmospheric gravity waves and TIDs, and neutral
winds near the mesopause.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SuperDARN is an international
collaboration involving the funding agencies of a dozen countries. The SuperDARN
Upper Atmosphere Facility (UAF) operates four of the radars and provides
essential technical support to the collaboration in the areas of radar operating
software, web data access, and data distribution. U.S. researchers gain access
to the entire dataset through association with SuperDARN researchers and are
supported with interpretive analysis and collaboration. Significant scientific
findings have been reported in areas as diverse as ionospheric convection, M-I
coupling, ULF pulsations, plasma structuring, and atmospheric tides and
planetary waves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is a collaboration between
Virginia Tech and the Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory
(JHU/APL). Virgina Tech maintains and upgrades the radars and explores technical
innovation while JHU/APL oversees software and data distribution functions. The
group at Virginia Tech is student-centered activity with an emphasis on
education and training while JHU/APL provides key software and web services. The
project research and data products take advantage of the recent expansion of the
network to polar and mid-latitudes and the development of enabling technologies.
The research program is directed towards an improved understanding of the
coupling of energy from the solar wind to Earth's upper atmosphere and the
impacts on the space environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Earth is buffeted by the
solar wind, which interacts in complicated ways with the geomagnetic field to
produce large-scale plasma motions within the upper atmosphere. These motions
are a key source of information on the coupling processes. SuperDARN is a system
of HF radars that image these motions, producing large scale maps of the plasma
circulation that are widely used by the research community for both research and
applications. This project supports the operation of four radars and the roles
performed by the groups at Virginia Tech and JHU/APL in the international
SuperDARN collaboration. The overall research goal is to increase our
understanding of disturbance effects in Earth space environment from the polar
cap to mid-latitudes and to furnish critical measurements of conditions in the
upper atmosphere to the U.S. research community. The project activities will
also engage students in training for space science research and engineering.