* 0946955
* EAGER: PHYSICAL SYSTEM DYNAMICS FOR THE CHARACTERIZATION AND CONTROL OF COMPLEX WIRELESS NETWORKS
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Stuart Milner, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* GEORGE HADDAD
* 08/31/2011
* USD 149,687.00

&lt;br/&gt;This EArly-concept Grants for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project
addresses the need for wireless networks to autonomously reconfigure themselves
to adapt to changes in the network or in the requirements of the supported
applications. The approach utilizes physics-based models for characterization
and control that are inspired by the dynamics of multiple-connected atoms
forming a molecular network. The research considers two-tiered heterogeneous
networks with ad-hoc networks using omni-directional communication links
interconnected by a directional wireless backbone network that utilizes radio
frequency or free-space optical links.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With respect to
intellectual merit, the research uses a multidisciplinary approach to model and
control robust, self-organizing heterogeneous networks. The models and methods
for analysis and operation have the potential to deal with the growing
complexity and dynamical behavior of such networks. The research could lead to
models that would enable: (i) energy minimization through topology control in
complex networks by assessing network robustness and strategies for driving a
network topology to a minimum energy configuration; (ii) characterization of
link breaks and reconfiguration mechanisms in dynamic networks, including the
cost of link breaks that can lead to network partitions; and (iii) evaluation of
network evolution through mechanisms including network degradation, network
congestion, and node and link failures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With respect to
broader impact, the research has the potential to transform the analysis and
operation of next-generation dynamic wireless networks. Such dynamic wireless
networks have a number of important applications including personal and
commercial communication, disaster and emergency response, and tactical military
communications. The project contributes to ongoing efforts, including a summer
internship program, for broadening participation.