* 0946767
* Evaluation of the Effects of Recharge Rate Versus Changes in the Configuration of the Subglacial Hydrological System on Glacier Hydrology
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2013
* Jason Gulley, Gulley                  Jason          D
* Continuing Grant
* Lina Patino
* 08/31/2013
* USD 170,000.00

Dr. Jason Gulley has been awarded an NSF Earth Sciences Postdoctoral Fellowship
to carry out a research and education plan at the University of Cambridge. This
study will provide the first, independent assessment of a technique that is
widely used to investigate the configuration of glacier hydrological systems,
dye tracing; an important step in understanding the physical processes
responsible for the links between glacier hydrology and glacier motion. The
project includes mapping a subglacial conduit beneath the cold-based Rieper
Glacier, in Svalbard, Norway (with caving techniques modified for glaciers) at
the start and end of the melt season. Once the initial map is completed, a
series of dye tracing experiments will be conducted through the conduits to
determine how changes in the rate of recharge through the removal of the
snowpack affect dye trace data. Conduit water pressure and discharge data
collected from this study will be used to calibrate models of glacier hydrology
which can be evaluated against directly obtained conduit data. Laboratory models
will be used to investigate how changes in the configuration of subglacial
hydrological systems affect water pressure and dye traces because this type of
system is unlikely to be physically accessible. The laboratory study adapts
models of conduit formation in limestone karst aquifers to investigate how
conduit formation may affect the evolution of subglacial water pressure and
influence how fast glaciers move. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses field
investigations to provide new tools to interpret the results of dye tracing
techniques and uses laboratory models to understand how meltwater inputs might
increase subglacial water pressure and cause glaciers to slide faster. While
this research is important for understanding links between glacier hydrology and
motion, glacier caves are also visually stunning field sites that excite broad
audiences. Dr. Gulley will share his research with the general public by
contributing articles to international popular media outlets. In addition to
publishing about ice caves, he will co-present an annual lecture on glacier cave
safety and hazard recognition for the general public and cave guides in
Svalbard. During fieldwork in Svalbard, Dr. Gulley will exchange emails and
photographs and answer questions about the arctic with students at rural Eastern
Kentucky middle schools. Lastly, he will teach an undergraduate glaciology
course at the University of Cambridge.