* 0946598
* EAGER: Comparative Visualization
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Michael Gleicher, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2012
* USD 178,311.00

Visualization tools are an essential part of how many users work with complex
data. However, many of the tasks in a broad range of domains require comparing
complex objects (graphs, volumes, time series, molecular motions, etc.), and
while there exist a wealth of tools for visualizing individual objects there is
little support at present for comparing two or more of them. The PI argues that
the visual comparison of complex objects is best handled with visualization
tools and techniques specifically designed for that purpose, but the design of
such tools is challenging as it adds new issues to the more general
visualization problems, and the challenges increase as the visualization tasks
scale to larger or more complex objects, or to comparisons among larger numbers
of objects. While there are examples of comparative visualization tools,
existing solutions are highly specialized; they provide only limited help in
developing new tools, or in understanding the more general problem of
comparative visualization.

In this exploratory project, the PI will take the first steps toward development
of a science of comparative visualization. He will develop comparative
visualization systems as case studies, providing insights into the more general
problem as well as testbeds for new techniques and evaluation. He will develop a
concept framework of visual comparison to codify ideas and principles, and he
will develop new techniques that address issues common in comparative
visualizations. Specific techniques the PI intends to develop include
cartographic principles for informative display in 3D, mechanisms for the static
depiction of complex motions, generalized applications of registration,
interactive and automated view controls for juxtaposed displays, and generalized
methods for data abstraction. These techniques are all motivated by general
needs in comparative visualizations, and build upon prior technical developments
and visual principles.

Broader Impacts: By providing a general analysis of the issues involved, along
with principles and guidelines for the design of visualization tools, a taxonomy
and catalog of known solutions, and new techniques to address common problems, a
science of comparative visualization will allow developers to create better, and
possibly more general, tools, which will impact a wide range of disciplines in
science, engineering, and medicine.