* 0946603
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Behavioral Adaptations and Mobility of Early Holocene Hunter-Gatherers, Santa Cruz Island, California
* SBE,BCS
* 11/15/2009,10/31/2011
* Amy Gusick, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/2011
* USD 14,694.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Michael Glassow, Ms. Amy E. Gusick will conduct
archaeological research on the nature of mobility during the Early Holocene
(7500-10000 BP) on Santa Cruz Island. This island is one of four that comprise
the Northern Channel Islands, which are located in the Santa Barbara Channel
region of California. Though part of the same island chain, these islands differ
extensively in size, environment, and biodiversity; however, they all offer
abundant marine resources. As such, the human groups that lived on these islands
were maritime hunter-gatherer cultures with diets comprised of mainly marine
resources. Researchers have argued that the unique ecological context in which
maritime hunter-gatherers lived encouraged these groups to reduce their mobility
and reside at one locale, instead of migrating between various residential bases
located across the landscape. This type of sedentary lifestyle has been
associated with the development of socially and politically complex hunter-
gatherer societies. Ms. Gusick's research will focus on the earliest time period
in which a more sedentary lifestyle has been proposed for the hunter-gatherers
living on the Northern Channel Islands. While understanding mobility during
these earlier periods will not lead directly to determining the causes of social
and political complexity, it provides a baseline for understanding the
development of adaptations that influence the nature and timing of this
complexity.

Data previously collected from two of the Northern Channel Islands have been
used to suggest that Early Holocene island hunter-gatherers had one central
locale from which all foraging activity originated. Yet, data to support or
reject this hypothesis from Santa Cruz, the largest and most ecologically
diverse of the Northern Channel Islands, is lacking. Ecology and resource
distribution are major factors in the mobility and subsistence decisions that
affect group organization. Therefore, due to the pronounced environmental
variation between the Northern Channel Islands, broad hypotheses based on data
from other islands may not be appropriate for consideration of mobility on Santa
Cruz Island. Ms. Gusick's research will focus on identifying Early Holocene
mobility on Santa Cruz Island by collecting archaeological data through
excavation of the four identified Early Holocene deposits. Artifactual, faunal,
and floral assemblages will be analyzed to determine inter-site variation, site
functionality, habitat use, and paleoenvironment. This research is well
positioned to evaluate the possibility that groups may utilize varying mobility
strategies within the same region. Recognizing variation in behavior is an
important issue within anthropology, as generalization of adaptive behavior does
not account for local variants that can play a crucial role in cultural
development.

This project will have a positive impact on the Native American community, as
members will be involved with the project. Their participation will not only
promote dissemination of knowledge within their tribe, but it will also foster
relations between the scientific and Native American communities. Additionally,
all stages of this project will include undergraduate assistants and thus
provide instruction in field and laboratory techniques.