* 0946781
* Workshop:  Doctoral Consortium at the Medicine Meets Virtual Reality (MMVR) 2010 Conference
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2011
* Kanav Kahol, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 01/31/2011
* USD 25,715.00

Clinical simulation is emerging at the forefront of technologies for teaching
medical professionals without endangering patient safety. Because of tremendous
strides in computer graphics, haptics, bioengineering, human computer
interaction, and decision sciences, we are at the crux of an impending
revolution in the field of clinical simulations. This revolution will be fueled
by new researchers that focus in this area of specialization. The "Medicine
Meets Virtual Reality" (MMVR) conference series, established in 1992, has
evolved into an annual international event that promotes emerging data-centered
technologies for medical care and education. The conference is independent of
any professional association or institution; papers are selected on the basis of
peer review by a committee of scientists and physicians
(http://www.nextmed.com/mmvr_committee.html), and the conference proceedings are
published by IOS Press (http://www.iospress.nl). Conference attendees are
typically a mixture of computer scientists and engineers, physicians and
surgeons, medical educators and students, military medicine specialists, and
biomedical futurists. This makes for an audience that is interested in cutting
edge science and promotes cross-cutting interdisciplinary studies in the area of
clinical simulation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is funding to support a research
consortium (workshop) of approximately 12-15 promising doctoral students from
the United States and abroad, along with distinguished research faculty. The
event, the first of its kind to be associated with MMVR, will be held in
conjunction with the MMVR18 conference which will take place January 14-16,
2010, in Newport Beach, California. The goal of the workshop is to guide
students with their research theses, by providing specific feedback as well as
broader advice on the research environment and its international dimensions. The
workshop will take place on a single full day before the main conference begins.
Students will present and discuss their research and get constructive feedback
from a panel of about 6 leaders in the field, whose members include
approximately equal numbers of prominent research faculty and experienced
practitioners, and who represent multiple specialties and countries. At least
one panelist will have a close relationship with industry, so students can
acquire a better understanding of the commercial perspective. As an experimental
activity, the workshop organizers plan to support the students and their
academic pursuits beyond the conference, by developing a dedicated website along
with a listserv that will link workshop participants together so they can
continue to interact by sharing materials and interesting literature, discussing
common concerns, etc. Thus, the workshop will promote development of a network
of young researchers, which the organizers hope will serve as the basis for
future collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This workshop will
have both technical and societal impact. From a technical perspective, it will
serve to train and guide the next generation of researchers, who will address
the myriad research questions facing the clinical simulation community.
Computing and technology research has a major role to play in the need for a
more efficient healthcare system. Clinical simulation has emerged as a major
tool for the healthcare industry in training the next generation of medical
professionals, enabling healthcare institutes to make complex decisions and
provide state of the art clinical and ambulatory services. Training doctoral
students in computer science and related areas to conduct the necessary basic
research in clinical simulation is critical to the successful translation of
this basic research to tools and techniques used in the healthcare arena. The
workshop will have impact in the short term by providing young researchers with
an avenue to interact with leaders in the field and hone their skills; panelists
will provide timely feedback to students and help them shape their future
research directions. From a societal perspective, the workshop will further the
goals of designing human centered systems that enable patient safety, by laying
the foundation for research that is grounded and intricately designed from its
inception to address key research challenges facing the biomedical computing
community.