* 0946247
* Imagining an Engendered Archaeology of the North Atlantic
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2010
* Margaret ordonez, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 07/31/2010
* USD 42,994.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project supports
innovative research to introduce a little studied and poorly understood group
into Norse North Atlantic archaeological research - women. The research team
will start in Icelandic museum collections and a western Icelandic elite
archaeological site, to explore the potential for a larger project focused on
gender and the production and circulation of textiles from the Viking age to the
early 20th century. Through this research the team hopes to bring women's lives
and women's roles in the Icelandic economy, household organization, regional
politics, and culture into the forefront of contemporary archaeological research
in the North Atlantic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project consists of two
components: First, through collections-based research at the National Museum of
Iceland, the PIs will document the extent of existing archaeological textile
collections in hopes of determining how they they might be used in subsequent
analyses considering textile production and use through time on an island-wide
scale; Second, the research team will undertake two weeks of excavation at an
"elite" farm site in western Iceland, Gilsbakki, where preliminary
investigations in 2008 produced an unexpected number of remarkably well-
preserved textile remains from well-stratified deposits dating from the 13th-
early 20th centuries. Excavations in 2009 will take the archaeologically exposed
existing trenches down to sterile soil to understand the site's full potential -
its time depth and sequence, its preservation conditions, and whether textiles
are preserved throughout the entire sequence or are concentrated in particular
deposits. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;By combining information on a well-
contextualized sample of textiles from this single site that was occupied over
the entire Icelandic time sequence with an island-wide perspective gained from
the Museum collections, the PIs will be better able to assess how to bring
Icelandic women and women's work to the forefront in North Atlantic research.
This project will use Icelandic womens' material remains as an entree for
reintroducing an interpretation of women's lives into archaeological research
programs across the North and contribute to global discussions about the hidden
roles of women in traditional societies and their roles in guiding change and
preserving tradition.