* 0946214
* EAGER: Assessing Comparative Research of Social Coordination on Russian Arctic Gas Development
* GEO,OPP
* 03/01/2010,02/29/2012
* Arthur Mason, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 02/29/2012
* USD 145,874.00

This EAGER project explores whether a new conceptual model of social
coordination, developed by PI Arthur Mason using data from North American energy
companies, can effectively identify new forms of innovation for assessing
uncertainty in Russian arctic natural gas development. Previous research in
organizational anthropology by PI Arthur Mason illuminates the ways in which
North American energy companies culturally define uncertainty in U.S. and
Canadian arctic natural gas development; these include (1) reliance on redefined
relations between government and industry; (2) reliance on consultant expertise;
(3) reliance on future descriptions that catalyze perceptions about risk. The PI
theorizes that these three contexts establish "communities of interpretation"
among government and industry leaders for how industry operates and thus have
implications for the way society will produce, control, allocate and use arctic
energy resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order for the PI to test his
hypothesis of "communities of interpretation" across the Arctic there is the
need to gain access and explore these ideas among Russian energy companies. This
EAGER project will facilitate (1) identifying access to written empirical data
on Russian arctic natural gas development, including history of technology
transfers, energy demand forecasting, energy policy, market integration and
liberalization (2) identifying access to collaborative and field research
opportunities in Russia among government officials, industry leaders, community
stakeholders and academic institutions. The research addresses a major formative
force of our time, the politics of energy markets, and the way emerging
transnational networks of expertise are embroiled in the constitution of
imagined futures that impact on developments in the energy sector. The research
project will potentially determine the effectiveness of applying core
anthropological theories and methods to new and challenging research fields
often associated with other disciplines.