* 0946765
* Critical Emergent Design Issues in Wind Energy Production:  Guidelines for Maximizing the Economic Impact of Wind Turbine Arrays
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2011
* Achille Messac, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Christina L. Bloebaum
* 07/31/2011
* USD 89,988.00

This research objective of this EAGER award is to develop design guidelines for
wind energy systems by identifying the optimal conditions for maximum power-
extraction at different scales of the turbulent flow, and different
topographical settings. This research will explore critical aspects of wind
energy systems. While this exploration is progressing nationally with deliberate
speed, the proposed research is intended to fill a critical interdisciplinary
void that falls at the nexus of design, economics, fluids, structures, and
dynamics. The proposed research explores the impact of wind turbine arrays
design on power efficiency, which will contribute to the development of design
guidelines. This effort addresses critical design issues that are beyond the
scope of the fluids community. In particular, we will quantify the impact of
primordial external parameters (e.g., interaction between wind turbine,
topography, location, size, arrangements and turbine blade pitching angle). The
research provides the much-needed understanding of how these wind turbine arrays
interact among themselves, and how they can optimally extract energy under
highly uncertain conditions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the timely
release of the results of this research will provide a design guide in the
rapidly progressing research and development of wind energy production
nationally. In addition, following the NSF-Alliance for Graduate Education and
the Professoriate (NSF-AGEP) model for minority students under which one PI
undertook his graduate studies, several activities will be set in place to
further increase the number of scientist in STEM fields. NSF-AGEP goals are to
increase the number of underrepresented minorities in academia. The PIs will
recruit 5 undergraduate students from Puerto Rico and RPI to participate in a
research-intensive summer program during the year of this research. These
students and one graduate student will gain exposure to the field of
engineering/wind energy with state-of-the-art technologies (modeling).