* 0946326
* EAGER:   Development of the PARE approach for genome-wide profiling of mRNA decay in Arabidopsis
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Pamela Green, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 07/31/2012
* USD 299,712.00

The regulation of genes can occur at many steps, some of which are routinely
investigated thousands or tens of thousands at a time using genomic approaches.
Many of these methods focus on mRNA because intact mRNA is essential for gene
function. This project will expand the capabilities of PARE (Parallel Analysis
of RNA Ends), a new genomics method that allows gene regulation to be studied by
examining pieces of mRNA molecules that cells are throwing away. Sifting through
this cellular trash, millions of molecules at a time, will be a powerful way to
identify new types of regulation that were missed previously. PARE was
previously very successful for detecting mRNAs whose destruction was caused by
regulators called miRNAs. This work will develop PARE for detection of a much
broader range of mRNA pieces using the reference plant Arabidopsis. The patterns
of mRNA pieces produced in different tissues and when plants are exposed to
adverse environmental conditions will also be investigated. This should result
in the identification of genes that are controlled at the level of mRNA
destruction by drought, high temperature and more. The work should represent a
major advance because the cellular trash from mRNA destruction has been very
difficult to study previously and PARE is broadly applicable as discussed
below.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of the proposed
research&lt;br/&gt;The development of PARE as a next-generation technology for
the study of gene regulation will be far-reaching in many ways. The use of PARE
to the study environmental stress responses, may suggest new ways to make plants
stress-resistant. It will also help interpret existing data from other
approaches that can not separate intact mRNAs from mRNA pieces. More
importantly, because mRNA and its destruction are critical in all organisms from
bacteria to man, this project will make it possible to use PARE in all of these
systems to study how mRNA destruction is regulated under any condition. The data
will be made publicly available worldwide on our user-friendly websites with
tools for its analysis. A postdoctoral associate will be mentored under the
project, and it should also lead to new collaborations and expose other
scientists and potentially the general public to the work.