* 0946293
* Troposphere, Ionosphere, GPS, and Interferometric Radar (TIGIR) Workshop Proposal; Sepember 21-22, 2009 in Pasadena, CA
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2010
* Charles Meertens, UNAVCO, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 09/30/2010
* USD 20,250.00

The PIs will convene a workshop to bring together experts and stake-holders
in&lt;br/&gt;synthetic aperture radar and GNSS systems, the data processing and
the products they&lt;br/&gt;generate. The workshop will examine the wide range
of different approaches that have&lt;br/&gt;been developed to understand and
mitigate the atmospheric ?noise? in SAR signals, and&lt;br/&gt;establish the
current best-practices in atmospheric imaging and mitigation
techniques,&lt;br/&gt;generate priorities for further investigations, and
recommendations for upcoming&lt;br/&gt;missions for how best to maximize the
utility of the data products they will produce.&lt;br/&gt;Ionospheric and
tropospheric imaging using SAR and GNSS and stochastic
and&lt;br/&gt;deterministic modeling have great potential for correcting media
effects on space&lt;br/&gt;geodetic systems, however, although many of these
approaches have shown promise in&lt;br/&gt;particular circumstances,
effectiveness and general applicability are yet to be&lt;br/&gt;demonstrated.
Small amplitude, non-linear and non-periodic ground motion
signals&lt;br/&gt;abound in geodesy from a wide range of sources, and InSAR
holds great promise for&lt;br/&gt;giving us new insights into these types of
physical phenomena. For a wide spectrum of&lt;br/&gt;the signals we might hope
to explore, however, the delays induced in the SAR signals by&lt;br/&gt;the
ionosphere and the troposphere overprint and confuse the interpretation
of&lt;br/&gt;interferograms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop is multi-
disciplinary bringing together atmospheric&lt;br/&gt;and solid earth
researchers, operational centers and technologists to find ways
to&lt;br/&gt;understand and mitigate the effects of the atmosphere on new
satellite SAR systems.&lt;br/&gt;Coupled with the compelling hazards research
applications of SAR and GPS, this&lt;br/&gt;workshop provides an excellent venue
to engage students. Two students and one career&lt;br/&gt;researcher will be
recruited from a pool of protégés from UNAVCO and UCAR?s&lt;br/&gt;RESESS and
SOARS summer internship program. These two programs have operated
in&lt;br/&gt;partnership for many years providing research opportunities for
students from&lt;br/&gt;underrepresented groups. In addition, a workshop report
of the results and outcomes of&lt;br/&gt;the workshop and statement of
recommendations for upcoming SAR missions will be&lt;br/&gt;generated after the
meeting and disseminated via the UNAVCO website.