* 0946883
* Acquisition of a Multi-User EPR Spectrometer to Enhance Research and Teaching at Universities in the State of Kansas and Outreach Partner Universities in the Region
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2012
* Craig Lunte, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 12/31/2012
* USD 323,850.00

With this award from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities:
Departmental Multi-User Instrumentation program (CRIF:MU), Professors Joseph A.
Heppert, Mikhail V. Barybin and Timothy Jackson from the Department of Chemistry
at the University of Kansas will acquire an Electron Paramagnetic Resonance
(EPR) spectrometer. The instrument will be used to support research activities
such: 1) characterization of manganese complexes involved in environmentally-
friendly oxidation reactions; (2) azulene-based organometallics as platforms for
molecular charge transport systems; (3) design of metal- and anion-binding
supramolecular scaffolds; (4) characterization of heme and non-heme iron
proteins involved in heme and iron sequestration in bacteria; (5) de novo design
of heme proteins; and (6) identification of reactive oxygen species involved in
the regulation of hypoxia inducible factors. In addition, the spectrometer will
be available to researchers at other universities such as Kansas State, Wichita
State, Emporia State, Northeastern State, and Prairie View A&M University.

An EPR spectrometer yields detailed information of the geometric and electronic
structure of molecular and solid state materials. It may also be used to obtain
information about the lifetimes of free radicals, short-lived, highly reactive
species involved in valuable chemical transformations as well as the initiation
of pathological tumor growth. These studies will impact a number of areas, from
the synthesis of organic molecules to the development of new solid state
materials to the imaging of biological tissues. Employing examples inspired from
ongoing research, this instrument will be an integral part of teaching at the
undergraduate and graduate levels at the University of Kansas and collaborating
universities.