* 0946397
* Scalable Array Packaging for Optoelectronic Components
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Nasser Peyghambarian, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2012
* USD 500,000.00

Array Packaging for Optoelectronic Components&lt;br/&gt;ERC Innovation Program
A. 2&lt;br/&gt;PI, Nasser Peyghambarian, University of Arizona&lt;br/&gt;Connie
Chang-Hasnain and Ming Wu, EECS, University of California,
Berkeley&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of the Engineering Research Center for
Integrated Access Networks (CIAN), this project will investigate scalable and
novel packaging for optoelectronic components, e.g. vertical cavity surface
emitting laser (VCSEL) and tunable filter arrays. This will fill a major need to
enable research groups focusing on novel devices to bring forth components
suitable for advanced characterization in systems and testbeds. The funding will
support a research engineer with expertise and experience of industrial practice
and innovation in optoelectronics and optical micro-electro-mechanical systems
(MEMS). The particular candidate identified for this position is Dr. S. Patra,
with 16 years of industry experience in process development and transfer. He
will bring critical skill base to enhance Thrust III's capability to deliver
advance proof-of-concept devices to test beds, and translate research ideas into
system architecture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the optoelectronic components
industry, the package cost accounts for 60 to 80% of current manufacturing
expenses in component assembly, while it is only 10% in electronic components.
To deploy the novel photonic and optoelectronic components proposed here in
access networks in CIAN, one must address the packaging cost. The planned
strategy is, first, to treat packaging as part of the device design rather than
an afterthought; and, second, to pursue chip-scale packaging whenever possible.
Chip-scale packaging is now widely employed in IC and MEMS industries to reduce
footprint and packaging cost. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project includes two
major components of wafer-level, low-cost, hermetic packaging. The first one
includes the process and package of a high-speed VCSEL array and the second with
in-plane waveguide arrays. The challenge for the first project is the need of
multiple chips requiring vertical alignments, while for the second is on
requiring alignment of both facets of a chip. This covers the most challenging
parts of fiber coupling problems: surface-emitting 2D array and coupling of both
facets of edge-emitting devices. With solutions to both topologies, the
developed results will be readily extended to all optoelectronic devices. Dr.
Patra has significant industrial experiences on both types of packaging,
particularly on thermal, mechanical and electric designs of optoelectronic
packages. His leadership will help to prepare the graduate students to include
packaging considerations into device and material designs and to work at the
intersection. The key scientific goals and intellectual merit of this proposal
is to develop a scalable process and bring forth a common platform to assemble
diverse optoelectronic devices, requiring optical coupling in both surface-
normal and in-plane directions, a range of electrical signal frequencies and
operating conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts will be in
effectively bridging the gap between optoelectronic devices and systems by
providing a universal packaging platform. The proposed work will facilitate
researchers to collaborate more readily within the Center and with industry. The
new processes will be fundamental and can be readily extended to all edge-
emitting and surface-emitting optoelectronic devices. This work will be
important for low-cost, high through-put manufacturing of arrays of
optoelectronic devices. The purpose of the CIAN Photonics Testbed is to be the
first research facility to target cross-disciplinary research on communications
systems spanning from fundamental devices to subsystems to systems. With the
packaging know-how brought forth by Dr. Patra, the devices invented by Thrust 3
researchers will be able to participate more actively in the testbed. As CIAN
sponsors REU students and high school outreach programs, this proposed work will
provide better preparation for undergraduate and high school students with real
world practices and research experiences.