* 0946060
* SBIR Phase I:  Ultra-high-speed 3-D imaging
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* Benjamin Braker, Chiaro Technologies LLC
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2010
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will demonstrate
the feasibility of a new three-dimensional (3-D) imaging technology capable of
non-contact high resolution 3-D surface shape measurement at rates up to five
orders of magnitude faster than existing techniques. Technology for measuring
shapes of 3-D surfaces is used in many applications, but state-of-the-art non-
contact 3D metrology systems have relatively slow acquisition speeds and are
susceptible to errors due to object discontinuities as well as lighting and
reflectivity variations. The technology developed in this project will
dramatically advance metrology-class 3-D imaging speeds from a few frames per
second to several million frames per second (MHz) while providing metrological
accuracy. The Phase I effort will demonstrate several novel enabling
technologies including pattern projection and image acquisition on microsecond
time scales, and an efficient metrological 3-D image reconstruction algorithm
that is robust for a wide range of lighting conditions, scene compositions, and
surface properties. The results of these research activities will lead to a
complete system design for an ultra-high-speed 3-D imaging system.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project lies in its capacity to
boost productivity, increase security and safety, improve medical care, and
improve the lives of handicapped individuals. Markets with unmet needs for high-
speed 3-D surface imaging include aerospace and automotive design, testing, and
manufacturing; machine component testing and structural analysis; facial
recognition of moving targets; machine vision for robotic navigation; ballistics
testing; aviation and automotive collision analysis; 3-D image-guided surgery;
treatment of orthopedic injuries; vision aids for the blind; and many others.
While commercial 3-D imaging systems do not currently offer the combination of
speed, portability, accuracy, and robustness required for many of these
applications, the proposed technology will be able to meet these needs. In
addition to its commercial market value, this technology will allow scientists
and engineers to make new discoveries by studying dynamic systems and phenomena
in 3-D with spatial and temporal resolution never before available.