* 0946685
* Multiple migration strategies in sympatric Painted Buntings - behavioral plasticity or genetic divergence?
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Jeffrey Kelly, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 08/31/2013
* USD 285,453.00

Migration is a way for animals to take advantage of predictable changes in food
availability. It is unclear how migrants will respond to the changes in the
seasonality of food abundance that are caused by global change. Predicting how
global change will affect migrant populations requires knowing how unique
migration strategies arise and persist, which in turn requires an intense focus
on populations where multiple migration strategies exist. However, local
populations that harbor such variation are extremely rare. One such population
exists in Painted Buntings (Passerina ciris). Based on chemical analyses of
feathers, it appears that about half the birds molt in a single dry location
while a significant minority appear to initiate molt in a more moist location.
This project will track the locations of individual birds through their annual
cycle by using a small geolocation device (0.7g). The project will reveal
factors that enable different migration strategies to co-exist within
populations and it will evaluate the carry-over impacts of these strategies on
the reproductive success of migrants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The tiny geolocators
developed for this project will improve scientific research by greatly expanding
the range of animal body sizes for which it is possible to track movements. A
Ph.D. student will be trained to pioneer the combined use of stable isotope
ratios and geolocators to track migrants while gaining significant international
experience. The project will also provide significant training opportunities for
a Post-doc and a second graduate student. The researchers will expand their
ongoing educational collaborations with public schools and local zoos to include
technological aspects of animal tracking and Painted Bunting
migration.&lt;br/&gt;