* 0946932
* Workshop on Polymers in Complex Systems: Santa Fe, NM; October 18 - 21, 2009
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Dvora Perahia, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2010
* USD 4,875.00

TECHNICAL ABSTRACT:

This workshop will bring together computational scientists with theorists and
experimentalists to discuss current challenges in polymers incorporated in
complex environments and derive new directions that will allow the design of
responsive polymer based complexes, with emphasis on the potential contributions
of multi scale computational studies.

The current and potential applications of polymers in compounded systems and
complex fluids span a remarkable range from plastics that require well defined
mechanical properties to drug delivery systems and single molecule sensors. The
significance of these materials results in immense efforts that include
synthesis and structure properties relations. While many experimental and
theoretical aspects have been determined, one of the missing links to obtain a
comprehensive understanding of the structure property relations is a
simultaneous insight into hierarchal phenomena that span the large time and
length scales. Computational studies can probe the rich variety of length and
time scales relevant for establishing predictive models. The proposed workshop
will bring together computational scientists with experimentalists whose
research focuses on different aspects of polymers to derive future directions in
polymer complex systems with the long term goal of deriving predictive models
for structure-properties relations.

NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT:

The proposed workshop will directly impact the development of new materials that
consist of polymer complexes. It will provide guidelines to the development of a
systematic approach that brings together the input of computational studies with
experimental observations to develop new materials with well defined
characteristics.

As part of the general contribution to broadening participation, in particular
in polymer physics, a special effort will be made to integrate and highlight the
contributions of underrepresented groups in the field. Each of the sessions will
include at least one invited lecture by female scientists and a third of the
discussion leaders will be female scientists. This representation from senior to
the most junior participants may contribute toward enhancing the overall
representation of women in the field.