* 0946132
* SBIR Phase I: Computational Enzyme Design for the Production of Butadiene
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Daniela Grabs, ARZEDA Corp.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2010
* USD 149,237.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project proposes engineering
novel biocatalysts for the production of butadiene. High value, renewable
chemicals have the potential to become economic drivers for integrated
biorefineries. Currently, effectively exploiting biomass is limited by the low
specificity of chemical processes and the low catalytic diversity of naturally
occurring dehydratases. We will apply a unique and groundbreaking enzyme design
technology harnessing computational power to rapidly screen and design novel
dehydratases not existing in nature. An ideal dehydratase active site targeting
the substrate will be generated and grafted into a large library of proteins.
The library will be computationally optimized for high substrate affinity and
specificity, with top enzyme models selected for experimental characterization
and assayed for catalytic activity. The anticipated result of this SBIR Phase 1
research project is a novel enzyme that converts 2,3-butandiol into butadiene in
the test tube. Ultimately, this project will lead to a fermentation process to
convert cellulosic sugars directly into butadiene, a higher value, renewable
chemical.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project will enable integrated biorefineries to more effectively use biomass,
diversify revenue streams and potentially reduce hazardous waste. Our proposed
approach, which uses the only proven technology for the design of novel
catalytic machineries, will lead to new dehydratases for the production of
commercially high value renewable chemicals. Directed evolution, the current
state of the art, cannot address the enormous combinatorial complexity inherent
in generating novel enzymes. Butadiene is an existing building block used in a
wide variety of applications, resulting in a multibillion-dollar market ($5.56M
in 2008). Bio-butadiene can be used directly as a renewable drop-in chemical in
these existing applications and, therefore, offers an attractive and immediate
opportunity to help built a stable and profitable biorefinery industry.
Furthermore, the knowledge gained in this project will be leveraged to generate
a panel of dehydratase enzymes for the production of other renewable chemicals,
thereby opening up the opportunity to access new markets and develop new and
innovative products. This technology will help address many of the pressing
needs of the biorefinery industry: Develop new biofuels,increase profitability,
and accelerate growth through efficient and effective conversion of biomass.