* 0946647
* Financial Frictions and Economic Development: A Quantitative Exploration
* SBE,SES
* 05/18/2009,06/30/2012
* Yongseok Shin, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Niloy Bose
* 06/30/2012
* USD 236,355.00

Financial Frictions and Economic Development: A Quantitative Exploration SBE-SES
0820318: PI Shin (U of Wisconsin); Co-PI Buera (NBER, subaward)

Understanding the sources of cross-country differences in economic development
is a central question in the social sciences. Recent empirical research has
provided some answers: Cross-country income differences are mainly explained by
the low total factor productivity in developing countries, particularly in
producing investment/tradable goods. Misallocation of resources across
production units is an important source of their low productivity. Well-
functioning financial markets are an important institution missing in these
countries. This project constructs a unified framework where financial frictions
and resource misallocation are explicitly modeled and their impact on economic
development is quantitatively evaluated.

This project first analyzes how financial frictions lead to resource
misallocation, and how some industrial sectors are more vulnerable to financial
frictions than others. It is shown that a model incorporating sectoral
differences in the scale of establishments explains why developing countries are
particularly unproductive in producing investment/tradable goods. This model has
implications on the patterns of establishment size distribution across countries
and across sectors. Such model predictions are tested against establishment-
level data. As part of this project, a comprehensive data set on the size
distribution of establishments in developing (e.g. Mexico and India) and
developed countries (e.g. the US) is put together, to be shared with other
researchers.

The project also studies dynamic effects of an economic reform that partially
eliminates distortions in the economy. It is shown that the interaction between
financial frictions and resource misallocation is crucial in understanding
growth experiences of developing countries that are incompatible with standard
theories. Consistent with the data, the model generates a slow transition to a
higher state of economic development, low interest and investment rates in the
early stages of development, and endogenous productivity dynamics.

Finally, this project studies how the interaction between international and
domestic financial markets determines economic development. The model is used
for studying the transition dynamics following liberalizations of cross-border
production factor flows, which are an important part of growth-enhancing reform
packages in many developing countries. In particular, it addresses the puzzling
observation that countries going through a period of output and productivity
growth tend to export capital, contradicting the standard theory. In addition,
other dimensions of factor flows are explained, such as foreign direct
investment flowing from developed to developing countries while entrepreneurial
talent moves in the opposite direction (brain drain) at the same time.

More broadly, this project is related to the literature that places institutions
at the center of economic development: Financial frictions in this project are
modeled as arising from imperfect enforcement of contracts, an important topic
in the broader institutions literature. In this context, this project sets an
example of how to quantitatively analyze the mechanisms through which
institutions determine economic development. This project is also useful for the
design and execution of public policies. By applying its quantitative framework,
one can answer important questions on economic reforms: How soon will reforms
start to pay off? How fast will economic growth trickle down to the poor? What
are the optimal policies on international factor mobility?