* 0946464
* PTC Recognition in Human Nonsense-Mediated mRNA Decay
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2013
* Jens Lykke-Andersen, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Martha Peterson
* 03/31/2013
* USD 646,816.00

The information that controls the growth and function of cells in our body is
contained within the genes of our chromosomes. Most genes direct the production
of messenger RNAs (mRNAs) by the process of transcription. mRNAs in turn serve
as templates for translation into proteins. However, before mRNAs are translated
into proteins they need to undergo several processing events, including the
removal of non-coding segments called introns by the process of splicing.
Sometimes when mRNAs are processed, mistakes happen that cause the mRNAs to
encode aberrantly shortened protein products. This can be deleterious to cells,
as even small amounts of shortened protein products can in some cases block the
process in which the full-length protein normally functions. However, eukaryotic
cells have evolved a machinery to identify and degrade such aberrant mRNAs, thus
preventing the production of deleterious shortened protein products. This
machinery is called the nonsense-mediated mRNA decay pathway, or for short, NMD.
NMD is also important for preventing the translation into protein of so-called
pseudogenes, which are genes that used to encode proteins, but during evolution
have been mutated and become inactivated. The mechanism by which the NMD pathway
identifies aberrant mRNAs from those that are normal is mysterious and highly
debated. In this project, it will be studied how normal mRNAs have evolved to
evade degradation by the NMD machinery, and how the NMD machinery cooperates
with the translation process to identify and degrade aberrant
mRNAs.&lt;br/&gt;This project will train a female graduate student and a
postdoctoral researcher, as well as one or more undergraduate students in state-
of-the-art molecular biology research. The project is an integral part of the
principal investigator's undergraduate and graduate teaching in Molecular
Biology at the University of California San Diego, for which new interactive
teaching methods will be developed to help convey to college students the
importance of the scientific method for both scientific research and for our
society.