* 0946620
* GRADUATE STUDENT PARTICIPATION IN THE 14TH INTERNATIONAL HEAT TRANSFER CONFERENCE: Aug 8-13, 2009 in Washington, DC
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2011
* Jungho Kim, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 07/31/2011
* USD 15,000.00

0946620&lt;br/&gt;Kim&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will provide funds for
graduate students to attend the Fourteenth International Heat Transfer
Conference in Washington D.C. on August 8-13, 2010. Over 1000 participants are
expected to attend, and up to 46 students, who are co-authors of conference
papers, will be supported. The financial support will be used to establish a
reduced student registration fee at the conference, relative to the regular
registration fee.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The International Heat Transfer
Conference includes a broad range of topics, from biological heat transfer to
turbulence. Emerging areas such as novel energy conversion devices,
environmental heat transfer, and nanomaterials will also be included. The co-
sponsors of the conference include the American Nuclear Society, the American
Institute of Chemical Engineering, the Canadian Society of Mechanical
Engineering, and the American Institute of Aeronautics and
Astronautics.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Active participation of a diverse cadre
of students from a variety of backgrounds will be enabled. Students eligible for
the reduced registration fee will primarily be co-authors of papers or posters
presented at the conference. Students from underrepresented groups will be
actively recruited to attend the conference. The venue will provide a unique
opportunity for students to interact with researchers from the global heat
transfer community.