* 0946659
* U.S.-India Planning Visit: Experimental and Numerical Analysis of Compressed Earth Block Structures
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2010
* Craig Foster, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 09/30/2010
* USD 9,469.00

0946659&lt;br/&gt;Foster Temple &lt;br/&gt;This award supports a planning visit
for early career researcher, Dr. Craig Foster, University of Chicago and a
graduate student to study the mechanical behavior of compressed earth block
(CEB). They will collaborate with civil engineer, Dr. Venkatarama Reddy, Indian
Institute of Sciences (IISc), Bangalore to establish an ongoing experimental and
modeling program for improving the understanding and performance of CEB
structures. As a low cost material with high thermal mass, CEB has gained
interest in developing countries and in the US sustainability community;
however, much remains to be understood about the structural behavior of these
materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits&lt;br/&gt;The merits of
this research include an improved understanding of compressed earth block and
masonry in general. This understanding includes knowledge of failure modes, and
how failure progresses through a CEB structural system. Secondly, the program
will aid in the development of numerical techniques for structures with
propagating fractures. In particular, the propagation of fractures where the
material may fail either at an interface or in the bulk material will be
explored. Eventually this understanding will be applied to design codes for CEB
structures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;There
are several ways in which this project will create broader benefits to society.
First, by setting up video equipment, the laboratory facilities will be
improved. Digital films of tests may be saved, reexamined, and distributed to
partners across the globe. The distribution is one way in which international
partnerships will be improved. The communications during the visit, the hands on
experiments with the material, and the site visits will help build understanding
of the needs and approaches in India and the U.S., and will foster cross-
fertilization of ideas.