* 0946858
* CRIF:MU  Acquisition of a Benchtop Electrospray Ionization Time of Flight Mass Spectrometer
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2012
* Angel Kaifer, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 12/31/2012
* USD 308,800.00

With this award from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities:
Departmental Multi-User Instrumentation program (CRIF:MU), Professor V.
Ramamurthy and colleagues Burjor Captain, Angel E. Kaifer, Francisco M. Raymo
and Norito Takenaka of the University of Miami will acquire a liquid
chromatography electrospray ionization mass spectrometer. Research activities
that will be facilitated by the new instrumentation include investigations of
supramolecular photochemistry and electrochemistry, studies of molecular self-
assembly, elucidation of protein signaling pathways, development of helical
chiral asymmetric catalysts, synthesis of hydrogen-storing metal clusters and
investigations of luminescent switches for fluorescent
spectroscopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a liquid chromatograph interfaced mass
spectrometer, the chromatograph separates a mixture into its molecular
components. These flow into the mass spectrometer where they are ionized by an
electrospray technique. The mass spectrometer measures the molecular mass of
each component and its fragments. This facilitates determination of the
structure of the constituents of the mixture. The electrospray ionization
technique allows large nonvolatile molecules such as proteins and supramolecular
clusters to be analyzed directly from the liquid phase. This acquisition will
benefit undergraduate and graduate students through research programs in the
department and will allow the introduction of this modern analytical technique
into undergraduate chemistry laboratories. &lt;br/&gt;