* 0946629
* Origin and Evolution of the Absolute and Relative Highly Siderophile Element Abundances Present in the Early Earth
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2010,02/28/2014
* Igor Puchtel, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 02/28/2014
* USD 292,753.00

Intellectual Merit. This project is designed to constrain the origin and
temporal evolution of the absolute and relative abundances of highly siderophile
elements (HSE: Re, Os, Ir, Ru, Pt, Pd) in the early Archean mantle. This task is
crucial for understanding fundamental planetary processes including Earth's
primary differentiation, late accretion, and subsequent chemical evolution. The
study focuses on ultramafic magmas (komatiites) from the Barberton Greenstone
Belt (BGB), which preserved relicts of the very early stages of the Earth's
evolution at a time when its mantle was less modified by processes of melt
extraction, re-fertilization via crustal recycling, and core-mantle interaction.
The BGB komatiites have unique chemical compositions, including extremely high
MgO contents and a variety of LREE- and HREE-depleted/enriched signatures that
clearly distinguish them from younger komatiites and imply very specific
conditions of their magma generation. A total of ca. 150 chemically well
characterized komatiite whole rock samples and olivine and chromite separates
from the 3.48 Ga Komati, 3.30 Ga Weltevreden, and 3.30 Ga Mendon Formations of
the BGB will be examined for high-precision absolute HSE abundances and
186,187Os/188Os isotope systematics. Well-preserved samples, ranging from Al-
depleted to Al-enriched compositions, either are already in hand, or will be
provided by collaborators; additional samples will become available through the
ICDP Barberton Drilling Project, of which the PI is an active participant.
Absolute and relative HSE abundances will be estimated for the mantle sources of
the three respective komatiite systems at UMd. Together with lithophile trace
element and isotopic data, these HSE data will be compared with high precision
HSE data for chondritic meteorites, primitive upper mantle, lunar impact melts,
and Archean komatiite systems to evaluate secular variations in the composition
of the Archean komatiite mantle sources, and to develop models regarding the
origin and evolution of HSE in the mantle. Extant hypotheses include [1]
additions of HSE as a result of continuous accretion of planetesimals, [2] high
pressure metal-silicate equilibration under the magma ocean conditions, and [3]
subsequent modifications resulting from mass transfer in subduction zone
environments and recycling of oceanic lithosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts. Outreach efforts of this project will foster collaborations between
scientists from four continents, including the PI and Christophe Robin, a Ph.D.
student of Nick Arndt (Univ. Grenoble), and members of the ICDP Barberton
Drilling Project. It also will involve a UMd undergraduate student. Support for
this research will help sustain the IGL's mission to share and collaborate
world-wide, especially with those lacking access to necessary analytical
facilities. Due to the unique nature of the Barberton region, it is currently
being nominated as a UNESCO World Heritage Site. This project will provide added
scientific support for this motion to protect and preserve the natural heritage
of the area.