* 0946580
* EAGER: Developing Measures of Cultural Variation and Change in the Faroe Islands
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2010
* Richard Mcelreath, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 07/31/2010
* USD 23,355.00

Dr. Richard Mcelreath (University of California - Davis) will use this Early
Concept Grant for Exploratory Research to conduct preliminary research in the
Faroe Islands to refine context-specific measures of cultural diversity. These
measures are needed in order to describe patterns of variation to test different
theoretical models of cultural dynamics underlying how human beings learn and
adapt to new conditions. The Faroe Islands present a natural experiment in
cultural diversification. The people of the Faroe are ethnically homogenous but
internally diverse, exhibiting variation among both villages and islands.
Accurately sampling this diversity at the individual level, in addition to
individual social networks, will allow for the testing of different dynamic
models of cultural processes. Exploratory domains of variation to be sampled on
this project include dialect, political beliefs, ecological beliefs, and health-
relevant beliefs.

Over two months of field research, the researcher will conduct initial sampling,
translation, and validation of interview and dialect recording. The initial
samples will allow estimation of amounts of variation, which will help determine
later larger sampling strategies. In addition, individual two-degree social
networks will be collected, to characterize the immediate social influences of
each informant. Dialect variation will be characterized with vowel formants.

Whether in the Faroe Islands or elsewhere, the dynamics of cultural diversity
depend in part on how individuals learn and how society is structured. Learning
strategies influence the acquisition of new information and beliefs, biasing
from whom people learn and how social and individual experience interact. Social
structure, at the small scale, influences the diversity of behavior that is
presented to each individual, and, at the large scale, it influences rates of
mixing among diverse local cultures. Theories that combine different kinds of
learning and social structure can produce a wide array of cultural dynamics.
Making these models empirically relevant requires estimates of the strengths of
different learning biases and demographic rates. This research will contribute
to a broadly relevant body of theory, showing how it can be applied to specific
ethnographic contexts.