* 0946543
* EAGER: Mapping the Distribution and Interaction of Multi-Adsorbates at Metal  Oxide-Water Interfaces Using EC-STM/STS
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,01/31/2011
* Xiaoguang Meng, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Debra Reinhart
* 01/31/2011
* USD 99,763.00

0946543&lt;br/&gt;Meng&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal objective of this
research is to establish a novel method for in-situ mapping and identification
of multi-adsorbates on metal oxide surfaces using electrochemical scanning
tunneling microscopy (EC-STM) and scanning tunneling spectroscopy (STS). A
multi-adsorbate system containing arsenate, phosphate, calcium, and hematite
will be used as a model competitive adsorption system because phosphate and
calcium significantly influence the adsorption of arsenic by iron oxides in the
environment and in water treatment systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research is based on the hypotheses that adsorbed anions and cations can have
various distributions and interactions on metal oxide surfaces, such as patch
and mixed distributions, preferential adsorption to different surface hydroxyl
groups, formation of surface and three dimensional clusters, electrostatic
repulsion among adsorbed anions, cation-bridging of anionic surface species, and
surface-induced hydrogen bonds. Currently, there are no technologies to
determine these fundamental surface features, which limit our ability to develop
multi-component adsorption models for prediction of the fate and transport of
pollutants in the environment and the adsorption capacity of adsorbents in water
treatment systems. The surface analysis methods established in this study will
enable scientists and engineers to investigate competitive adsorption of
pollutants and co-existing compounds on mineral and adsorbent surfaces, chemical
reactions on catalyst (such as titanium dioxides) and nano-material surfaces,
and poisoning of catalysts by irreversible adsorption of co-existing compounds
in solutions, at molecular levels. Understanding the distribution and
interaction of adsorbed multi-component species will lead to the development of
new adsorption models and invention of more effective adsorbents and catalysts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project integrates cutting-edge research and broader
education of graduate, undergraduate, and pre-college students, and
underrepresented groups. A graduate student will be trained by performing the
proposed research under the PI?s supervision. An undergraduate student will
participate in some of the research through a Stevens Summer Scholarship
program. The PI and graduate research assistant will demonstrate the EC-STM
imaging process to undergraduate students in the EN375LA Environmental
Engineering Laboratory class and to middle and high school students and school
teachers through existing outreach programs. The PI will integrate the research
findings into the course materials of EN 551 Environmental Chemistry of Soils
and Natural Surfaces. The key findings will be published in scientific journals
and reported at scientific and non-scientific meetings.