* 0946376
* EAGER: Gaze Click: A New Procedure for Assessing Cognitive Competence in Pre- and Non-Verbal Populations
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Francys Subiaul, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 08/31/2012
* USD 199,873.00

This project seeks to develop a new paradigm for the purpose of studying
cognition in pre- and non-verbal populations. Specifically, studies will compare
the individual- and observational-learning abilities of pre-verbal human infants
and non-verbal monkeys using an entirely new experimental paradigm that combines
eye-tracking and 'gaze-click' technology. Gaze click effectively allows non-
verbal participants to make responses on a computerized task using either eye
blinks or gaze fixation that are equivalent to a mouse click or physical
response. This will free participants from having to plan and coordinate a
specific motor response. Using this technology, infants and monkeys will be
trained to respond in a specific order to three simultaneously presented picture
items (e.g., apple, boy, cat) appearing on a computer screen. From trial to
trial, however, the pictures change spatial configuration. This procedure
prevents participants from using a motor-spatial rule (remembering where on the
screen the pictures appeared) and forces them instead to form an abstract
ordinal rule (remembering the order of the pictures themselves) to guide their
responses. Human infants between the ages of 6 and 16 months and adult capuchin
monkeys will be given the opportunity to learn novel ordinal rules either by
trial and error learning, where they must discover the order of picture items
individually, or by imitation, where they first observe a model execute the rule
prior to responding. The work of various researchers have challenged the notion
that children younger than 18 months as well as monkeys are capable of imitating
novel, arbitrary rules. However, those studies have all relied on motor tasks,
confounding what a participant learns with what they can do. Additionally,
because these studies used objects such as toys, they may not have adequately
controlled for either familiarity or novelty. The use of gaze click to study
both individual and imitation learning overcomes these important confounds. As
such, results have the potential to transform comparative and developmental
cognition research and shed light on both the development and evolution of a
cornerstone of human cognition, namely imitation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of this project are three-fold. First, studies will lead to
unique educational and research opportunities for graduate and undergraduate
students. Second, research comparing individual, observational and imitation
learning in human infants and monkeys has the potential to alter our
understanding of the development and evolution of social learning in these
populations. Finally, results from these studies have the potential to
revolutionize comparative and developmental research as it allows investigators
to ask more questions of non-verbal populations in greater detail using more
objective measures, providing scientists and educators with unique insights into
how such minds learn, think and acquire knowledge from others.