* 0946897
* Travel Support for FOA10 Conference
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Peter Monson, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Rosemarie D. Wesson
* 12/31/2010
* USD 10,000.00

This proposal requests partial travel support for U.S. participants to attend
the 10th International Conference on the Fundamentals of Adsorption (FOA10) in
Awaji, Japan, May 23rd-28th 2010. The funds will be used to support the travel
of tenure-track faculty members and their graduate students in U.S. educational
institutions, as well as researchers from US nonprofit research institutions who
will have an oral or poster presentation at the meeting. Priority will be given
to young faculty (who have been in academia for no more than 5 years) and
graduate students.

The FOA series of conferences has become the premier international conference in
the field of Adsorption. The conference is well attended by researchers from
throughout the World. Many of the attendees are Chemical Engineers but there are
also significant numbers of Chemists, Physicists and members of other
disciplines, and the level of industrial participation is high. Thus the
conference is an excellent forum for the exchange of ideas and information
between scientists, engineers in academia and industrial practitioners in the
field. A hallmark of the conference is its comprehensive coverage of the
spectrum of fundamental research and applications of adsorption, ranging from
molecular modeling and simulation of fluids adsorbed in porous materials to the
design of pressure swing adsorption systems for industrial gas separation
processes.

Technological advances in energy, biotechnology, pharmaceutical, and
environmental applications of adsorption will be facilitated by FOA10 through
sharing of new adsorption-related scientific information at the highest level.
Additional broader impacts will be associated with the participation of young
faculty and doctoral students (facilitated by the proposed travel funds), and
their exposure to the frontiers of adsorption science and technology in a truly
interdisciplinary and international scientific gathering.