* 0946094
* Collaborative Research: Feedbacks between Marine Stratiform Cloud, Atmospheric Circulation and Temperature on Decadal Timescales and in Anthropogenic Change
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2014
* Joel Norris, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 12/31/2014
* USD 333,001.00

Marine stratus clouds (MSC) are low clouds that form in the subtropics off the
west coast of continents, and the resulting "stratus decks" cool the earth by
reflecting sunlight back to space. The fate of the stratus decks in a warming
climate could be a key factor in determining the earth's climate sensitivity, or
how much the planet will warm for a given increase in atmospheric greenhouse
gases. If the stratus decks expand, or become more persistently cloudy, the
resulting increase in reflected sunlight would have a cooling effect and
counteract some of the greenhouse warming (a "negative feedback"). But if they
contract or become less cloudy global warming could become considerably enhanced
(a "positive feedback"). At present the sign of the MSC feeback is not known and
the physical mechanisms which determine the sign of the feedback are not well
understood.

This research project will address the MSC feedback through an examination of
relationships between MSC, atmospheric circulation, and temperature, occuring
both in observations and in model simulations. Preliminary work by the principal
investigators has shown that decadal fluctuations are detectable in cloud
datasets. Furthermore, these signals reveal the sensitivity of the clouds to
shifting environmental conditions on timescales relevant for climate change, and
can serve as a important test of model simulations of cloud variability.

Research under this grant will build on the preliminary work by 1) examining
observed long-term variability in subtropical regions around the globe using
multiple, independent cloud and meteorological datasets; 2) evaluating the
simulation of MSC in global climate models through the use of observed cloud-
meteorology relationships, and assessing the reliability of model cloud
feedbacks and projected cloud and climate changes; and 3) using the current and
upcoming versions of the NCAR global climate model (GCM) to carry out
experiments quantifying MSC feedbacks. The work is designed to test three linked
hypotheses: 1) Subtropical MSC exerts a local and regional positive feedback on
SST and atmospheric circulation; 2) This feedback substantially contributes to
decadal variability in the local and regional atmosphere-ocean system; and 3)
Changes in subtropical MSC under long-term anthropogenic warming will be
primarily associated with dynamical processes (changes in atmospheric
circulation) rather than thermodynamical processes (changes in lapse rate).

The work performed under the grant will be of broad interest because of the need
for better estimates of the degree to which the world will warm in response to
greenhouse gas increases. In addition, the project will enhance infrastructure
for research and education by fostering a research collaboration between the
University of Miami and the University of California, San Diego. The work will
also support two graduate students. Outreach activities will be conducted at
both universities, including activities to encourage middle-school girls to
pursue careers in science (in Miami), and activities at a summer school for high
school students (in San Diego).