* 0946458
* MIRTHE Industry Experts in Packaging
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2013
* Claire Gmachl, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Jackson
* 12/31/2013
* USD 859,506.00

MIRTHE Industry Experts in Packaging&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We here
propose to appoint to MIRTHE, the NSF-sponsored Engineering Research Center for
Mid-InfraRed Technologies for Health and Environment, a small group of
industrially experienced researchers, MIRTHE Industry Experts in Packaging, to
assist MIRTHE in establishing cost-effective, reliable, and state-of-the-art
packaging capabilities for its foundational research work on high performance
Quantum Cascade lasers, laser sub-systems, and sensors. A lack of such packaging
capabilities was previously cited as a weakness or potential threat to MIRTHE by
NSF site review panels. This proposal opportunity allows us to rapidly establish
this much needed packaging capabilities on-site in MIRTHE's shared facilities
under the guidance of experienced industry experts. We have selected industry
experts who in addition to top-quality technical expertise also bring with them
expertise in starting up companies, working in highly successful small
businesses, and who have experience in working with graduate and undergraduate
students. The proposed work matches well with all three of MIRTHE's pillars: it
will bring much-needed expertise in device packaging to MIRTHE's R&amp;D
efforts; it helps fulfill MIRTHE's education mission in training students and
returning students in the STEM fields; and it strengthens MIRTHE's
industry,university ties. In addition to hiring two part-time senior industry
experts in packaging for the duration of three years, we also propose to hire a
very small group of recently laid off junior engineers who are transitioning
from industry back to graduate school.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
merit.&lt;br/&gt;The NSF-sponsored Engineering Research Center MIRTHE is leading
the development of an entirely new platform of trace gas sensor systems that
provide high-performance, cost-effective, and networked sensing capabilities.
These sensor systems are based on mid-infrared Quantum Cascade laser
spectroscopy and excel through their compactness, autonomy, networking
capability, and fast time response. They fulfill the application requirements of
trace chemical sensing on the individual point sensor, urban sensor network,
remote sensor, and regional scale. In doing so, MIRTHE has been addressing and
continues to address the important societal challenges of securing a clean,
safe, sustainable, and healthy environment, clean air to breathe and accessible
healthcare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The here proposed "MIRTHE Industry Experts in
Packaging" program appoints particularly qualified and highly motivated experts
from industry to develop MIRTHE's device packaging capabilities which will
greatly enhance and speed up MIRTHE's research and development at the device and
sub-systems level. In turn, MIRTHE will be better able to deliver on its
research and development mission and vision.&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts&lt;br/&gt;MIRTHE successfully trains and graduates a diverse and
globally competitive U.S. workforce ready to assume engineering leadership for
the 21st century. MIRTHE has a proven track record to reach out to groups
historically underrepresented in science and engineering, and its researcher and
student diversity consistently exceeds comparable national averages. In
collaboration with its industrial/practitioner partners, MIRTHE has developed
and continues to develop prototypes of cost-effective, market-ready, mid-
infrared sensing technologies; these technologies result in new profitable
product lines and new revenue streams for important industry
sectors.&lt;br/&gt;In the here proposed ,MIRTHE Industry Experts in Packaging?
program, students and post-doctoral researchers will work closely with industry
experts on the development of the commercially important packaging capabilities.
Students and post-docs will be trained in a previously unavailable yet necessary
skill (packaging), and will be offered first-hand insight into the effort of
starting up a company and of working in small businesses.&lt;br/&gt;Hiring of
recently laid-off junior engineers transitioning from industry to graduate
school provides a unique opportunity to retain talent in the STEM fields and to
increase the diversity of MIRTHE's student pool.&lt;br/&gt;Needless to add,
MIRTHE's shared facilities will gain greatly from the addition of a cost-
effective, reliable, state-of-the-art packaging facility