* 0946219
* Technical Assistance to Increase the Competitiveness of Minority-serving Institutions in the Foundation's Robert Noyce Scholarship Program
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2009,03/31/2013
* Shirley McBay, QUALITY EDUCATION FOR MINORITIES NETWORK
* Standard Grant
* Joan T Prival
* 03/31/2013
* USD 391,493.00

The Quality Education for Minorities (QEM) Network is conducting two annual
information and proposal development workshops focused on increasing the
awareness and participation of Minority-serving Institutions (MSIs) in the
Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program. Workshop participants include two-
person faculty teams from 15 MSIs with accredited teacher education programs.
Each team consists of a STEM faculty member and a teacher education faculty
member. Minority-serving Institutions represent a valuable source of future K-12
mathematics and science teachers who can help meet the nation's future economic
challenges through the development of a more productive science and technology
workforce. Moreover, MSIs are uniquely qualified to address the issue of
recruiting, retaining, and developing STEM teachers for high-need schools,
especially in urban areas. The Noyce Scholarships serve as an incentive to
attract and retain talented students majoring in STEM disciplines at MSIs into
the pre-college teaching profession. The QEM workshops provide participants
feedback on their required project summaries to assist them in developing their
ideas into competitive Noyce proposals. Consultants and current Noyce grantees
lead discussions of best practices in STEM K-12 teacher preparation as well as
in the recruitment and retention of pre-service teachers. The institutions
represented by the workshop participants will use the Noyce award as a stimulus
for strengthening their teacher education programs to produce high quality
mathematics and science teachers who will eventually work in high-need areas.