* 0946027
* SBIR Phase I:  Reconfigurable Sparse Array Smart Antenna System via Multi-Robot Control
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* Garret Okamoto, Adaptive Communications Research Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2010
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project develops and
evaluates a flexible sparse array smart antenna system that can be reconfigured
through the use of multiple mobile robots. Current robotic systems are limited
because they cannot utilize beamforming due to their limited number of antennas
and the high computational requirement of beamformers. This pioneering research
is made possible through recent breakthroughs for ultralow computational
complexity beamforming and multi-mobile robot cluster control. Unlike current
beamformers, the antennas in the sparse array will not be physically connected
together but instead each robot will have a single antenna. By developing new
signal processing and robotic control techniques, robotic communications will be
enabled where impossible today due to range, dead spots, or interference. Over-
the-air measurements will make it possible to finally evaluate how key issues
(distance between robots, geometric shape of the sparse array, etc.) affects
system performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential
of this project is that it can revolutionize commercial robotic systems and
other applications in the wireless industry. Enabling multi-robot collaborative
communications makes reliable communications possible in worst-case
environments. Performance evaluation of sparse arrays will provide valuable
insight for collaborative communications for other applications such as
distributed sensor networks while the beamformer?s ultralow computational
requirement makes it feasible to be added to current and future wireless
systems. Creation of a new class of robotic communications will enable robots to
be more effective in current applications and create new markets for the robotic
sector. The use of robots has increased exponentially with robots increasingly
relied upon for defense, law enforcement, and manufacturing, but communication
limitations prevent robots from being effective in many situations. Preventing
this critical loss of communications for robots searching for people trapped in
collapsed buildings or while on scout missions can save lives and have a great
societal impact. This research will foster new fields of scientific and
technological understanding by enabling Academia and Industry researchers to
evaluate the advances made through this pioneering research, which will enable
performance optimization for smart antenna systems whether the antennas are
physically connected or at different locations.&lt;br/&gt;