* 0946267
* 2009 Biomedical Engineering Society Annual Fall Meeting to be held at Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA Oct 7-10, 2009
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2010
* Harvey Borovetz, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Semahat S. Demir
* 07/31/2010
* USD 15,000.00

0946267&lt;br/&gt;Borovetz &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The BMES Annual Fall Meeting is
a multidisciplinary scientific event sponsored by the Biomedical Engineering
Society (BMES). This year's meeting is also co-sponsored by several other
societies such as the Whitaker International Fellows and Scholars Program, among
many others. This annual meeting will be held in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, from
October 7-10, 2009. The conference theme, "Bridging the Three Rivers of Biology,
Engineering and Medicine", will highlight the importance of Biomedical
Engineering as the intersection of Biology, Medicine and Engineering. Attendance
to the meeting is expected to be more than 2000 delegates from all over the
world. The BMES meetings bring together academic leaders, students, and
industrial representatives once a year. At this conference, two extremely high
quality plenary speakers are scheduled at a time with no other activities such
that all conference participants would attend these talks and several workshops
as well. The conference format will be 12 parallel sessions of oral
presentations. Approximately 2/3 of the accepted papers will be presented in
poster format. A booklet will provide program details to the participants of the
conference. All technical presentations will be one-page abstracts and compiled
in a CD format, distributed to all registrants. Copies of this CD will also be
provided to all cosponsoring societies. The CD will serve as the only technical
proceedings of the meeting. The budget request of $15,000 to NSF is to aid in
reducing student registration fees, help in reimburse some of the student travel
costs, student paper competition awards, and to cover in part the publication
costs of the program booklet and CD.