* 0946328
* Workshop:  Behavioral and Quantitative Game Theory Workshop on Future Directions; Newport Beach, California; May 14-16, 2010
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,01/31/2011
* Moshe Dror, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Russell Barton
* 01/31/2011
* USD 49,999.00

The objective of this award is to hold a workshop on operations management and
logistics, behavioral game theory, and computational/algorithmic game theory.
The purpose is to create opportunities for cross-disciplinary exchange and
crossover of findings from one discipline to the other for the benefit of all.
There has not been, to our knowledge a workshop/conference that has included a
focus on supply-chain and logistics games and on enriching the state of the
knowledge of such games by cross-pollination with behavioral and computational
game theory. Since the three main game-theoretical streams represented in this
workshop are quite new all three emerged in the last decade or so there is a
very strong impetus for learning and exchange from one arena to
another.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this workshop will produce a
research framework for further efforts in these fields and produce possibly new
research avenues from the cross pollination. While one may stake a claim for
more coherence among participants and topics, empirical findings show that this
may result in clustering and exclusion. Findings also show that heterogeneity
ought to lead to a larger involvement with respect to broader interest and
participation. Thus, this workshop's mixing of three separate academic
communities linked together by their common game-theory base should create a
fertile environment that moves forward the academic frontiers of their
individual disciplines and discovers new frontiers for exploration.