* 0946502
* New GK-12: Engineering for Society - An Energy and Environmental Sustainability Research Pathway to Cultivate Engineering Leaders and Enrich Education for Disadvantaged Youth
* ENG,EEC
* 03/15/2010,02/28/2018
* Angela Bielefeldt, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Poats
* 02/28/2018
* USD 3,356,478.00

New GK-12: Engineering for Society ? An Energy and Environmental Sustainability
Research Pathway to Cultivate Engineering Leaders and Enrich Education for
Disadvantaged Youth 2010 NSF Proposal Abstract, University of Colorado at
Boulder This project cultivates diverse engineering PhD students to become
future engineering leaders while serving K-12 students traditionally
underrepresented in engineering. Through extensive K-12 student contact, ten
fellows annually translate their engineering research into hands-on K-12 STEM
curricula, engaging K-12 students and teachers through connecting engineering
design to the study of science and math. These K-12 experiences impact fellows
through the pairing of real-world opportunities with their research, and fellows
gain communication and pedagogy skills as they communicate their research
through the creation and delivery of K-12 STEM curriculum. Our experience has
shown that teacher STEM confidence is strengthened by the exchange of pedagogy
and subject matter, and student STEM learning is enhanced, preparing youngsters
for high school pre-engineering programs. Questions of intellectual merit
addressed: How is PhD students? understanding of their research impacted by
sharing it with non-technical audiences? How do K-12 experiences promote
engineering fellows? becoming STEM leaders? Do teachers who contribute to
fellows? education subsequently realize deeper passion and independence in
teaching science and engineering? Do school districts that provide hands-on
engineering experiences realize higher graduation rates and STEM college
matriculation? How can colleges institutionalize K-12 teaching in PhD
engineering graduate programs? Innovative approaches: Diversity-focused national
recruitment of professoriate-bound future engineering educators, resulting in
diverse PhD graduates entering the workforce with a research interest applied in
a broader context; enrichment of teacher STEM content through engineering-
focused professional development workshops; fellows improvement of STEM literacy
in high-needs schools; and nationally disseminated classroom-tested curriculum
via the NSF-funded TeachEngineering digital library.

