* 0946739
* Coupled Aerosol and Climate Models: An Intercomparison of the GFDL Model and the NCAR Model
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2015
* Joyce Penner, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Anjuli Bamzai
* 07/31/2015
* USD 700,000.00

This project aims to examine the relationships between aerosol changes, cloud
changes and climate change using the Integrated Massively Parallel Atmospheric
Chemical Transport (IMPACT) aerosol model coupled to two different climate
models and to evaluate the adequacy of the aerosol treatment and cloud
treatments within the two versions of the coupled IMPACT/climate models.
Specifically, the investigators will (i) couple the aerosol model to the
Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory (GFDL) atmospheric general circulation
model (AGCM) and the National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) Community
Atmosphere Model (CAM) models that will be used in the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change 5th assessment report (AR5) simulations, (ii) compare how
different parameterizations in the models as well as basic model dynamics help
determine the cloud fields, aerosol fields, and direct and indirect forcing by
aerosols, and (iii) study the relative changes to clouds from changes in climate
and from aerosols. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will help to determine
which climate model transport, chemical transformation, and removal for aerosols
is best able to reproduce satellite data for aerosol optical depth, ratio of
extinction as a function of wavelength, backscattering profiles, and the
effective radius of aerosols. It may also help to reduce the range of
sensitivity of climate models to increases in greenhouse gases.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this project concern both its policy
implications and the training of scientific personnel. The issues being
addressed are of prime importance in the determination of climate change and its
prediction. The use of models that are being submitted to the next IPCC AR5
report will help the understanding and comparison two primary U.S. models used
in that policy-relevant report. In addition, a graduate student as well as a
post-doctoral will be trained and results from this project are routinely used
to update the Precipitation and Clouds course taught by one of the
investigators.