* 0946894
* Econometric Analysis of Strategic-Interaction Models under Flexible Behavioral Assumptions
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2009,07/31/2010
* Andres Aradillas-Lopez, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2010
* USD 60,918.00

This project is devoted to the econometric study of models where economic agents
(individuals, firms, unions, governments, etc.) interact with each other in an
incomplete information environment. In these settings, each agent's observed
behavior is at least partially determined by her subjective and unobserved (to
the researcher) beliefs about the expected choices of others. The vast majority
of existing econometric work for these models assumes that unobserved beliefs
are consistent with equilibrium behavior, which imposes extreme assumptions
about agents' rationality and jeopardizes the robustness and validity of the
estimation results. This project weakens this restrictive assumption and assumes
instead that agents' unobserved beliefs are only "rationalizable" in the sense
that they do not assign positive probability to opponents' actions that are
strictly dominated. The notion of rationalizability has been thoroughly studied
by game theorists but has not ?until now- been formally incorporated into
econometric analysis. It includes equilibrium beliefs as a special case, but
allows for a wide range of alternative behavior.

Methodologically, this research project is two-pronged. First, it characterizes
which statistical features of a given model can be identified under the sole
assumption of rationalizable beliefs. Second, it develops statistical methods
for estimation and inference of the identified features. Using observed behavior
and other observable features of agents (if any), these methods shed light on
questions such as: How much are agents' actions affected by the expected choices
of others if their beliefs are only assumed to satisfy a minimal rationality
requirement? Can an upper bound for rationality be identified? Can Nash
equilibrium be ruled out? What pieces of available information do agents use to
construct their beliefs? Counterfactual exercises (e.g, the effect of
hypothetical policy analysis) under flexible behavioral assumptions are also
made possible. The methods can be applied to a wide variety of real-world
settings, including: Auctions, market entry/exit, interaction among firms,
location models for firms or individuals, models of individual choices with
peer-effects, etc. They are also especially amenable to experimental data sets,
whose availability has been steadily increasing in the recent past.

Broader Impacts of Research Project: The broader impact if the project goes
beyond contributing new methods to the existing literature and attracting the
attention of research experts in the subject. A major goal is the design of
courses, workshops and seminars aimed not only to advanced economics doctoral
students, but to students and researchers of other social science disciplines
interested in estimation and inference in interactions-based models. These
courses would study not only the theory, but also the methodological and
computational issues involved in the implementation of these methods to real
data. They will be complemented by workshops, seminars and lectures by prominent
experts in the subject. This project is designed to bring together game
theorists, econometricians, applied economists and decision-makers in need of
policy analysis in complicated interactions settings under flexible behavioral
assumptions. All computer data programs, lecture notes and research papers which
will result from this project will be widely disseminated.