* 0946147
* SBIR Phase I:  Bioethanol from Seaweed
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* Yasuo Yoshikuni, Bio Architecture Lab, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2010
* USD 0.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project advances a novel
technology that produces biofuels and renewable chemicals from seaweed through
microbial fermentation. A microbial platform will produce ethanol from seaweed
at a cost significantly lower than the cost of ethanol from corn or Brazilian
sugar cane and will produce 80% less greenhouse gases than transportation fuels
derived from petroleum. This Phase I project will leverage unique expertise in
computational enzyme design and synthetic biology to develop a yeast-based
platform that will reduce the costs of fermentation and achieve commercial
viability. A yeast-based platform will improve the titer and productivity of
ethanol production, while demonstrating the commercial viability of ethanol
production from seaweed.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is the domestic
production of renewable energy such as biofuels while reducing the emissions of
carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases that threaten our climate and
environment. To date, domestic biofuels have not been cost-competitive with
petroleum, due to a lack of low-cost, scalable sugar sources that do not compete
with growing food. Ideal for biofuel production, seaweed is an abundant,
scalable, low-cost biomass that actually benefits the environment. Aquafarmed
seaweed reduces ocean acidity and eutrophication, while reducing carbon dioxide
in the environment. Unlike terrestrial biomass, seaweed does not compete with
food crops for land or water use and requires no fertilizer. A yeast system for
the fermentation of seaweed will be used by oil and gas companies to produce
low-carbon-footprint biofuels near US coastal populations and key oil and gas
infrastructure. More than 3 billion gallons of ethanol can be produced
domestically from seaweed. This project will maintain the United States'
leadership in industrial biotechnology, synthetic biology, and metabolic
engineering, while enhancing our knowledge of the use of marine biomass for
biofuel production.