* 0946322
* Garnet-Biotite-Tourmaline Thermometry at High Mn Content
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2013
* David London, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 05/31/2013
* USD 263,356.00

Intellectual Merit. This proposal requests funding for new experimental programs
that will expand the utility of existing Fe-Mg exchange geothermometers, and
that may introduce new thermometers based on the composition of coexisting
tourmaline. If successful, the research will extend the application of garnet-
biotite thermometry to some common Mn-rich metamorphic rocks, and to a variety
of silicic igneous rocks in which garnet and tourmaline coexist, with or without
accessory biotite and muscovite. Although Mn readily substitutes for Fe in
common ferromagnesian silicates, previous calibrations of equilibrium between
these minerals were conducted in Mn-free systems thereby raising concern that
there may be systematic errors in P-T estimates based on these calibrations.
Essentially, the accuracy of existing thermobarometers wanes as mineral
compositions diverge from those of the experimental design. Thus, many rock
types and conditions are outside of the range of confidence for which most
thermometers can be applied. New experiments using Mn-bearing starting materials
will help to resolve current discrepancies in the estimation of the
thermodynamic mixing parameters for garnet and lead to improved solid solution
models. Experiments are also proposed to calibrate the fractionation of major
and minor elements (Fe, Mg, Mn, Ca, Ti, and V) between the bipolar ends of
tourmaline crystals as a function of temperature, in hopes of developing a
single-phase geothermometer. Finally, experiments will be conducted to quantify
Fe-Mg exchange between tourmaline and biotite, cordierite, and garnet to develop
a new tourmaline- ferromagnesian silicate thermometers. If successful multiple
tourmaline-based thermometers could be used simultaneously in the same rock to
confirm internal equilibrium or document lack thereof. For igneous rocks,
tourmaline-garnet thermometry will be inherently more accurate than conventional
thermometry with micas (biotite or muscovite), owing to the refractory nature of
garnet and tourmaline as compared to biotite and muscovite, for which low
closure temperatures and low modal abundances in igneous rocks hinder their
value in thermobarometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. This project
will support one graduate student. Funding also will support the experimental
lab of the PI, and the contributions to mineral thermobarometry could have
profound influence on petrogenetic interpretations.&lt;br/&gt;