* 0946528
* The Complete Genome Sequence of the Glaucophyte Alga Cyanophora paradoxa
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2009,09/30/2010
* Debashish Bhattacharya, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 09/30/2010
* USD 262,958.00

How was photosynthesis established in eukaryotes? To gain insights into this
fundamental step in the evolution of our planet, a grant has been awarded to Dr.
Debashish Bhattacharya at the University of Iowa and Dr. Jeffrey Boore at SymBio
Corporation to determine to high coverage the 140 million base pair nuclear
genome sequence of the unicellular alga Cyanophora paradoxa. Cyanophora is a
member of the remaining group of photosynthetic eukaryotes (Glaucophyta) that
still lacks a complete genome sequence. The single cyanobacterial primary
endosymbiosis that gave rise to all plastids (e.g., chloroplasts) occurred in
the common ancestor of Cyanophora, other algae, and plants. This was a pivotal
and ancient (~1.5 billion years ago) event in the Earth's history that laid the
foundation for modern terrestrial ecosystems. A critical step in plastid
establishment was the transfer of endosymbiont genes to the "host" nucleus. It
is unclear however whether this massive transfer was limited to genes strictly
involved in plastid metabolism or whether the host profited from the captured
genome to explore other novel functions via recruitment of genes from the
cyanobacterium. The Cyanophora genome sequence will enable scientists to
rigorously test this idea in a relatively "simple" algal model. Beyond its
contribution to understanding endosymbiosis, the Cyanophora genome sequence will
allow countless other insights which include identifying a set of core genes
shared by algae and plants that can be studied in detail to understand the
origin of plant-specific characters. In addition the Cyanophora genome will be
invaluable for guiding the annotation of the genomes of plants and other
protists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although this is a basic science project, the
Cyanophora project has the potential to accelerate education and interest at all
levels in protists and their genomes. The research team will incorporate the
findings of this study into several outreach efforts. The principles of high
throughput genomics will be incorporated into several courses offered at the
University of Iowa as well as in the NSF-funded undergraduate summer "Workshop
on Comparative Evolutionary Genomics", the findings of the study will be
published in the Microbial Life Educational Resources web page at the
micro*scope web site http://starcentral.mbl.edu/microscope/portal.php, two
graduate students and several undergraduates will be trained at the University
of Iowa, and the PI will recruit one or more minority summer student per year
through the AGEP program at Iowa.&lt;br/&gt;