* 0946637
* Collaborative Research: Physiological and molecular control mechanisms in a socially regulated escape-circuit in cichlid fish
* BIO,IOS
* 11/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Thomas Preuss, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 06/30/2012
* USD 240,514.00

Animal behavior, including our own, is influenced by environmental context and
social interactions. Determining the underlying cellular and physiological
mechanisms is central in studying these environmental effects on behavior. This
project elucidates such mechanistic questions through a collaborative,
multidisciplinary approach that merges quantitative behavioral measurements, in
vivo electrophysiology, and single cell functional genomics. The overall focus
will be on exploiting individual variation in natural and laboratory populations
in order to determine the neuronal and molecular basis of adaptive changes of
predator avoidance behavior (escape response). Specifically, the work will study
the M-cell system, which generates startle escape behavior, in the African
cichlid fish Astatotilapia burtoni (an important model system for investigating
the influence of social rank on the molecular, neuroendocrine and cellular
processes in the brain that underlie aggressive and reproductive behaviors). The
goal is to (i) quantify and pharmacologically alter (using serotonergic drugs)
individual differences in the performance of startle escape behavior; (ii)
analyze the membrane properties of the M-cell in their relationship to
individual variation in hormones and behavior; (iii) assess the activity of
genes encoding serotonin receptors as well as genome-wide transcript profiles
from single M-cells. While the essential escape motor pattern (e.g. escape
latency, escape kinematics) is not expected to vary, quantitative differences in
responsiveness (escape thresholds) are likely. These experiments will for the
first time make it possible to explain variation in behavior at the
physiological, cellular and molecular levels in a single neuron. This novel
proposal provides an exciting and unique avenue for elucidating neural
plasticity through a systems-level single-cell analysis of a vitally important
behavior within an organismic and social context. This research project will
provide outstanding educational benefits to high school students, undergraduate
and graduate students at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine and at The
University of Texas at Austin.