* 0946002
* SBIR Phase I:  Ultra Compact Passive Mode-Locked All-Fiber 2 Micron Fiber Laser
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* Jianfeng Wu, NP PHOTONICS INC
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2010
* USD 149,979.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project focuses on the
development of a compact all-fiber-based, short pulse (< ps) mode-locked laser
operating in the 2-micron wavelength band. The laser will be constructed from
Tm-doped germanate glass fiber, which provides high optical gain in a short
length, and the fiber is embedded with carbon nanotubes (CNT), which act as a
saturable absorber for mode-locking operation. Mode-locking will be realized
through the interaction between the laser field?s evanescent wave with the
saturable absorption from the carbon nanotubes localized within the fiber near
the active core. Chirped fiber Bragg gratings will be used to provide cavity
feedback and dispersion compensation. This approach promises to produce a few
centimeter long all-fiber based ultrafast mode-locked laser suitable for cost-
effective integration into optical systems and instruments. More generally,
optical fibers embedded with CNTs may provide a flexible method for the
integration of CNTs into photonics devices.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be to open the
2-micron wavelength window to ultrafast short pulse optical technology. This
project will develop an all-fiber self-starting passive mode-locked fiber laser
capable of delivering sub-picosecond pulses in the 2-micron wavelength band. Its
compact size, environmental stability, wavelength tunability, scalability to
high power, high repetition rate, portability, and high wall-plug efficiency
will make it readily suitable for adoption into many commercial markets, such as
medical applications, high efficiency THz generation, 3-5 micron supercontinuum
generation, time-resolved molecular spectroscopy, optical frequency comb, Light
Detection and Ranging (LIDAR), free space communication, high-order harmonic
generation, MID-IR frequency conversion, air pollution monitor, and high
efficiency soft X-ray generation. Among those applications, medical applications
are particularly interesting due to the 2-micron?s strong water absorption, but
weak absorption by human tissue. The strong point of using 2-micron ultrashort
pulses on human tissue is the absence of an appreciable thermal effect.
Therefore such lasers could find applications in surgery, dentistry, and
dermatology where ancillary heating of tissue is undesirable.

