* 0946435
* MIRTHE Post-Doctoral Fellowship in Industry
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Claire Gmachl, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Jackson
* 08/31/2012
* USD 472,165.00

MIRTHE Post-Doctoral Fellowship in Industry&lt;br/&gt;MIRTHE, the NSF-sponsored
Engineering Research Center for Mid-InfraRed Technologies for Health
and&lt;br/&gt;the Environment, conducts a vibrant education and outreach program
that starts at K-12 and culminates&lt;br/&gt;at the post-doctoral level. Here,
we propose a new addition to MIRTHE's post-doctoral research
and&lt;br/&gt;training program, i.e. the MIRTHE Post-doctoral Fellowship in
Industry program.&lt;br/&gt;A small group of recent MIRTHE graduates will be
competitively selected to conduct year-long, postdoctoral&lt;br/&gt;research on-
site with MIRTHE industry member companies. The research projects are
closely&lt;br/&gt;linked to the fellows,former MIRTHE research and strengthen
the university industry partnerships arising&lt;br/&gt;from the joint work and
the group of academic and industrial mentors tied together by the post-
doc&lt;br/&gt;fellows. In addition to full time work in industry, the post-
doctoral fellows will be assigned mentors at&lt;br/&gt;Princeton University;
they will report twice yearly on their research to the entire MIRTHE community.
The&lt;br/&gt;fellowships are competitive, with a strict selection process, and
are tightly woven into MIRTHE's overall&lt;br/&gt;formal post-doctoral mentoring
program.&lt;br/&gt;The post-doctoral fellows are appointed through Princeton
University at the base salary rate; the hosting&lt;br/&gt;companies will raise
the fellows, salary to the companies? rate and will fund the fellows
research&lt;br/&gt;expenses; we estimate this to amount to at least 25% cost-
sharing by industry.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit&lt;br/&gt;MIRTHE is leading
the development of an entirely new platform of trace gas sensor systems that
provide&lt;br/&gt;high-performance, cost-effective, and networked sensing
capabilities. These sensor systems are based&lt;br/&gt;on mid-infrared Quantum
Cascade laser spectroscopy and excel through their compactness,
autonomy,&lt;br/&gt;networking capability, and fast time response. They fulfill
the application requirements of trace chemical&lt;br/&gt;sensing on the
individual point sensor, urban sensor network, remote sensor, and regional
scale. In doing&lt;br/&gt;so, MIRTHE addresses the important societal challenges
of securing a clean, safe, sustainable, and&lt;br/&gt;healthy environment, clean
air to breathe and accessible healthcare on the national and global
scale.&lt;br/&gt;The here proposed MIRTHE Post-doctoral Fellowship in Industry
program sends five or more highly&lt;br/&gt;qualified, competitively selected
post-doctoral fellows to work on-site with MIRTHE industry members
on&lt;br/&gt;MIRTHE-related research projects. Their high degree of engineering
excellence will strengthen&lt;br/&gt;university,industry collaborations and will
advance MIRTHE's mission and bold vision stated above.&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts&lt;br/&gt;MIRTHE successfully trains and graduates a diverse and
globally competitive U.S. workforce ready to&lt;br/&gt;assume engineering
leadership for the 21st century. Since 2006, MIRTHE's post-doctoral training
program&lt;br/&gt;has grown to encompass 9 current post-doctoral fellows with
career aspirations in academia,&lt;br/&gt;government, and industry. Three
fellows have already ?graduated? to long-term employment in&lt;br/&gt;academia.
MIRTHE has a proven track record to reach out to groups historically
underrepresented in&lt;br/&gt;science and engineering, and its researcher and
student diversity consistently exceeds comparable&lt;br/&gt;national averages.
The here proposed MIRTHE Post-doctoral Fellows in Industry program provides
an&lt;br/&gt;outstanding opportunity to increase the size and improve the
diversity of MIRTHE's post-doctoral&lt;br/&gt;researcher pool.&lt;br/&gt;The
program will provide MIRTHE's graduates with additional training, skills,
knowledge, and insights,&lt;br/&gt;and will make them more competitive in the
job-market, hence allaying the gravest of our post-
doctoral&lt;br/&gt;researchers, concerns about their career opportunities in the
current weak economy.&lt;br/&gt;The program will attract specifically post-
doctoral researchers interested in a career in industry and
in&lt;br/&gt;starting up their own company. The post-doctoral fellows will also
form key connections between&lt;br/&gt;academia and industry in MIRTHE's
industrial/practitioner collaboration program, which
develops&lt;br/&gt;prototypes of cost-effective, market-ready, mid-infrared
sensing technologies; these technologies result in&lt;br/&gt;new profitable
product lines and new revenue streams for important industry sectors.