* 0946911
* Intraseasonal Variability of the West African Monsoon
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2014
* Eric Maloney, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Anjuli Bamzai
* 02/28/2014
* USD 214,165.00

The Madden-Julian Oscillation (MJO) modulates tropical cyclones and easterly
waves in the Atlantic, providing the potential for prediction of enhanced
Atlantic hurricane activity a couple of weeks in advance. This project will
address several major outstanding questions: (i) the teleconnection pathway by
which the MJO affects the Atlantic during boreal summer, (ii) how west African
and Atlantic precipitation is actually initiated by the MJO once the
teleconnection is established, (iii) the mechanism by which the MJO modulates
African easterly waves, and (iv) how these easterly waves feed back to influence
the MJO.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A hierarchy of models will be used to understand
the teleconnection pathways by which the MJO affects the Atlantic and west
Africa, including the non-divergent barotropic vorticity equation, a filtered
shallow water model on a sphere, and an atmospheric general circulation model.
Because it is hypothesized that the MJO first initiates convection anomalies
over the Darfur region of the Sudan, several observational products (e.g. Cloud
Archive User Service (CLAUS) brightness temperature, Tropical Rainfall Measuring
Mission (TRMM) and Global Precipitation Climatology Project (GPCP)
precipitation) will be used to document the time evolution of precipitation in
west Africa as a function of MJO phase. A primitive equation model will be used
to test the hypothesis that strong heating variations over the Darfur region
forced by the MJO modulate the amplitude of easterly wave activity in west
Africa and the Atlantic, and test the hypothesis that MJO-related structural
changes in the African easterly jet significantly affect easterly wave growth.
Further, the impact of MJO-related easterly wave variability on the column-
integrated intraseasonal moisture budget in west Africa and the Atlantic will be
examined in satellite and reanalysis datasets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of this work are educational and in the potential to improve our
prospects for medium range prediction of periods of enhanced Atlantic tropical
cyclone activity.