* 0946636
* EAGER: Exploration of the Ocean Surface for the Source of Arecibo's Continuous Thermospheric Gravity Waves
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2010
* Frank Djuth, Geospace Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Robinson
* 07/31/2010
* USD 48,253.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator will utilize satellite
altimetry data to identify the specific ocean source responsible for
thermospheric Acoustic Gravity Wave observations made at the Arecibo
observatory. The Arecibo Observatory is the largest atmospheric radar in the
world and the research will make full use of its high atmospheric resolving
capabilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator and colleagues have
previously discovered that a continuum of waves is present in the upper
atmosphere above Arecibo Observatory (AO), Puerto Rico. It has been determined
that these fluctuations are the result of the propagation of neutral atmospheric
waves through the ionized portion of the upper atmosphere from 120 km altitude
to heights greater than 650 km. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research effort will
investigate whether the thermospheric wave production process is unique to the
ocean near Arecibo (e.g., related to the Puerto Rican Trench), or whether it can
be found at other global locations. A better understanding of these processes
will greatly improve our understanding of gravity wave propagation. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Attention will be focused on identifying ocean structures capable of
producing a broad spectrum of horizontal AGW wavelengths and periods in the
range of 5-90 min. Satellite altimetry measurements from repeat orbits will be
used to search for far infragravity ocean waves and determine surface wavelength
and direction of wave motion. In addition other ocean features created by the
presence of the Antilles current will be examined as well as the nature of the
mesoscale eddies. In addition, signs of Ekman upwelling, seiches, edge waves, or
Kelvin waves will be investigated in detail to determine their impact on
Acoustic Gravity Wave propagation and thermospheric signatures observed by
Arecibo.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator is involving young undergraduates
students, who will participate in the data analysis as well as receive a
valuable learning experience.