* 0946273
* EAGER: Developing Theoretical Foundation for Cooperative Communications with Network Coding
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Yi Shi, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 08/31/2011
* USD 150,000.00

The goal of this project is to investigate the impact of network coding on
cooperative communications and to lay a theoretical foundation in this new and
growing field. In their preliminary results, the PIs found that the use of
analog network coding will inevitably introduce new noise during signal
extraction at a destination node. Such new noise will directly affect capacity
calculation and result in smaller capacity in cooperative communications. That
is, the use of network coding may not always benefit cooperative communications,
which is against some researchers? belief. Enlightened by this result, the PIs
plan to systematically investigate the impact of network coding on cooperative
communications in a general multi-session environment. The intellectual merit
includes exploring and understanding various approaches in signal extraction and
the potential noise introduced during the signal extraction process. Based on
this new knowledge, the PIs also plan to re-visit a number of important problems
that employ network coding in cooperative communications and offer new and
correct understanding. Such understanding will not only offer a solid foundation
for further research, but also has transformative potential to bring the
existing network coding and cooperative communications theories one step closer
to practice. The broader impact of this project includes the development of
cross-disciplinary educational materials and courses. Throughout the PIs?
experience with wireless networking research, they have found that advance
materials in wireless communications are beyond the typical education for
students in networking. An integral part of this project will be to bridge the
gap between networking and wireless communications curricula via new cross-
disciplinary courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;