* 0946752
* EAGER: Cause and Duration of Extensive Rejuvenated Volcanism on Savai'i, Samoa.
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Jasper Konter, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 08/31/2011
* USD 18,389.00

This Early Grant for Exploratory Research (EaGER) is to support an exploratory
project to investigate the compositional evolution of an active, but yet
understudied volcano, Savai'i, located on the western fringe of the Samoan
Islands. A 20th century Savai'i eruption displaced an entire village, and
understanding the timing and evolution of this volcanism is of social importance
for the local islanders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Savai'i was essentially repaved
with large volumes of rejuvenated volcanism, in contrast to other ocean islands
(e.g., Hawaii, the Canary Islands and Mauritius). Eruption of Samoan rejuvenated
volcanism is limited to the western three islands, and their close proximity
(~150 km) to the northern terminus of the Tonga trench suggest that Samoan
rejuvenated volcanism may have a different origin than in other hotspots. In the
last 5 million year (Ma), the distance between Savai'i and the trench has
decreased due to plate motion and slab roll-back. Thus, trench-related stresses
and materials may be responsible for the volume, duration and unusual enriched
compositions of Samoan rejuvenated lavas. The rejuvenated stage may be
completely exposed in a 500m deep gorge on the south side of Savai'i that covers
a 2 Ma history. This gorge offers an unprecedented opportunity to sample a long-
lived sequence of Samoan rejuvenated lavas. Key samples from this canyon are
needed to determine whether material from the Tonga trench is represented in
Samoan rejuvenated lavas, and whether such a trench signature increases with
time. In comparison to Hawaiian volcanic stages, the rejuvenated stage at
Savai'i seems volumetrically larger, longer-lived, and geochemically more
enriched. Currently, the extent and volume of the rejuvenated volcanism is
constrained by one 2Ma trachyte cobble from Savai'i, isotopically
indistinguishable from rejuvenated lavas, and found in a stream that drains the
gorge. In order to better constrain if the compositional change could indicate a
shift in source composition while the volcano was still in its shield stage, a
more detailed sampling of the site needs to be performed. This EaGER will enable
two early-career PIs (Jasper Konter from UT-El Paso and Matthew Jackson from
Boston University) to travel to Savai'i for a more complete sampling of the area
to ascertain if a long term geochemical and petrologic study of the island is
indeed justified.