* 0946833
* Descending Inputs and the Decoding of Temporally Encoded Sensory Information
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Nathaniel Sawtell, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen A. Mesce
* 08/31/2010
* USD 158,119.00

Sensory information is often acquired through active exploration. Knowledge of
the world is gained by exploring a complex surface with hands or a visual scene
with eyes. Yet relatively little is known about how neurons encode sensory
stimuli in the context of natural patterns of sensing behavior, or about how
sensory processing regions in the brain distinguish properties of the external
world from the sensory consequences of the animal's own behavior.

A particularly clear example of active sensing is found in mormyrid electric
fish. Electric fish use an electrical sense to navigate and find prey in the
dark by probing the environment by emitting brief electric organ discharge (EOD)
pulses. Nearby objects perturb the electric field around the fish, and these
perturbations are detected by electroreceptors in the fish's skin. Each receptor
encodes changes in local field strength as small shifts in the precise timing of
individual action potentials following the EOD. The fish thus obtains a sequence
of "snapshots" of the world, in which information about surrounding objects is
encoded in the timing of action potentials.

In nature, the frequency and regularity of this sequence of snapshots varies
depending on the behavioral context, whether the fish is probing objects,
foraging, or quietly resting. Interestingly, the frequency chosen by the fish
has a clear effect on the timing of electroreceptor action potentials within
each snapshot: higher rates shift spikes later, and lower rates shift spikes
earlier. The size of these effects is comparable to the effects of small
invertebrate prey on which these fish feed. How does the fish detect and capture
prey when its own sensing behavior has such a strong effect on the sensory
input?

This study provides opportunity to explore how sensory processing regions of the
fish's brain resolves the ambiguity, and whether a change in the input from
electroreceptors is due to an external stimulus or to the animal's own sensing
behavior. Neurons at the first stage of electrosensory processing integrate
input from electroreceptors with signals from other areas of the fish's brain
linked to the motor command that evokes the EOD. Such motor command signals
could, in principal, "undo" the effects of EOD rate on electroreceptor input.

The research is expected to lead to a better understanding of how animals use
internal knowledge of their actions to distinguish properties of the external
world from the sensory consequences of their own behavior. At a more cellular
level, the experiements are also expected to lead to a better understanding of
how information contained in the precise timing of action potentials is decoded
or interpreted by neural circuits.