* 0946152
* SBIR Phase I:  Continuous Production of Lightweight and Energy Efficient Solid-State Microcellular Panels from Recycled PET
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Xiaoxi Wang, MicroGREEN Polymers, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2010
* USD 149,913.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims to create
multilayered panels of microcellular recycled polyethylene terephthalate (RPET).
Today's $1.44 billion wall paneling and decorative tile market is increasingly
focused on sustainable and energy-efficient building materials. This project
will explore the feasibility of continuously producing thick solid-state
microcellular plastic panels from RPET feedstock with thermal insulation
properties comparable to or better than existing materials. Solid-state
microcellular RPET foams provide high strength and do not require chemical
blowing agents, which contain volatile organic compounds. PET is the most
recycled plastic in the United States. However, of the 2.3 billions pounds of
water bottles collected annually in the US, only 24% are currently recycled.
Building materials made from RPET could utilize this untapped source and in
turn, could be recycled again. We will develop a process for continuous
production of solid-state microcellular RPET panels by fusion bonding
microcellular foam rolls. The proposed approach to fusion bond flexible, thin
foam layers into thicker panels will eliminate the need for bonding adhesive.
Prototype panels of 0.25" thickness will be created. Technical data will be
collected during this project, enabling a detailed commercial feasibility and
process cost modeling exercise.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be to satisfy the
construction industry's rapidly growing need for lightweight and energy-
efficient panels based on green building materials. The proposed microcellular
RPET panels are targeted for use in wall panel and decorative tile applications.
Compared to current materials the advantages of these panels include a lower
cost, reduced material consumption, a lower weight, high energy efficiency, high
recycled content, a high-quality surface finish and their compatibility with
end-of-life recycling. The proposed research will focus on using RPET as the raw
material due to the immediate positive environmental and economic impacts. The
proposed innovation is expected to increase the use of RPET in high-value
applications, thereby providing economic stimulus to the recycling industry. The
proposed research will enable expanding the application frontiers for solid-
state microcellular plastics technology and enable collaborative research to
develop further markets for these lightweight materials in other industries such
as transportation, maritime, etc. Furthermore, new technology resulting from
this research will preserve resources for a sustainable environment, enhance the
competitiveness of US plastics industry, and create new job opportunities that
will benefit society as a whole.