* 0946922
* NeTS-NBD: Dynamic Carrier-Assisted Routing in Mobile Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 07/03/2009,08/31/2014
* Jie Wu, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 08/31/2014
* USD 287,279.00

Carrier-Assisted Routing in Mobile Networks

In terms of handling node mobility in various mobile networks, two schools
exist. The traditional connection-based model is built on the premise that the
underlying network is connected, and views node mobility as undesirable. The
mobility-assisted model considers mobility as a desirable feature, where routing
is based on the store-carry-forward paradigm with random or controlled movement
of mobile nodes. This research uses node mobility to enhance routing capability
in a mobile network. A dual control planes model is presented, which includes
the traditional S (stationary)-plane for routing among stationary nodes using
connection-based message routing. In addition, a new control plane, M
(mobile)-plane, is used for trajectory control of mobile nodes. The focus is on
loosely controlled movement of mobile nodes to assist routing. The five goals of
this work are the following: (1) Propose a generic framework for routing. (2)
Offer flexible trajectory control of mobile nodes to balance several global
objectives. (3) Explore the use of unicasting as a basic building block to
support collective communication, including multicast, broadcast, anycast,
gather, and gossip. (4) Extend the current model in the 2-D Euclidian space to
the high-dimensional and non-Euclidian space. (5) Integrate different components
in dual control planes and fine tune the system through an empirical study based
on a set of well-defined quantitative performance metrics. This work is the
first to integrate two schools of handling node mobility. The PI envisions that
results generated from this research will provide guidelines for efficient
routing in a wide range of applications, including the GENI project.