* 0946297
* Acquisition of an Excimer Laser, Quadrupole ICPMS and Microsampler for UC Davis
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2012
* Howard Spero, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 06/30/2012
* USD 411,187.00

0946297 &lt;br/&gt;Spero&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides funding over
24 months to acquire an excimer laser and quadrupole inductively coupled plasma
mass spectrometer (ICP-MS) for high-resolution paleoclimatological elemental and
isotopic measurements. The requested configuration will allow analyzing a broad
suite of elements and isotopes. Various geological materials can be analyzed and
the instrument offers a rapid (&lt;0.5 sec/analysis) sample throughput. The
laser will offer ultra-high resolution (micron to nanometer spatial scale), and
the system will have minimal inter-sample memory problems. Accuracy and
precision will be comparable to wet plasma ICP-MS systems. The system will
especially useful for measuring Metal/Ca (e.g. Mg/Ca, Ba/Ca, B/Ca etc.) and
stable isotopes (carbon and oxygen). Research will focus primarily on
paleoclimatic and paleoceanographic questions but the instrumentation will be
applicable to many geoscientific-related themes. The new instrument will be a
valuable training tool for graduate students, post-docs and exceptional
undergraduates. The instrument will be used for teaching by the PI and Co-PIs in
graduate and undergraduate geochemistry courses and undergraduate research
projects and senior theses. This state-of-the-art instrumentation, unique in the
US will allow the PIs, students and postdocs to remain at the forefront of new
research areas and techniques. The instrument will be moved into a recently-
renovated laboratory space. The PIs will collectively be responsible for
operation and maintenance. Grant income and recharge funds will be used to
maintain the instrument and support a technician. The administration will fund
major repairs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***