* 0946718
* Workshop Proposal:   Research Issues at the Interface of Computer Science and Economics
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Lawrence Blume, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2010
* USD 50,000.00

This workshop will provide leading figures in computer science and economics a
chance to explore and further develop emerging research opportunities at the
interface of the two disciplines. There is strong interest in both communities
in pursuing a joint research agenda. The workshop will explore a range of issues
where there is opportunity for research interaction. These include models of
learning by computational agents in economic settings; research on the role of
complex networks in economic systems; the welfare properties and stability of
equilibria; the computational tractability of basic economic problems and the
design of computationally feasible mechanisms; and the role of information,
trust, and reputation in markets. The workshop will be structured to facilitate
discussions among people working in different disciplines, who may have
different perspectives that can be usefully synthesized in approaching these
problems. The workshop will help frame the preparation of a subsequent report
articulating significant research directions and applications.

The topics covered by the workshop have the potential to inform design and
policy questions on topics of fundamental societal importance. One fundamental
application will be to problems of trust, risk, and contagion in financial
markets, offering insights into the interconnectedness and fragility of large
financial systems. Other fundamental applications will be to problems in
emerging online markets; to systems supporting innovation and knowledge
creation, including social, economic, and technological aspects; and to markets
in the developing world.