* 0946596
* US-Egypt Cooperation:  A Workshop on Material Cycling Along the Egyptian Coastline
* NONE,NONE
* 11/01/2009,10/31/2010
* Richard Peterson, Coastal Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 10/31/2010
* USD 43,793.00

This is a proposal by Dr. Richard Peterson, Research Scholar at Coastal Carolina
University, to host a workshop in conjunction with the 3rd International
Conference on Aquatic Resources (ICAR ?09) to be held in Alexandria, Egypt from
17-20 November 2009. Co-organizers of the workshop include Dr. Mohamed Atteia
Shreadah, President, National Institute of Oceanography and Fisheries in Cairo,
Egypt and Dr. Ayman A. El-Gamal, Department of Oceanography at the Coastal
Research Institute in Alexandria, Egypt. The workshop will focus on five topics:
sediment budgeting, water budgeting, nutrient and contaminant budgeting, primary
production and fisheries management, and future implications. The workshop will
take place on the last day of the conference and will bring US and Egyptian
scientists together in an effort to establish future collaborative efforts on
the topic of coastal oceanography. The Egyptian participants at the workshop
will provide background knowledge on prior studies and current problems, while
together with the US participants, will identify research priorities for this
area based on their technical expertise.

The Egyptian coastline is a highly dynamic region with varied sources of
material fluxes to the Mediterranean Sea. The Nile River is the largest
contributor, inputting vast quantities of water, sediment, nutrients, and
contaminants into the Mediterranean. In addition, the Suez Canal provides a
point-source link between the Red Sea and the coastal Mediterranean Sea. Non-
point sources of material input to the coastal waters of Egypt include
groundwater seepage and atmospheric deposition. To date, little is understood
about these material budgets and how they impact subjects such as delta
erosion/accretion, sea level rise, primary productivity, sustainable fisheries.
Future land use and climate change scenarios will influence these material
budgets to unknown extents.

Expected outcomes of this workshop include: (1) the development of professional
relationships between US and Egyptian researchers that will lead to future
collaborative studies; and (2) the identification of research priorities within
the workshop theme that future studies should focus on undertaking. Workshop
results will be published in both electronic (website) and print (journal) forms
for greater dissemination to other interested researchers. Senior and junior
researchers will participate in the workshop, as well as students and
underrepresented groups.