* 0946360
* Group Travel Award to the VIII IberoAmerican Conference on Phase Equilibria and Fluid for Process Design: Oct 17-21, 2009 in Praia da Rocha, Portugal
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2010
* John O'Connell, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 08/31/2010
* USD 6,450.00

0946360 O'Connell

The VIII Conference is scheduled for October 17-21 2009, in Praia da Rocha,
Portugal, with a similar format to the successful previous Conferences, but with
innovative contemporary session topics. See http://paginas.fe.up.pt/~equifase/.
These include: Fundamentals of Thermodynamics; Molecular Simulation; Product &
Process Design; New products and Materials (Properties & Applications); Green
Engineering & Sustainability; Alternative/Sustainable Energy; Biomolecules and
Biotechnology; Contemporary Educational Challenges. There are expected to be
more than 150 technical participants in spite of the current economic conditions
limiting international and business travel. The proceedings will be published in
a special issue of the journal Fluid Phase Equilibria.

The present proposal requests funds for travel and per diem for up to three
invited US speakers, all of whom are academics who would not be able to attend
without assistance. No request is made for Meeting organization expenses or for
non-US participants.

Intellectual Merit: This Conference will gather important international
researchers in the vital discipline of fluid properties and phase equilibria for
product and process design to review progress and to examine the next
generations of problems in chemical technology and their potential solutions.
Invited US participants will share their state-of-art knowledge via lectures and
discussions, and will learn of advances being made by colleagues from regions of
rapidly developing technology and resource utilization.

Broader Impacts: Global state-of-the-art in chemical technology will be
articulated, shared, and advanced by an important segment of the developing
world. American participation is essential for making contributions to the
general knowledge base, for building awareness of global activities, and for
fostering international collaborations.