* 0946811
* Collaborative Research:    Seston Contributions to metabolism Across Longitudinal Ecosystems (SCALE)-- Dynamics of Organic Particles in River Networks
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2009,03/31/2011
* James McNair, Grand Valley State University
* Continuing Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 03/31/2011
* USD 18,187.00

Collaborative Research: Seston Contributions to metabolism Across Longitudinal
Ecosystems (SCALE)--Dynamics of Organic Particles in River Networks

Streams and rivers continually transport microscopic organic particles that
originate from sources such as forests, upland soils, and streambed algae. These
particles are important because they (1) carry food-energy from headwaters to
larger streams and rivers, (2) transport pollutants through river systems, and
(3) transfer organic carbon from terrestrial to marine ecosystems. This research
asks three fundamental questions about particulate organic carbon in transport:
is it biodegradable, how far downstream does it travel, and to what extent does
it support life in larger streams and rivers? To answer these questions, we have
assembled a research team with expertise in stream ecology, organic
geochemistry, hydrologic engineering, and mathematical modeling that will
perform chemical and biological characterizations of the particles, identify the
important hydrodynamic processes controlling suspension and deposition, and
construct a mathematical model that simulates the generation, transport, and
decomposition of particles as they move downstream.

Stroud Water Research Center Education staff will develop curricula for middle-
and high school classrooms which introduce modeling within the larger framework
of aquatic sciences. The educators will work with researchers to develop the
curricula and models, which range from conceptual diagrams to mathematical
simulations. Because this research will emphasize the role of headwaters in
subsidizing larger streams and rivers, the result should help guide policy
regarding the protection of upstream ecosystems. Research results will be
summarized for local watershed associations for dissemination to the public, and
shared with national conservation organizations that provide technical
information to legislative aides.

