* 0946431
* Alliance for Building Faculty Diversity in the Mathematical Sciences
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2018
* Hien Tran, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Nandini Kannan
* 02/28/2018
* USD 2,975,225.00

An alliance comprised of NSF Mathematical Sciences Institutes and seven major
research universities with a good record of mentoring minority mathematics
graduate students will offer post-doctoral fellowships to new Ph.D.s for a
period of up to three years. The program specifically targets minority
candidates. A typical 3-year postdoctoral fellow will spend 1 year at a national
institute and 2 years at the host institution (university), which will provide
mentoring and other support. The Alliance universities are (listed
alphabetically): Arizona State University, Howard University, Iowa Alliance
(University of Iowa and Iowa State University), North Carolina State University,
University of Arizona, and University of Nebraska. The Alliance NSF Mathematical
Sciences Institutes are (listed alphabetically): American Institute of
Mathematics (AIM), Institute for Mathematics and its Applications (IMA),
Institute For Pure and Applied Mathematics (IPAM), Mathematical Biosciences
Institute (MBI), Mathematical Sciences Research Institute (MSRI), Park City
Mathematics Institute (PCMI/IAS), and Statistical and Applied Mathematical
Sciences Institute (SAMSI).

Despite slowly increasing numbers of undergraduate and graduate students in
math coming from underrepresented groups, there remain very few minority faculty
members in the mathematical sciences, especially at Research I Universities. An
explicit goal of this proposal is to increase this number. The career track of
most faculty at the best universities includes a strong postdoctoral experience
in which they build their research portfolio and broaden their understanding of
mathematics and its community. This postdoctoral fellowship program will allow
strong Ph.D.s, especially those from underrepresented groups, to reach their
full potential. Additionally, increasing the number of minority faculty will
provide role models for undergraduates and graduate students, thereby
encouraging underrepresented groups at all levels to continue in STEM fields in
general and mathematics in particular.

