* 0946708
* EAGER: A socio-technical framework for identifying team science collaborations that could benefit from cyberinfrastructure
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Jonathon Cummings, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Suchman
* 08/31/2012
* USD 183,778.00

Increasingly, research is conducted in multidisciplinary distributed teams using
various cyberinfrastructure components. Understanding the creation, evolution
and support of research collaborations is a crucial step in learning how to
identify and nurture the research teams that will be central to future advances.
This project investigates how scientific and engineering collaborations come to
adopt cyberinfrastructure and identifies characteristics of collaborations that
make them best suited to take advantage of cyberinfrastructure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The many ways that cyberinfrastructure is currently used
in team science and the socio-technical components underlying team science
collaborations will be identified. A new predictive model of the use of
cyberinfrastructure by different kinds of team science collaborations will be
developed and tested. Guidance on jointly assessing a collaborative team?s
technology, tasks, structures and people will be provided.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will show how scientific and engineering
collaborations form and evolve allowing nascent collaborations to be assessed in
terms of their readiness to form teams and successfully use cyberinfrastructure.
It will enhance team science effectiveness and improve the development of
appropriate cyberinfrastructure tools by identifying general classes of socio-
technical needs and solutions.