* 0946422
* Management, Operations, and Associated Projects for the National Solar Observatory
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2024
* William Smith, Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy, Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Carrie E. Black
* 09/30/2024
* USD 0.00

Under terms of this Cooperative Agreement, the Association of Universities for
Research in Astronomy (AURA), Inc. will manage and operate the National Solar
Observatory (NSO) and associated projects on behalf of the National Science
Foundation and the national communities of solar physicists and space weather
researchers. AURA will lead a transformation of current U.S. capabilities in
solar astronomy, develop a national observatory able to offer solar physicists
access to the foremost solar telescope in the world and to a robust solar
synoptic program. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;NSO will provide forefront facilities
and scientific instruments for researchers at Kitt Peak National Observatory and
Sacramento Peak Observatory based on the principle of scientific merit, as well
as the expert in-house support and data analysis tools that users have come to
expect. At these observatories, NSO provides a range of assets that allow solar
physicists to probe all aspects of the Sun, from the deep interior to its
interface in the corona with the interplanetary medium. NSO provides scientific
and instrumentation leadership in helioseismology, synoptic observations of
solar variability, and high-resolution studies of the solar atmosphere in the
visible and infrared by means of the above observatories and the six stations of
the Global Oscillations Network Group. These same assets provide data to space
weather researchers in their efforts to understand solar eruptions and their
effect upon Earth and its climate and to apply that knowledge to the protection
of satellites, astronauts, land-based power systems, and Earth?s climate.
Contingent on an NSF decision to fund it, the Advanced Technology Solar
Telescope (ATST) will move from the drawing boards to the mountaintop during the
duration of this Cooperative Agreement. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the highest
level NSO will enable a research portfolio that will provide quantifiable tests
of solar magneto-convection, the origins of solar activity, and the flow of
energy from the solar interior through the solar atmosphere and into
interplanetary space. NSO synoptic programs will provide data on the long-term
variability of the Sun and its consequences for humanity. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this program include providing access to research
facilities to the entire solar community on the basis of intellectual merit,
archiving and distribution of data to enable future investigations by anyone
with access to the Internet, and services and support provided to students and
educators. NSO leads a broad program in education for public visitors to its
facilities, undergraduates interested in solar physics, graduate students
conducting dissertation research on the Sun, and postdoctoral researchers
needing access to its facilities. Under terms of this Cooperative Agreement, NSO
will vigorously promote the advancement of under-represented minorities and
persons with disabilities in solar physics and space weather research.