* 0946935
* EAGER: Reducing Energy Consumption in Data Centers
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Natarajan Gautam, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Russell Barton
* 08/31/2011
* USD 240,000.00

This grant provides funding to develop models and methodologies for reducing
energy consumption in data centers to the maximum extent possible without
degrading the quality of service experienced by the users. The models and
methodologies are based on integrating stochastic optimization and stochastic
optimal control algorithms to determine: a) the optimal set of meta-applications
for virtualization in multiple servers; b) the optimal strategy to control
server speeds by dynamic voltage scaling; c) optimal rules for real time cluster
sizing. The algorithms will be developed and integrated under a unified multi-
time scale platform to exploit their benefits. They will be implemented in
software using existing advanced computational infrastructure that is capable of
interfacing with sensors and actuators in data centers. Software simulations
will be performed using workloads experienced by standard enterprise servers to
test, benchmark and validate the algorithms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, the results of this research will lead to improvements in the
efficiency of data center energy usage and methods for handling multi-
dimensional, multi-time scale, and nonlinear stochastic optimal control
problems. The primary goal of this research is to combine stochastic
optimization and stochastic optimal control for capacity planning and resource
management in data centers. These methodologies will be used to integrate pro-
active planning with real time control to reduce energy consumption to the
minimum extent possible. Planning capacity and managing resources will help
reduce the operating cost and the greenhouse gas emissions from data centers.
The proposed work will also contribute to the analytical tools and software for
stochastic optimization and optimal control problems.&lt;br/&gt;