* 0946688
* SGER:  Stress Relaxation Mechanisms in End-Linked Main-Chain Smectic Elastomers
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2009,02/28/2010
* Ronald Hedden, Texas Tech University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 02/28/2010
* USD 96,601.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;Liquid crystalline elastomers (LCE) are rubber-like
polymer networks that exhibit strong deviations from ordinary rubber elasticity
due to the presence of mesomorphic ordering. "Main-chain" smectic LCE, which
form lamellar mesophases due to mesogens embedded in the backbones of the
network chains, exhibit complex dynamic mechanical behavior with broad
relaxation time spectra. Recent studies of main-chain smectic elastomers
prepared by non-linear polycondensation made some progress in understanding
their dynamic mechanical response, but further progress depends on achieving
better control over the molar mass distribution of elastic chains between
crosslinks (Mc). This SGER involves a challenging synthesis of architecturally
well-defined smectic LCE by end-linking, which allows control of Mc. "Model"
end-linked networks having minimal amounts of defects and "imperfect" networks
having deliberately introduced pendant or free chains will be synthesized.
Mechanical properties of end-linked MCLCE will be characterized by small-strain
oscillatory deformation and tensile stress relaxation. Domain size and the
volume fraction of smectic vs. amorphous material will be characterized by X-ray
diffraction. Comparing model and imperfect elastomers will reveal how segment-
level or domain-level relaxation processes are tied to macroscopic dynamic
mechanical response. This study will be the first to use end-linked networks to
sort out the complex array of relaxation processes in smectic LCE, offering the
potential to catalyze rapid and innovative advances in understanding the physics
of liquid crystalline polymer networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;Main-chain liquid crystalline elastomers (MCLCE) are
materials that combine the flexibility and toughness of a rubber-like polymer
with the molecular ordering of liquid crystals. MCLCE have unique mechanical
properties that potentially make them useful as vibration damping or impact-
absorbing rubber coatings, or as soft actuators with properties similar to
muscle tissue. To better understand the connections between molecular structure
and macroscopic properties, "model" MCLCE with controlled chemical structures
and minimal amounts of defects must be studied. This SGER grant supports
preparation of model MCLCE by a technique called end-linking, which will be
followed by experimental research aimed at characterizing their physical
properties. The project will advance basic understanding of smectic MCLCE, which
have layered ordering at the nanometer scale. The research supports valuable
educational activities at Penn State University including graduate and
undergraduate research, supporting the work of students who actively participate
in outreach programs that introduce women and high-school students to polymers
and materials science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;