* 0946257
* EAGER:   MSB:   Collaborative Research: Chemical and Microbial Mechanisms Linking Litter Quality and Decomposition Rate
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Daryl Moorhead, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2011
* USD 67,239.00

A mechanistic understanding of the chemical and microbial mechanisms that drive
decomposition is lacking. Lignin:nitrogen or lignin:cellulose ratios of litter
are frequently negatively correlated with decomposition rates and are often used
to predict mass loss. In addition, traditional empirical models typically relate
generic patterns of microbial activity to environmental variables. Both
predictive approaches are correlative; neither explicitly represents the dynamic
interaction of substrate and microbial activity that determines the rate of
decomposition. Recently, a theoretical model of decomposition (Guild-based
Decomposition Model, GDM) integrated the dynamics of changing litter chemistry
with changing microbial community composition and biochemical activities, but
this model has yet to be experimentally validated. This project will test a set
of hypotheses that address interactions among lignin, cellulose, nitrogen (N),
and microbial community composition on decomposition rates of litter. Results
will be used to refine and validate GDM, thus improving predictions of
decomposition under global change. Mutant lines of the model plant Arabidopsis
thaliana that vary in lignin and cellulose concentrations will be used for
litter decomposition experiments. The chemical and microbial composition of that
litter will be tracked as it decomposes in N-fertilized and control plots in an
Alaskan boreal ecosystem. Nucleotide analog labeling of DNA will permit the
determination of the relative abundance of putative lignin- and cellulose-
degrading microbes in situ.

This project is high-risk in terms of relating Arabidopsis litter to natural
litter. It is high-payoff in terms of supplying a better mechanistic and
predictive understanding of ecosystem dynamics. Broader impacts include a novel
application of an important model plant to decomposition studies, training for
one graduate and one undergraduate student, and development of a summer "Mutant
Camp" for local high school students.