* 0946691
* Digital Immersive Screen Colloquium for Unified Standards and Specifications (DISCUSS)
* EHR,DRL
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2012
* Beatrice Stahl, White Oak Institute
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Welch
* 03/31/2012
* USD 249,804.00

This conference project will convene science museum leaders and technical
experts in the giant-screen theater field to start a process of establishing
shared Digital Immersive Giant Screen Specifications. The institutional giant
screen theaters are facing significant challenges in converting from traditional
analog large screen film to new digital systems. The analog film inventory
investment is at risk, as are the science museum theaters as new digital formats
become dominant. Prior to the conference, a pre-session Online Forum will
provide research reports, proposed technical solutions, and opportunities for
discussion. A Colloquium will bring together industry professionals for two days
to develop an initial consensus on standards and outline trial tests for next
steps. A post-session Online Forum will make possible wider review and
recommendations on the specifications.

Collaborators include the Giant Screen Cinema Association, International
Planetarium Society, Assocation of Science-Technology Centers, and MacGillivray
Freeman Films Educational Foundation, which will assist with the dissemination
of the draft specifications. LF Examiner will provide data on theaters and
films, and the Institute for Learning Innovation will conduct the summative
evaluation, which will build on other research (e.g., DRL-0610253, Maya Skies)
related to the impact of large screen immersive films on learners.