* 0946741
* Workshop: International Workshop on the Impact of Control: Past, Present, and Future, held in Berchtesgaden, Germany on October 18-20, 2009.
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2010
* Gary Balas, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 09/30/2010
* USD 10,000.00

An International Workshop on the impact of control entitled ?International
Workshop on the Impact of Control: Past, Present, and Future, is proposed to be
organized October 18-20, 2009 in Berchtesgaden, Germany. The Workshop is being
sponsored by the Institute for Advanced Study (IAS) at the Technische
Universitaet Muenchen and the IEEE Control Systems Society. The objective is to
bring together a group of leading researchers and practitioners in control
science and engineering to broadly address the issue of the impact of control.
There will be a particular emphasis on problems where controls had a lasting
impact in the application domain. Examples of application domains include and
are not limited to the following: automotive, aerospace, process industries,
manufacturing automation and robotics, networked systems, biomedical devices,
smart grids and renewable energy sources. Several panel discussions on these
applications and the impact of control therein will be carried out. Breakout
sessions on thematic topics such as Controls Education, Outreach and visibility,
Industry-Government-Academia collaboration, and Market studies and analysis for
control will also be organized. A panel report summarizing the deliberations of
the Workshop as well as recommendations for cross-institutional collaborations
in controls, specifically targeting industrial, academic, and governmental
cooperation will be produced subsequent to the Workshop. This award will support
a group of 8 U.S. researchers to participate in this three-day international
workshop on the impact of control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The US organizers are
Anuradha Annaswamy PhD., Senior Research Scientist, MIT, Tariq Samad PhD,
Honeywell and President of the IEEE Control System Society, and Professor Gary
Balas, Department of Aerospace Engineering and Mechanics, at the University of
Minnesota. Professor Martin Buss of the Institute for Advanced Study (IAS)
at&lt;br/&gt;the Technische Universitaet Muenchen is the German organizer of the
workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the workshop is to
identify the past and present impact of control in the engineering and science
communities, along with the future directions where control will have a high
impact and common theoretical and computational challenges facing the controls
community. Many of the leading international control researchers plan to
participate in the workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the
workshop will include a report on the past and present impact of control and
future direction and potential impact of control in the areas of automotive,
aerospace, process industries, manufacturing automation and robotics, networked
systems, biomedical devices, smart grids and renewable energy sources. A journal
article in the IEEE Control System magazine is also planned. The report and
article will highlight new opportunities for follow-on research and education
activities specifically for junior researchers and graduate students in the
controls field.