* 0946572
* EAGER:   Evaluation of an in silico constructed transcriptional regulatory network
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2009,12/31/2011
* Mandy Ward, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 12/31/2011
* USD 221,770.00

Intellectual merit: Shewanella oneidensis MR-1 is a bacterium that utilizes a
sigma-28 regulated transcriptional network to express coordinately regulated
genes. A computer-based (in silico) analysis predicted that the sigma-28
regulatory network contained several genes necessary for flagellar motility.
However, several additional genes, mostly annotated as encoding hypothetical
proteins, were also linked to these motility genes. The purpose of this project
is to analyze the products of transcriptional regulation of these genes using
reverse transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction Assays. Then, the biological
roles of the proteins will be assessed by constructing in-frame deletion mutants
and screening these mutants for motility defects using chemotaxis assays and
video-microscopy. Using these approaches it will be possible to evaluate the in
silico method used to construct the sigma-28-regulated transcriptional network
and potentially identify roles for a number of currently hypothetical proteins.
This research will lay the foundations for a better understanding of the
diversity of bacterial motility mechanisms (a topic about which very little is
known), provide information on the role of bacterial motility in the
biogeochemical cycling of metals (because MR-1 is a dissimilatory metal-reducing
microbe), and facilitate modeling for bioremediation studies that involve
microbial metal reduction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The PI will
enhance educational infrastructure by producing an open-access, web-based,
series of lectures: Modules in Microbiology. Each module will encourage
interdisciplinary thinking by emphasizing how different disciplines have
impacted the field of microbiology. These modules will be advertised on the
Society for Microbiology web sites of different countries and will provide an
e-text for students and teachers unable to afford regular textbooks.