* 0946015
* SBIR Phase I:  Inferring Neural State with a Home-Based Robotic System
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Mark Malhotra, Pine Hill Labs, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2010
* USD 140,812.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to conduct
R&amp;D needed for the commercialization of a home-based rehabilitation robot
for people with motor disabilities primarily caused by stroke. Currently, the
best level of care for stroke survivors ? daily occupational and physical
therapy for a several months ? is rarely achieved because of under-coverage by
insurance, the hassle of going to a clinic, and survivors? own motivation
levels. The first objective of the research is to validate the accuracy of the
rehabilitation robot. The second objective is to implement a method
to&lt;br/&gt;determine muscle activation (stiffness) using the robot. This
method will then be validated by comparing human muscle activation trends found
by the robot, and comparing these trends to those found in the literature. It is
anticipated that the robot will meet its design criteria of accuracy and will be
able to correctly determine muscle activation. Finally, a fun exercise
environment will be created to feed the muscle activation back to the user to
encourage him/her to decrease stiffness. This will help them move more naturally
and regain the ability to independently perform activities of daily
living.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project is significant, especially to motor-disabled stroke survivors and their
families. Every year, 250,000 Americans are left with impaired motor functions
after stroke. Rehabilitating these people will allow them and their families to
live more independently. The commercial impact comes from advancing the state-
of-the-art by bringing research findings, such as the importance of tracking
muscle activation in the rehabilitation process, to an underserved segment of
the&lt;br/&gt;market. Current rehabilitation devices are mostly used in clinics
because they are too expensive for users to purchase themselves. The home-based
robotic device will complement clinical rehabilitation. Furthermore, this
project will have an impact on research by contributing improved ways to display
neural state parameters (like muscle activation) to users, regardless of what
rehabilitation device they happen to use.