* 0946905
* RAPID: In-Channel Alluvial Benches and Their Environmental Controls
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2009,01/31/2011
* Phillip Royall, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Ezekiel Kalipeni
* 01/31/2011
* USD 10,000.00

In-channel alluvial benches are shelf-like deposits of river sediment that are
located above the channel bed but below the main floodplain surface. Their
positions and morphologies may complicate routine determinations of bankfull
stage, so vitally important to stream restoration plans. Their presence can
impact the quality of hydraulic and riparian habitat, while their mass budgets
are important indicators of fluvial dynamics. This research focuses on measuring
modifications of old in-channel benches documented by Kilpatrick and Barnes in
1964 in the Southern Piedmont of the southeastern United States, and of younger
benches that may have originated during drought conditions occurring in the
Piedmont over the last decade. Researchers elsewhere have found that benches may
be produced during drought and destroyed during wetter, flood dominated regimes.
The return to higher rainfall in 2009 relative to most of the last decade thus
has the potential to initiate rapid transformation of benches, affecting
sediment budgets and riparian habitat throughout the region. Alternatively, land
use history may override flood regimes as the dominant control on bench
formation and destruction. This project seeks to differentiate controls on bench
mass balance to elucidate bench dynamics in Piedmont streams using surveying,
landform dating techniques, flood data analysis and land use change assessment.
This project is time sensitive because year 2009 rainfall to date has been much
greater than that occurring annually for most of the last decade in the southern
Piedmont. This recent meteorological transition from drought to wetter
conditions presents an unparalleled opportunity to document in-channel benches
that may have been created during decadal drought and to observe the effects of
a transition to higher stream-flow regime at its beginning. This research
contributes to better understanding about sediment storage in rivers, as not
much is known about the formation and persistence of in-channel alluvial benches
as sediment storage features. What is known about alluvial benches comes from
studies conducted in locations with climates significantly different from those
of the temperate Eastern United States. Thus, this research will address whether
our current understanding of benches from previous research is generally
applicable to systems in diverse climatic settings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research project examines the occurrence, formation, and persistence of a
specific type of river sediment storage feature. As such, it will result in a
better understanding of causes, processes, and conditions leading to in-channel
sediment storage, which has considerable potential to help make sediment budgets
more precise and meaningful in terms of understanding sediment dynamics in
rivers. From an applied fluvial geomorphology perspective, this research will
provide new insight into the field determination of bankfull stage, by examining
geomorphic surfaces located below the floodplain or main valley flat that are
hydrologically significant. Finally, this research will provide new insight into
the coupling of landscape and atmospheric phenomena by examining the potential
impact of drought versus more commonly cited instigators of change in river
sediment dynamics, such as historic alteration of land use /cover and surface
hydrology. Research results will be widely disseminated in conference
presentations and research journals.