* 0946918
* International Workshop on Cyber-Physical Systems (WCPS'09): Closing the Loop  -- To be held in conjunction with ESWEEK 2009. To Be Held in Grenoble, France, October, 11-16, 2009
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Nikil Dutt, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Zhi Tian
* 08/31/2011
* USD 30,000.00

The International Workshop on Cyber-Physical Systems: Closing the Loop is to be
held in conjunction with Embedded Systems Week (ESWEEK) in Grenoble, France,
October 11-16, 2009. The objectives of the Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) workshop
are to: (i) provide a forum for investigation of major challenges in addressing
next-generation physical and engineered systems; (ii) promote collaboration and
cooperation between CPS researchers in the United States and Europe; and (iii)
stimulate discussions on research in CPS through panels, poster and break-out
sessions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With respect to intellectual merit, the emerging
field of CPS requires close interaction and collaboration between experts from a
variety of fields. CPS is of global importance and there are significant CPS
research activities in the U.S., Europe and elsewhere. This workshop contributes
to the planning and coordination of CPS research that plays a critical role in
identifying new crosscutting scientific foundations for building high-confidence
cyber-physical systems and bringing together stakeholders from academia,
industry and government agencies with a global
perspective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With respect to broader impacts, this workshop
can lead to advances in CPS with the potential for technological impact on a
number of important application domains including energy, transportation, and
healthcare. The workshop will facilitate diverse participation of U.S.
researchers in the international ESWEEK event, including Ph.D. students and
junior faculty. Efforts are made to towards broadening the participation of
researchers from women and other underrepresented groups. The workshop, thus,
has the potential to contribute to training the next generation of scientists,
engineers, and designers for cyber-physical systems.