* 0946284
* REE-SiO2 Systematics for Distinguishing a Fractional Crystallization Versus Crustal Melting Origin for Intra-Oceanic Silicic Melts: A Combined Experimental and Field Investigation
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2010,02/28/2014
* James Brophy, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 02/28/2014
* USD 274,276.00

Intellectual Merit.Â  A fundamental problem in the origin of silicic magmas in
oceanic environments (both oceanic arc and mid-ocean ridge) concerns the
relative roles of fractional crystallization of basaltic magmas vs. partial
melting of hornblende bearing lower crustal grabbro or gabbroic cumulate rocks.
This issue bears on basic interpretations of the inner workings of oceanic
magmatic systems and, ultimately, their impact on continental growth. The PI has
proposed recently a geochemical "test" (based on the co-variation between SiO2
and the REE) that might permit discrimination of these two processes in oceanic
environments (Brophy, 2008, 2009). In short, fractional crystallization of
parental basalt oceanic island arc (OIA) or mid-ocean ridge (MOR) settings
should lead to a positive SiO2-REE correlation while dehydration melting of
amphibolite (OIA environment) or hydration-induced melting of gabbro (MOR
environment) should lead to a negative SiO2-REE correlation. If correct, these
predicted co-variations represent a straightforward geochemical test for the
genesis of silicic magmatism in oceanic environments. This proposal aims to
evaluate the robustness of this model via both experimental studies and
petrologic studies of natural rock suites. The experimental work comprises two
parts: (1) dehydration melting of oceanic arc crustal amphibolite at 7.5 Kb
(~base of crust); and (2) hydration-induced melting of mid-ocean ridge crustal
gabbro at 2.0 Kb (~shallow crust). These experiments will be designed to insure
global equilibrium and development of sufficiently large melt pools to permit in
situ major element (EMP) and REE (and other trace element) (SIMS) analysis.
Experiments will be conducted at three different locations including The
Institute for Study of the Earth's Interior, Okayama University, Japan, Hannover
University in Hannover, Germany, and the University of Oregon. An added benefit
will be the determination of partition coefficients for the REE and other trace
elements between high-SiO2 liquid (&gt; 65% SiO2) and the minerals hornblende,
plagioclase, augite, and Fe-Ti oxides. Such data are sorely lacking and will
fill an important void in our overall knowledge of solid-liquid partition
coefficients. The field based work comprises studies of natural examples of both
dehydration melting of lower OIA crustal amphibolite (the Asago Body of the
Yakuno Ophiolite, Honshu Island, Japan) and hydration melting of MOR gabbro (the
Fournier Oceanic Crust, New Brunswick, Canada). Through the direct analysis of
major element and trace element abundances in both unmelted host rock and
crystallized silicic melt (i.e. leucosomes) it is anticipated that the proposed
REE-SiO2 systematics can be directly evaluated in the natural
setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The proposed study has the
potential to verify and, therefore, provide a straightforward means of
determining a crustal melting versus fractionation origin for silicic magmas in
oceanic volcanic systems. At the more practical level, the proposed study will
initiate (and hopefully perpetuate) collaborative research with several
international scientists including Dr. Eizom Nakamura (Director, Institute for
Study of the Earth's Interior), Dr. Akira Ishiwatari (Tohoku University), Dr.
Juergen Koepke (University of Hannover) and Dr. John Spray (University of New
Brunswick). The work will support the training of one graduate student in
geology. The Department of Geological Sciences at Indiana University strongly
encourages the participation of undergraduate students in faculty research. The
PI currently has two undergraduate students working in his lab and expects to
"carve out" additional individual projects suitable for undergraduate level
research.&lt;br/&gt;