* 0946877
* Critical Zone Science: A Workshop on the Biological Aspects of Weathering; October 3-5, 2009; Washington, D.C.
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2011
* Susan Brantley, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 09/30/2011
* USD 64,812.00

The Critical Zone is the zone on Earth where rocks meet life: as such, this zone
supports the functioning of human society. Due to ongoing anthropogenic
activity, the health of this Zone, including the hydrosphere, biosphere,
lithosphere and atmosphere, is now under stress. Soils integrate and record the
chemical, biological, and physical processes occurring in the Critical Zone, and
as such provide a long-term history of change.

To understand long-term and recent change in the Critical Zone, a global and
interdisciplinary Critical Zone community has formed to collect, track, and
disseminate data on Critical Zone processes that are driven by changes in
important environmental variables. This community continues to grow as
groundwater chemists, soil chemists, geomorphologists, ecologists,
microbiologists, and others seek to understand the coupled processes in the
Critical Zone.

To guide and advance future research programs in Critical Zone science, the
proponents plan to organize a workshop, ?The Critical Zone: A Workshop on the
Biological Aspects of Weathering,? to be held in October 2009 in Washington,
D.C. Approximately 20 to 25 leading scientists in the fields of geosciences,
soil sciences, ecology and microbiology will participate. This cross-
disciplinary workshop will be organized by Susan L. Brantley, Pennsylvania State
University, and Patrick Megonigal, Smithsonian Environmental Research Center,
and will be held at the Smithsonian Institute?s National Museum of Natural
History. The goal of the workshop will be to articulate a research agenda for
the biological aspects of weathering science for the next 10 years. The
discussions will lead to a publication on the topic that will lay out up to 10
important research questions.

Broader Impacts. In this proposal, we ask NSF to subsidize the costs of the
meeting. Workshop participants will derive from university and government
organizations and will derive from a variety of disciplines. The goals of the
workshop will have broad impact because the workshop will: ? Foster
multidisciplinary collaboration among Critical Zone scientists ? Identify new
approaches to Critical Zone science ? Identify research areas that are currently
underfunded and that lie between geosciences and biological sciences ? Develop
research priorities for weathering science ? Articulate a 10-year research
agenda for the interface of geochemistry-biology as it pertains to Critical Zone
science ? Produce one publication highlighting future research priorities