* 0946102
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Environmental Barrier Coatings for High-Temperature Metals and  Ceramic Matrix Composites
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* Edward Pope, MATECH Advanced Materials
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2010
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project proposes two approaches
to develop a thin, low cost, protective coating for SiC-based ceramic composites
and refractory and other high-temperature metal alloys reaching 1200 C.
Protective coatings are required for metals and ceramics to prevent accelerated
fatigue from oxidation and corrosion. A novel SiCN coating will be synthesized
via metal doping of thermoset polysilazanes, exhibiting low volumetric
shrinkage, high bond strength, and excellent hermiticity. Zr/Ti and Zr/Al doped
polysilazanes will be powder coated, thereby increasing ceramic yield by
limiting volatile content. Doped SiCN coatings offer lower Young's modulus and
tailorable coefficients of thermal expansion (TCEs) and surface chemistries,
increasing the coatings' durability during thermal cycling. The second proposed
coating system involves a sol-gel or polymer derived ZrSiO4 oxygen barrier with
a sol-glass top layer for moisture protection. Zircon functions as a bond coat
for the protective Y-Zr-Al-Si-O. The zircon phase will either be spin/dip cast
via a standard sol synthesis or derived from the condensation of Zr and Si
thermoset polymers. The applications of the novel coatings in this proposal are
not limited to protecting SiC-based ceramic composites, but also can be used for
silicon nitride, silicon-based monolithic ceramics, and high-temperature metal
alloys. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
program involves innovative material solutions to improve the performance,
durability, and life expectancy of metal, ceramic, and composite components
within propulsion and power generation heat engines. Thermal cycling and
accelerated corrosion dramatically reduce the lifetime of high-temperature
materials, which are experiencing increasingly harsh operating conditions.
Protecting ceramic and metal components during service in elevated temperature
regimes has been identified as a 21st century materials science priority.
Current protective coatings for both metals and ceramics consist of thick layers
(100s of microns) of materials of varying composition, increasing the complexity
and cost of production of high-temperature materials intended for long-lifetime
applications. Achieving this with low-cost, easily processable materials through
innovative chemistry will reduce the exorbitant costs of corrosion. The coating
approaches being developed offer the potential for quick inspection and
servicing through reapplication of the coating system. Ceramic, metal, and
composite structural materials operating under high thermo-mechanical loads in
corrosive or oxidative environments would benefit from the low-cost coating
systems to be developed.