* 0946768
* TC: A U.S.-France Collaborative Symposium of Young Engineering Scientists (YESS 2009)
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2010
* V. N. Venkatakrishnan, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* carl landwehr
* 08/31/2010
* USD 49,928.00

In what has become an annual event, the French Government and The National
Science Foundation jointly sponsor symposia, at the French Embassy, that bring
together young investigators from both countries on a topic of current
importance and that involves scientific challenges. For 2009, the topic was
digital identity management, an important subtopic under the Trustworthy
Computing Program?s emphasis area on ?fundamentals?. In bringing together these
young scientists, it is anticipated that the field will be advanced by getting
researchers together on problems that benefit from consideration of culture
differences between the two countries (as is the case with the study of privacy
issues), &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A very broad view of identity management is being
considered, including biometrics and other methods for authentication, forensics
to determine if after-the-fact an authentication violation took place,
cryptographic and other methods to achieve anonymity, and metrics to determine
the effectiveness of methods individually and in
combination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI created a program that consists of
invited talks, talks by young investigators, talks by Government research
agencies in which important research areas for both countries are declared, and
panels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The funds requested would be used to reimburse the
expenses of graduate and undergraduate students. The workshop is to take place
on July 7-10, 2009 in Washington, DC. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our systems are
experiencing an increasing number of attacks from all kinds of attackers:
underground criminals, nation states, terrorists, etc. Knowing who is on your
system is vital to discouraging attacks but also to achieve accountability in
the face of an attack. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;