* 0946337
* EAGER: Oxide Film Effects on Dislocation Nucleation -- Implications to Structure/Property Relations
* MPS,DMR
* 12/15/2009,11/30/2012
* William Gerberich, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Taleff
* 11/30/2012
* USD 264,439.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves a combination of in
situ nanoindentation studies in a Transmission Electron Microsocpe (TEM) with in
situ measurements of electrical conductance between tip and sample. It is now
possible to measure small conductance changes induced by dislocation nucleation,
while simultaneously measuring nanoindentation curves. This powerful measurement
capability will address the role of native oxide film formation on nanoscale
mechanical properties. This effect is very important because as sizes scale
downwards, the oxide role is inadequately understood but of relevance to a large
variety of technological issues such as stress corrosion cracking, fretting
fatigue, mechanically-assisted dielectric breakdown, fatigue of Micro-Electro-
Mechanical Systems (MEMS), fracture toughness of nanostructures, MEMS tribology
and wear and yielding in general. Model thin-film systems comprised of metal or
semiconductor films coated with oxide overlayers will be used to explore
fundamentals of the early stages of dislocation nucleation at or near surfaces,
i.e. to establish the critical structure-property relationships at the nanometer
scale. In particular, understanding the indentation size effect at very small
length scales is unresolved in most metallic systems since the image forces
associated with native oxide films have usually been ignored. By measuring
conductive contacts during deformation of oxide-covered thin metallic films,
simultaneously with load-displacement output, dislocation scale events can be
directly monitored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work has the potential to impact an
unusually wide range of scientific communities because it is fundamentally
inter-disciplinary. It includes instrumental, scientific, and technological
advances that will be of interest to the communities doing research on electron
microscopy, electronic transport in nanostructures and atomistic simulation of
mechanical properties of materials. The proposed research is of very significant
value technologically. Oxide film formation affects mechanical properties at
small length scales and plays and important role in areas as diverse as stress
corrosion cracking, fretting fatigue, mechanically assisted dielectric
breakdown, fatigue of MEMS, fracture toughness of nanostructures, MEMS tribology
and wear. These are core issues in many areas of nanotechnology that will be
immediately impacted by the proposed research. The PIs have an excellent record
of inclusion of undergraduate students in their research, an effort that will be
aggressively continued during the duration of this award. These students are
funded through various programs such as the UMN Undergraduate Research
Opportunities Program, NSF REU programs, directed research for credit, etc., and
have been involved in all aspects of the activities of the PI?s research
groups.&lt;br/&gt;