* 0946030
* SBIR Phase I:  Transparency Variable, Pixel Independent Wearable Screen For all-light Usable Mobile Image Communication Systems
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Xiqun Zhu, XIMAX Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 12/31/2010
* USD 199,991.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop a
system to solve two fundamental problems in personal mobile image information
communications: 1) sun-light readability and environmental awareness 2) personal
mobile communications device display screen size, weight, resolution, cost, and
power consumption. Up-to-now, no existing mobile display solutions solve above
two problems satisfactorily. Here we propose a solution that uses fast transient
MEMS based dynamically transparency variable display screen to solve both above
problems and will result in an all-light usable, thin, light-weight, low power
consumption, and low-cost wearable display devices for mobile computing,
personal mobile communications and entertainments.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact/commercial potential of this project is bringing mobile users
high resolution viewing experience. This technology will enable broad commercial
applications in mobile computing and mobile communications as a personal viewer
accessory for laptop computers, cellular phones, personal data assistants
(PDAs), portable TV, and video player such as iPod. It will find broad
application in education, industry and military. For example, through this
proposed transparent screen and supported by virtual reality software with
alignment/registration functions, a student can use empty test tubes to do
chemistry experiments with all processes and results displayed virtually to
avoid the expense and danger of real chemistry experiments, some of which can be
flammable, explosive or toxic. Therefore, this technology will open a broad
market across wide range of mobile internet access, education, industry
training, consumer wireless, and gaming market sectors.&lt;br/&gt;