* 0946142
* SBIR Phase I:  Flexible Thin-Film Thermoelectric Wearable Energy Harvester
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2010
* Paul McClelland, Perpetua Power Source Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2010
* USD 105,785.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will demonstrate
a wearable thermoelectric energy harvesting prototype generating sufficient
energy for a wireless transceiver powered by the heat of the human body. The
human body generates approximately 20mW/cm2, yet harvesting that power requires
complex thermal and electrical optimization. Traditional thermoelectric
generator solutions fall short of the voltage necessary for current electronics.
This proposal uses an innovative semiconducting materials deposition process,
patterning thousands of thermocouples on a flexible polyimide film. Research
will determine the optimal geometry of the thermal elements matching the thermal
resistance of human body and subsequently spool those elements into a wearable
thermal package prototype to achieve higher outputs sufficient to operate a
wireless transceiver. The device&lt;br/&gt;will deliver energy in a lightweight,
space efficient (less than 3.5 x 2.5 x 0.3 inches),and cost effective
package.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial impact of this
project will be primarily realized in medical monitoring and personal protective
equipment, with additional applications in both military and civilian
applications. Wearable thermoelectric generators can replace batteries for the
Wireless Body Area Network (WBAN) to improve quality of life and aid in
preventative medical treatments by wirelessly monitoring physiological data such
as EEG and ECG. First responders can use renewable means to power Personal Alert
Safety Systems (PASS) 3?]axis solid state accelerometers for detecting motion.
The use of lightweight thermoelectric generators can also reduce the soldier?fs
burden of carrying batteries. Wireless and battery free computing/sensing
platforms have long been an objective in these domains. Wearable thermoelectric
generators can provide the multiple benefits including lower total cost of
ownership, continuous availability of critical power, long operating lifetimes
(greater than 10 years), zero maintenance, elimination of
battery&lt;br/&gt;changes/recharging, and reduction of environmental impact with
less batteries&lt;br/&gt;ending up in landfills.