* 0946602
* An Electrochemomechanical Theory and Its Application to Solid Oxide Fuel Cells
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* jianmin qu, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Martin L. Dunn
* 07/31/2011
* USD 184,571.00

The ultimate goal of this project is to understand how ionic solids respond to
the combined electrical, electrochemical and mechanical loadings. To achieve
this, the research is organized into four components: (1) to develop and
validate a scientific theory that account for the interaction between
electrochemical reactions and mechanical stresses in ionic solids, (2) to
develop a numerical method for solving the nonlinear equations in the new
theory, (3) to gain better understanding of the coupling between
electrochemistry and thermomechanical stresses in ionic solids near microscopic
defects such as voids and crack, and (4) to conduct experimental validation of
the new theory.&lt;br/&gt;Ionic solids such as yttria-stabilized zirconia and
gadolinium-doped ceria are commonly used to make electrolyte - a key component
in solid oxide fuel cells. Solid oxide fuel cell is an electrochemical device
that converts hydrogen into electricity without releasing harmful pollution. It
is considered as one of the most promising green energy conversion technologies
of the future. However, to make solid oxide fuel cell commercially variable,
fracture failure of the electrolyte under combined mechanical and
electrochemical loadings must be fully understood. This research is to meet such
need. Besides contributing to science and engineering, the research activities
will also have a broader impact on educating students. Key aspects of the
educational plan include integrating research results into existing courses,
involving undergraduates in engineering research, bridging graduate research
across different disciplines, and engaging students from underrepresented groups
in engineering research.&lt;br/&gt;