* 0946510
* SynBERC BioFAB Facility
* ENG,EEC
* 12/01/2009,05/31/2012
* Jay Keasling, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Lynn Preston
* 05/31/2012
* USD 1,400,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0946510, Arkin, University of California-
Berkeley&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary purpose of this bio-fabrication
facility (BioFab) is to ensure that all of the driving testbed applications of
the Synthetic Biology Engineering Research Center (SynBERC) that are both
existing and future have rapid access to high-quality standard biological parts
as well as DNA synthesis and part assembly services. Two critical secondary
purposes are: (1) the development and testing of the best organizational
architecture for operating and scaling a production facility that is capable of
producing many standard biological parts and that supports broader community
participation across both academia and industry, and (2) ensuring that all
foundational SynBERC-developed technologies, from rapid genome-scale
reengineering of chassis to function composition standards for devices are
broadly accessible and rapidly translated into SynBERC testbeds and to industry.
Practically, the facility will pursue three specific projects at launch.
Specifically, the BioFab staff will 1) rapidly prototype SynBERC-specified
engineered genetic systems to achieve testbed-driven objectives, 2) design,
construct, and test a collection of 6,000 new BioBrick parts for controlling
replication, transcription, RNA processing and degradation, translation, and
protein degradation in E.coli and S. cerevisiae, and 3) work in partnership with
industrial and academic partners to develop improved tools for supporting the
design, construction, and characterization/testing of engineered genetic systems
assembled from standard biological parts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
merit: The successful development, launch, and operation of the world?s first
design and build facility for making high-quality standard biological parts will
mark an important transition in the development of biology as a substrate for
engineering. Within academia and industry, the BioFab will mark a transition
from individual ?crafts? based production of genetic reagents to a more mature
engineering technology platform. In turn, this will make the engineering of
biology easier and more predictable, with potential applications in energy,
human health, information processing, and more. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts: This first-of-its-kind facility has significant broader impacts for
academic research, education, industry, and globally. The BioFab facility will
accelerate the adoption and development of biological standards while extending
the SynBERC?s cutting-edge research to the broader industrial and academic
communities. This professionally staffed and operated parts engineering facility
will serve as an important resource for industry and academia for defining and
promulgating standards, from technical to professional practice. Within
education, engineering students will have access for the first time to improved
collections of biological parts for controlling basic but essential cellular
processes, allowing them to focus less on technical issues and more on
identifying ways to engineer biology to solve the world?s problems.