* 0946860
* Genetic and Molecular Characterization of Two Quantitative Trait Loci for Circadian Rhythm in Neurospora crassa
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Kwangwon Lee, Rutgers University Camden
* Continuing Grant
* Martha Peterson
* 09/30/2013
* USD 625,000.00

Most eukaryotic organisms display cellular and behavioral rhythms with a period
of approximately 24 hours. These rhythms are collectively called the biological
or circadian "clock", and this clock influences many of an organism's
activities, such as the sleep/wake cycle in humans. Through genetic,
biochemical, molecular, and genomic studies, the filamentous fungus Neurospora
crassa has served as an excellent model system for unraveling many biological
mysteries. Due to the commonality of the core mechanisms of the circadian clock
in eukaryotes, understanding the clock in Neurospora should improve our
understanding of its functioning and biological consequences in a wide range of
organisms. The goal of this project is the molecular characterization of two
major quantitative trait loci (QTLs) that contribute to circadian rhythms. The
project should provide insights into the biology of both the circadian clock and
quantitative trait loci. This research will be integrated into a new laboratory
module for the investigator's "Circadian Rhythms" course. The laboratory module
will provide undergraduate students - science majors and non-majors alike - with
an opportunity for hands-on experience in the experimental characterization of
the fungal circadian clock, along with insights into the nature and study of
quantitative traits. This will be an invaluable learning experience for these
students, and will help them develop into the intellectually informed,
scientifically sophisticated citizens that the nation needs.