* 0946632
* Travel Support for 2009 IJCAI Robotics Workshop and Exhibition
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Ayanna Howard, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence
* Standard Grant
* Thomas C. Henderson
* 08/31/2010
* USD 20,000.00

In 2005, the NSF hosted ?Robots: An Exhibition of U.S. Automatons from the
Leading Edge of Research?, which was the result of a 2-year comprehensive study
assessing robotics programs in the U.S., Asia, and Europe. The subsequent report
concluded that America is in danger of losing its leading position in robotics.
Arguably, the U.S. remains the world leader in artificial intelligence (AI) and
machine learning research. Such research is critical to advancing the cognition
that robots need to interact with people and manipulate objects in unstructured
environments. This need for machine cognition thus provides American roboticists
with opportunities to fill critical gaps and both vertically advance and lead
the field. The annual IJCAI event (International Joint Conference on Artificial
Intelligence) is a venue that can bring American and International roboticists
and AI experts together. For over a decade-and-a-half, the IJCAI has held the
Robotics Workshop and Exhibition as part of the overall conference. Such a venue
provides a unique opportunity for the community to formulate roadmaps that
leverage and apply America?s strengths in artificial intelligence to robotics.
Towards this, the 2009 IJCAI Robotics Exhibition and Workshop (Pasadena CA July
13-17, 2009) will emphasize the use of robotics outside of academia by creating
a joint forum with the commercial and amateur sectors.

Intellectual Merit: The workshop ?Beyond Academia: Exploring the Lessons and
Best Practices in Commercial and Amateur Robotics? focuses on sharing the needs
and expectations of robotics from all communities. Speakers from Willow Garage,
iRobot and the amateur robotics publication Make Magazine will offer unique
perspectives and approaches to common challenges from the perspective of
repeatability, measurement and situated deployment. The cross-pollination of
these ideas and experiences is crucial to the successful integration of AI into
robotics. The ultimate goal of the workshop is to generate a white paper
describing joint research opportunities. This has intellectual merit because
both the AI and robotics communities are at a crossroads regarding how to best
move robotics forward toward algorithms and experimental approaches that produce
repeatable results in unstructured environments. The exhibition consists of four
themes that relate to subsequent robotics challenges: 1) multirobot teaming, 2)
learning by demonstration, 3) manipulation, and 4) undergraduate robotics
challenges. Each of these areas has been identified as focus areas for the
integration of AI and robotics by previous NSF supported workshops. Broader
Impact: Complementing the workshop discussions and panel will be a significant
number of hands-on exhibits. Here, research teams will showcase working
demonstrations that support the challenge themes of learning, teaming and
manipulation. Exhibits will be on display for 2 full days during the general
IJCAI Conference, providing an excellent opportunity to engage a broad technical
audience. The exhibits will also be open to the general public to raise
awareness of the state-of-the-art. Students from local schools and summer camps
will be invited to visit. In previous years, the exhibition attracted local
school groups that attended via a day field trip. Access to the exhibits
provides an opportunity for students and leaders to learn how robotics and AI
play important roles in society.