* 0946280
* Environmental Determinants of Malaria Transmission in Africa: Hydrology of Water Pools near Villages
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2010,06/30/2015
* Elfatih Eltahir, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 06/30/2015
* USD 516,235.00

ENVIRONMENTAL DETERMINANTS OF MALARIA TRANSMISSION IN AFRICA: HYDROLOGY OF WATER
POOLS NEAR VILLAGES Hydrology plays an important role in shaping the dynamics of
malaria transmission in Africa. The hydrologic processes that lead to the
formation of water pools near African villages represent a key link between
variability in the natural environment and the dynamics of malaria transmission.
The long-term goal of the proposed research is to develop credible computational
tools that can be used to (1) design intervention technologies based on
environmental management of the local hydrology; as well as to (2) predict the
impact of climate variability on the hydrology of water pools and the associated
malaria transmission. The proposed project represents the first steps toward
this goal. In the course of the proposed research, two graduate students will be
introduced to this important field of research. This project will contribute to
the ongoing international research project on African Monsoon Multidisciplinary
Analysis (AMMA).

The objective of the proposed project is to improve our understanding of the
factors that define the hydrology of water pools in Africa. The HYDRology,
Entomology and, MAlaria Transmission Simulator (HYDREMATS) of Bomblies et al
(2008) will be developed further to incorporate interaction between local
aquifers and formation of water pools and to describe the impact of changes in
regional climate forcing and in land use. We shall determine how local
environmental conditions lead to the formation of these natural water bodies and
hence provide habitats that are suitable for sub-adult mosquitoes; and we shall
attempt to predict the response of these pools to climate variability and
climate change. A field site in Niger will serve as the focus of this activity.
Special attention will be devoted to link field measurements and model
development activities, e.g. villages are selected to represent a range of
variation of water table levels. Several important questions will be addressed:
What is the role of local environmental conditions (rainfall, soil, topography,
and vegetation) and microclimatic conditions (defined in terms of radiation,
temperature, wind and humidity) in dictating the dynamics of the water pools
that serve as habitat for mosquito populations? What is the relative role of
local hydrologic conditions, such as location within a watershed and depth to
the groundwater table, in shaping the water pools? Can we predict the response
of these water pools to seasonal, inter-annual, and longer term climate
variability in Africa? What is the impact of land use change on the spatial
coverage and persistence of these water pools? A specific set of hypotheses will
be studied with emphasis on the followings: (i) A significant fraction of the
variation in mosquito abundance between villages can be explained by variation
in the location of groundwater table relative to the surface; (ii) Land use
change in the Sahel and the associated degradation of vegetation and soil will
result in increasing the fractional spatial coverage and the persistence of
mosquito breeding habitats; and (iii) Adult mosquito abundance can be predicted
using satellite observations of rainfall over the Sahel. The predictions of this
study will be subjected to a systematic analysis of the uncertainty that may
arise from model assumptions and/or from prescribed range of model forcing.