* 0947963
* Fungal Genome and Transcriptomes in Phytopathogenesis
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Michael Perlin, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 06/30/2014
* USD 741,516.00

The Microbotryum violaceum fungal complex is an exciting system for examination
of the ecology and evolution of host/pathogen interactions and can serve as a
model for emerging infectious diseases in 'wild' non-agricultural environments
where host heterogeneity provides an important contrast to heavily studied
agricultural pathogens. Current genomics scale high-throughput technologies are
invaluable for gaining insight into the complex systems and associated
interactions that result in disease progression. This project will provide a
genomics infrastructure necessary for the rational design of hypothesis driven
inquiries into M. violaceum development and pathogenesis. A comprehensive and
comparative view will be generated of the suites of genes that play significant
roles in fungal development and successful infection. The specific objectives
are to: (1) Sequence and assemble the complete genome of Microbotryum violaceum,
which is estimated to be 25 Mb; (2) Annotate gene structure using computational
methods; (3) Analyze gene transcription profiles late in infection; (4) Promptly
release publicly all reads, assemblies, and annotation; and (5) Develop
education, training and outreach programs. Broader impacts: Several research
groups are prepared to use the genome sequence to analyze signaling leading to
fungal development and disease production, host specificity, genes under
positive selection, evolution of sex, and gene expression during infection. A
website will be developed at the Broad Institute to disseminate the information
on the genome of M. violaceum as well as allow comparison to other genomes,
including Ustilago maydis, the causative agent of corn smut disease. These
resources will be used by a community of scientists in the public and private
sectors interested in basic fungal biology, host-parasite interactions, fungal
evolution and the development of new methods for protecting agricultural crop
plants from fungal diseases through a better understanding of the basic
infection mechanism and disease process of obligate plant parasitic fungi.
Furthermore, this project will provide educational opportunities for
undergraduate students to participate in fungal genomics and bio-informatics
research and broaden the participation in basic science by under-represented
groups (specifically, African-Americans, women, Appalachians). An outreach
mechanism will enhance the interest of such undergraduates in pursuing an
advanced degree in the biological sciences.