* 0947439
* EAGER Collaborative Research:  Development of Synthetic Fly Ash Glass as a Model System for Investigating Fly Ash Reactivity
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Amde Amde, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 08/31/2010
* USD 17,859.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this EAGER research
is to demonstrate the feasibility of using synthetic fly ash glass as a model
for systematic studies of fly ash reactivity instead of using real fly ash. It
will demonstrate that synthetic fly ash specimens will produce reactivity data
consistent with that of actual fly ashes, while at the same time enabling the
use of analytical methods that cannot be used on the latter. This will establish
the basis for future systematic studies of fly ash reactivity. In this proposed
research, several fly ash glasses will be prepared with compositions based on
those of characteristic clusters identified in real fly ash. Powdered glass
samples will be hydrated in parallel with whole fly ash specimens and analyzed.
In addition synthetic glass monoliths with typical dimensions of 1 cm will be
hydrated in individual Teflon containers. This approach enables quantitative
determination by mass balances of the glass leach rates as a function of
solution chemistry and glass composition. It also permits the subsequent
detailed analysis of the gel layer using SEM and micro-Raman analysis. This is
not feasible for whole fly ashes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research effort will
help accelerate the usage of fly ash by the concrete industry through an
improved understanding of fundamental factors controlling reactivity. This will
lead to the better prediction of fly ash glass behavior in cement paste based on
its reactivity instead of trial and error by conventional tests. This in turn
will lead to a more effective use of fly ash, which will increase the
utilization rate and provide economical use of a waste material and lower
emissions of CO2.