* 0947189
* A Mid-IR Instrument Design for the TMT
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Christopher Packham, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey R. Pier
* 08/31/2011
* USD 109,828.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Astronomers from the U.S., Canada, and elsewhere are involved in the design of a
new telescope for the future - the Thirty Meter Telescope, or TMT. Its name says
it all, the new telescope would have a mirror that is 30 meters (approximately
98 feet) in diameter! Such huge telescopes (there are at least three being
considered now) are termed Extremely Large Telescopes, or ELTs. The size of a
telescope is important for two reasons: a bigger collecting area means that more
light can be gathered, allowing astronomers to study the faintest of objects
within a reasonable amount of telescope time; and the increased mirror size also
enables higher resolution so that the fine details of objects can be examined
more closely. A telescope delivers the light it gathers to a focus where various
instruments can be used to analyze the light. Dr. Christopher Packham of the
University of Florida is working in collaboration with a Japanese colleague to
design an instrument for the TMT that will form images and spectra of distant
objects. This instrument will work in the mid-infrared (in the part of the
electromagnetic spectrum with wavelengths longer than visible light but shorter
than microwaves). Analysis of mid-infrared light can tell us how planets are
formed from the material in disks around stars and also how the objects swirling
around a black hole behave. The work is supported by the Division of
Astronomical Sciences of the National Science Foundation through the Grants for
Rapid Response Research (RAPID) program.