* 0947467
* French - American Young Engineering Scientists Symposium 2009
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Mark Wiesner, Duke University
* Standard Grant
*  Ashok S. Sangani
* 08/31/2011
* USD 45,000.00

0947467&lt;br/&gt;Wiesner&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientists and engineers from the
US and France have been building collaborative linkages between young scientists
over the last two years through a series of workshops and symposia sponsored by
the U.S. National Science Foundation, and the Office for Science and Technology
of the Embassy of France, the CNRS and the CEA in France. The aim of this
symposium is to bring together through a three day meeting, a select group of
early career engineers and scientists from industry, academe, and government
labs to discuss leading edge research and pioneering technical work in several
fields related to nanotechnology and further develop collaborative
relationships.&lt;br/&gt;The 2009 symposium will be devoted to three topics
within the area of Nanotechnology:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Simulation and
networking of phenomena at the nanoscale&lt;br/&gt;- Instrumentation, detection
and applications at the nano bio interface&lt;br/&gt;- Environmental, health,
and safety issues surrounding nanotechnology &lt;br/&gt;
applications&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funds requested for this workshop will support
travel for an estimated twenty US participants, including overview and keynote
speakers. Invitees to the workshop will be selected by the US co-Chairs from
submissions solicited, where there is the possibility of follow through, from
previous YESS participants who are developing collaborative relationships with
their French counterparts and will benefit from additional interactions in this
regard. Invitees from the initial workshop included a broad spectrum of
universities (public/private/HBU) from geographically diverse
regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research
on the applications of nanotechnology to molecular electronics, medicine and
environmental protection as well as study of the impacts on human health and
environment and societal implications of these technologies have received high
priority in the US, France, Europe, and beyond. This workshop seeks to improve
awareness of efforts in these areas among early career scientists and engineers
with the goal of establishing collaborations and improving synergy in their
respective research efforts. While the need for research in these areas has been
recognized in both the US and France, coordination between groups has been
limited. Invitees to the workshop will represent leading young researchers in
their respective fields and the materials will provide a sample of top research
efforts in electronics, medical applications and impacts on human health,
environment and society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER
IMPACTS&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Impacts beyond the scientific merits of the
workshop will include the establishment of personal contacts between
researchers, an accelerated internationalization of US efforts in this area and
the dissemination of information on applications and environmental impacts of
nanomaterials. Selection of US participants for the workshop will include a
strong consideration of participant diversity and the potential for accelerating
collaborations ties that might not otherwise develop.