* 0947787
* Izapa Regional Settlement Project
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2014
* Robert Rosenswig, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2014
* USD 280,558.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Robert Rosenswig will investigate
the history of the Izapa state by collecting regional settlement data from the
Soconusco region of Chiapas, Mexico. The resulting data will help document the
emergence of hierarchical society centered at Izapa by at least the Late
Formative period (350-100 BCE), and determine the political nature of the
polity's persistence until the Early Postclassic period (CE 1000-1350). The
research will contribute theoretically to an understanding of the origins and
development of state-level society by documenting the important and poorly
understood Izapa polity during its rise, florescence and eventual collapse. The
project will implement a survey strategy that compares changes between three
environmental zones in the Soconusco. Survey efforts will be complemented with
limited test excavations from a site dating to each the Formative, Classic and
Postclassic periods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At its most basic level, the proposed
research asks: how did our stratified world evolve from the egalitarian hunter-
gatherers that constitute most of human history? After over 100,000 years of the
existence of modern humans on earth, hierarchical forms of political
organization emerged around the world less than ten millennia ago. Power and
hierarchy are fundamental issues addressed by many social sciences and
archaeologists are in a unique position to explore the origins and development
of the institutionalized hierarchy that permeates modern life. In contrast to
most regions of Mesoamerica where Classic period states are the primary focus of
study, the Soconusco provides a case where early political innovations are
currently far better understood than the subsequent rise of the Izapa state.
Izapa is surprisingly poorly understood considering that it is one of the
largest sites on the Pacific coast of Mesoamerica and it has been well-known
since the 1940s when its mounds and sculptures appeared in the pages of the
National Geographic Magazine. Despite the high-quality maps of monumental
architecture at its core, the full extent of Izapa is unknown. Further, the
overall demographic patterns of Izapa's sustaining area are unknown as are the
number and distribution of lower-tier centers from any time in the site's long
occupation. This project will document these demographic and political patterns,
and how they changed over time. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this
research is to document the political history of Izapa, and thereby increasing
awareness of archaeological resources in the region. Izapa is the only site in
the Soconusco open for tourism and expanding what is known of its political
history will contribute to local as well as Mexican national cultural heritage.
One of the most enduring ways in which this will be done is by initiating a
program of outreach to local schools through the development of teaching
materials. University of Albany graduate student Marx Navarro was born and
raised in Tapachula and he will spearhead this endeavor and provide an example
of what local school children could aspire to. Two other University of Albany
gradate students will base their dissertations research on data collected by
this project and two Costa Rican students will participate in the research.