* 0947085
* Instrumentation for Complementary Inorganic, Organometallic, and Bioinorganic Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2014
* David Singel, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 01/31/2014
* USD 240,965.00

With this award from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities:
Departmental Multi-User Instrumentation program (CRIF:MU), Professors David J.
Singel, Joan B. Broderick and Robert K. Szilagyi from Montana State University
will acquire a suite of new spectroscopy instruments and upgrades to existing
instruments which will enhance their capabilities to do ultraviolet-visible, EPR
and Mossbauer spectroscopies on interesting inorganic, organometallic and
bioinorganic chemical systems. The instrumentation would support the
spectroscopy needs of six major users (Joan Broderick, Trevor Douglas, Yves
Idzerda, John Peters, David Singel and Robert Szilagyi) and their research
students. Amongst the variety of topics to be studied are: 1) studies of enzymes
with interesting iron-sulfur moieties (Broderick and Peters); 2) the study of
protein cage templates for nanomaterials (Douglas, Idzerda and Szilagyi); 3) the
physics of magnetic nanomaterials (Idzerda); 4) the study of nitrogenase and
hydrogenase structure, mechanism and assembly (Peters, Broderick, Douglas and
Szilagyi) 5) the biochemistry of nitric oxide (Singel, Szilagyi) and 6) the
development of an improved understanding of potential energy surfaces in
inorganic, organometallic and bioinorganic catalytic processes (Szilagyi) . The
instrumentation will be available to a broad range of young scientists doing
research in the research groups of the major users. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
spectroscopic instruments that are the subject of this award allow chemists to
probe the electronic structure and chemical bonding in a number of interesting,
primarily metal-atom-containing systems. The information that is obtained in
this kind of research enables chemists to develop a better understanding of how
these species participate in catalytic reactions. The studies described here
will impact a number of areas, including fundamental chemistry, catalysis and
biology. Students using the apparatus will receive valuable training with
cutting-edge instrumentation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;