* 0947962
* New, GK-12: CarbonEARTH (Carbon Educators and Researchers Together for Humanity)
* EHR,DGE
* 03/15/2010,02/28/2017
* Renee Diehl, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 02/28/2017
* USD 2,847,750.00

CarbonEARTH (Carbon Educators and Researchers Together for Humanity) will team
STEM (science, technology, engineering, mathematics) graduate students with
upper elementary and middle school science teachers from rural and urban school
districts to present innovative open-inquiry science projects related to the
themes of Energy, Matter and Materials, Earth Processes and Ecosystems. The
interdisciplinary theme of carbon, broadly construed, will provide a unifying
platform for investigation, discovery, training and education. In addition to
their ongoing training in research, the CarbonEARTH graduate fellows will be
trained in relevant elements of K-12 science teaching, and engage in activities
promoting skills in collaboration, organization, communication, teaching,
leadership, team building and other transferable skills. CarbonEARTH will
additionally facilitate collaboration among faculty and graduate fellows across
carbon-related research areas. CarbonEARTH will beneficially provide teachers
and students from a wide range of disciplines with science learning experiences
that not only teach concepts, but also develop skills for approaching scientific
problems, for example global warming, waste disposal, renewable energy and
nanoelectronics. The inquiry-based approach will enhance the understanding of
STEM concepts and scientific skills for the upper elementary and middle school
students, providing experiences that reflect the excitement and importance of
STEM careers through their interactions with graduate fellow role models. To
address the need to increase the STEM pipeline, throughout the program, priority
will be given to supporting STEM education and career retention of
underrepresented groups. CarbonEARTH also will strengthen and expand
relationships between Penn State and K-12 schools.



