* 0947483
* EAGER: Intelligent Interfaces for Managing User Experience in Hypermedia-Enabled Virtual Workspaces
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,02/29/2012
* Julian Lombardi, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 02/29/2012
* USD 299,998.00

This project will combine design principles and technology advancements to
enable the deployment and evaluation of new interface paradigms for managing
continuities between hyperlinked 3D virtual workspaces and for managing user
orientation with respect to 2D and 3D information resources within virtual
workspaces. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Having built the open source 3D collaboration
system (Open Cobalt) as a means of enabling the deployment of hyperlinked
virtual workspaces, the research group will leverage the modularity and
flexibility of Open Cobalt's graphical user interface (GUI) framework to explore
optimal user interface approaches for: (1) defining optimal affordances for
virtual workspace authors and end-users to manage the configuration and
functionality of 3D portals (links) within hypermedia-enabled virtual
workspaces, and (2) managing the perceptual relationships among 2D and 3D
components displayed within virtual workspaces, which include multiple
interacting avatars and aggregated 2D and 3D content. The research will assess
the effectiveness of multiple GUI approaches in each of these areas in the
context of two exemplar implementations involving scientific collaboration and
education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will provide key insights into
optimal GUI approaches for managing content and connectivity within virtual
workspaces. It will also: (1) further advance usability within a software
infrastructure designed to support the cost-effective, large-scale deployment of
interconnected and deeply capable virtual workspaces, (2) advance a common and
extensible software framework supporting synchronized communication and
collaboration among large numbers of people across distributed and hyperlinked
virtual workspace contexts, and (3) provide open source software products that
can serve as the basis for future research experimentation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has great potential in advancing an effective
3D GUI for managing virtual place and space so that people are better able to
manage access to social and informational resources within hyperlinked virtual
workspaces. This will have direct impact on the efficacy of using virtual
workspaces in support of education, research, business, social interaction, and
entertainment. The resulting functionality of Open Cobalt will; (1) provide a
highly capable open source platform in support of further research on virtual
worlds; (2) further advance a powerful medium for enabling scientific outreach
and education; and (3) serve as a powerful 'force multiplier' that by supporting
an interlinked network of multi-user virtual world spaces, can leverage
individual and recombined intellectual communities across the nation and
beyond.&lt;br/&gt;