* 0947790
* New, GK-12: Fostering Scientific Creativity by Building Connections and Improving Science Communication Skills
* EDU,DGE
* 02/15/2010,07/31/2015
* Carl Renshaw, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 07/31/2015
* USD 2,545,088.00

New, GK-12: Fostering Scientific Creativity by Building Connections and
Improving Science Communication Skills&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Carl E. Renshaw
(Department of Earth Sciences and Thayer School of Engineering)&lt;br/&gt;Vicki
May (Thayer School of Engineering)&lt;br/&gt;Nancy Serrell (Director of
Outreach)&lt;br/&gt;Cynthia E. Tobery (Dartmouth Center for the Advancement of
Learning)&lt;br/&gt;Janet Zullo (Department of Education)
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dartmouth College&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Student interest in
science and math declines during middle school as attitudes shift toward viewing
science not as a creative process of discovery, but instead as ?facts to
memorize? and ?boring?. This project seeks to transform graduate education in
all of the STEM disciplines at Dartmouth by building on existing partnerships
with five local school districts to foster in middle school students the
scientific creativity we scientists find so appealing. Supported by training in
strategies shown to foster creativity as well as in principles of teaching and
learning, Graduate Fellows are paired with a middle school teacher for one year.
During this time Fellows use their research and science backgrounds to work with
partner teachers to develop hands-on, educationally sound, active, inquiry-based
lessons that emphasize the creative aspects of building connections between
research and curriculum -- from simple exercises to promote better brainstorming
and idea generation to more in-depth visualization and creative writing
techniques. Fellows are encouraged to share with middle school students not only
an appreciation for the discipline and rigor of science but also for the
individuality and imagination involved. In so doing, Fellows improve their
communication skills through interactions with diverse audiences and gain a more
contextualized and nuanced understanding of their research by learning to view
their work from alternative perspectives. More broadly, this program improves
middle school students? and teachers? attitudes toward science and facilitates
the building of connections to existing knowledge among participants, which has
been shown to improve learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;