* 0947836
* New, GK-12:  Water and Energy Systems:  The Key to the Future of Arid and Semi-Arid Regions
* EDU,DGE
* 03/15/2010,02/29/2016
* George Frantziskonis, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 02/29/2016
* USD 2,881,937.00

Water and Energy Systems: The Key to the Future of Arid and Semi-Arid
Regions&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Kimberly Ogden, Department of Chemical and
Environmental Engineering, University of Arizona, Tucson
AZ&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Arid and semi-arid regions
in the southwest US are experiencing rapid population growth raising concerns
regarding sustainable management of land, water and energy resources. The goal
of this proposal is to bring innovative research in water and energy resources
to the classroom. This will be achieved by developing and delivering a high
school level course built around instructional modules in water and energy
engineering as well as junior high level modules for integrated science courses.
Each module represents an application of ongoing research at The University of
Arizona (UA). The research modules will be drawn from the energy and water
research centers including: AzRISE, Arid Lands Institute for Bioenergy, EFRI:
Infrastructure Development, NSF/SRC/Semetech ERC for Environmentally Benign
Semiconductor Manufacturing, and the IUCRC NSF Water Quality Center. These
research units have significant involvement with industry, utilities, and
government agencies, and these partners will be an integral part of this GK-12.
The graduate fellows will come from a variety of engineering disciplines and
participate in a teaching methods/communication course prior to working with the
schools. The teachers will be instructed on the basic concepts and
implementation of engineering modules and will gain content knowledge in
engineering principles. The teachers will be drawn from regional junior high and
high schools, many of which have large minority (Hispanic) populations and low
income families. Together teachers and graduate students will participate in a
summer program that will have a variety of pedagogical workshops that are
designed to promote information transfer and learning between the two groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;