* 0947832
* ECCS/PCAN/EAGER: Biologically Inspired  Resource Harvesting in Mobile Wireless Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Prathima Agrawal, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 08/31/2011
* USD 100,000.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biologically Inspired Resource
Harvesting in Mobile Wireless Networks&lt;br/&gt;This research proposal
submitted to NSF EAGER program will provide techniques to harvest and manage two
of the most important resources required by a wireless mobile device: energy and
computing power. As manufacturers of mobile devices continue to wrangle with the
power consumption implications of Moore's Law, managing the device's resources
including its battery and processing ability becomes extremely important. For
handheld devices like cellular phones, personal digital assistants (PDAs) and
laptops, much of the existing research deals with design of low-power
electronics and conservation of battery power via intelligent protocols and
software. Instead, mobile devices need to be designed, at no extra cost, for
self sufficiency and disaster readiness. This is especially pressing in the case
of networked unattended sensor nodes. To achieve this one must look at
intelligent ways to harvest, adapt, conserve and manage the resources on each
constrained device. Since nature has tackled similar resource harvesting and
management problems in the world around us, we plan to employ biologically
inspired algorithms to efficiently harvest critical resources on mobile devices.
In particular we look at the techniques developed and honed by social insects
like bees, termites and ants to help us in achieving this
goal.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: Our proposed research addresses the urgent
need of harvesting and managing critical resources like battery energy and
computational power in resource constrained mobile devices. By doing so, we can
envision the creation and extension of new applications that are resource
intensive for a handheld mobile devices and other networked wireless nodes. The
contributions of this proposal are: i) developing a new distributed computing
paradigm, primarily derived from biological research that are optimal and
secure, ii) developing an optimized middleware architecture for mobile devices
to efficiently harvest energy iii) simulation study for validating the above
architectures and algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Success of wireless
networks is strongly correlated to the availability and sustainability of
resources (examples include battery and computational power) within a mobile
device. Systematic study and understanding of algorithms and methods that
harvest such resources are long overdue. Proper collection and harnessing of
critical resources like energy and computational power expand the reach of
wireless networks into unchartered application spaces. New applications plant
seeds for societal growth in the form of better, faster and timely
communications, newly created employment opportunities, efficiency, and broader
educational opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;Results from the proposed research will be
submitted for publication in journals and conferences and made available in a
timely manner to general audiences The PI will seek participation from graduate
and undergraduate students especially female and minority students to
participate in this proposed research and educational activities. Auburn
University?s proximity provides opportunities for engaging underrepresented
minority students from Tuskegee University (an HBCU) in the project.