* 0947465
* New, GK-12: Computing in Context: Advancing Computational Thinking in the Classroom through  Applied Computational Research
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2010,12/31/2016
* Susan Brown, New Mexico State University
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 12/31/2016
* USD 2,604,180.00

The proposed project, DIScover SciEnce through Computational Thinking (DISSECT),
builds on the fundamental role computing has gained within all traditional
sciences. The driving force of the project is the infusion of principles of
computational thinking in traditional scientific disciplines, creating new
opportunities for scientific discovery and for stimulating learning of STEM. The
project seeks to develop a collaborative model among NMSU, K-12 schools, and
local school districts, to foster the development of a new generation of well-
rounded computer scientists (the GK-12 fellows), capable of carrying their
research to a broader scientific arena, and with the communication and
leadership skills necessary to operate outside their specific CS discipline.
Through an innovative collaboration model with K-12 teachers and NMSU faculty
members, the GK-12 fellows' scientific exploration will develop in novel
educational modules and activities, which will play a vital role in enriching
and revitalizing the general STEM content of K-12 curricula. The project
proposes to introduce computational thinking as the tool to achieve these
results. In the long term, the exposure to computational concepts will train
students in foundations of CS. The project will play a vital role in the
enrichment of middle/high school STEM teachers. Short term efforts will develop
critical thinking and problem-solving skills in K-12 students; long term, it
will play a part in alleviating the shortage of skilled computing professionals
in the United States.