* 0947827
* Beyond the Minimal Dark Sector: Finding New Physics in Cosmology and Colliders
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/2010,12/31/2013
* Neal Weiner, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Marc Sher
* 12/31/2013
* USD 240,000.00

The latter half of the twentieth century led to a remarkable scientific
achievement: the establishment of the so-called Standard Model of particle
physics. As a theory, it incorporates all known particles and forces of nature,
excluding gravity. It has been extremely successful in describing known
phenomena, but we are prompted to ask whether there is physics beyond the
Standard Model. Are there new forces of nature, or new states of matter, which
are important to the universe? In this project, the PI intends to explore new
theories of physics beyond the Standard Model, focusing on interesting
phenomenological signals absent in most conventional models. He will study many
topics including unexpected signals of the dark sector in terrestrial and
cosmological experiments, models which allow wider ranges of flavor violation,
connections between neutrino masses and dark matter, and models of dark matter
motivated by cosmic ray signals. By exploring what connections could exist
between these apparently disparate fields --- dark matter, cosmic rays, neutrino
physics, and collider physics --- the PI hopes to gain insights into the
possible nature of these diverse unexplored phenomena, and find ways in which
terrestrial and cosmological studies can complement one another.

This project is also envisioned to have two key broader impacts. First, the PI
will maintain a continued effort to participate in summer schools and will
compile a regularly updated set of lecture notes on dark matter. This will
provide an important resource for graduate students or interested faculty in a
rapidly evolving field. Second, the PI will continue his very successful
outreach effort with the Governor's School West in Salem, North Carolina. This
public summer school draws students from across the state, from varied
socioeconomic backgrounds, providing an opportunity to promote physics research
and careers to interested and talented students, and counsel them on pursuing
such a path. This program has been highly successful over the last several
years, and offers year- on-year interactions with new groups of students through
an established educational setup.