* 0947665
* AGU Chapman Conference on the Exploration and Study of Antarctic Subglacial Aquatic Environments
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2010
* Brenda Weaver, American Geophysical Union
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Clough
* 08/31/2010
* USD 49,950.00

This award provides support for a Chapman Conference on the Exploration and
Study of Antarctic Subglacial Aquatic Environments. The conference will bring
together a diverse group of attendees to discuss their most recent results, and
to share future plans for subglacial lake exploration. Since the last major
conference on this topic in April 2006 (Grenoble, France) the number of
recognized Antarctic subglacial lakes has increased from ~150 to more than 250.
It is now recognized that these often interconnected subglacial aquatic
ecosystems are likely to have important implications for ice sheet dynamics,
evolution of microbial life and possibly life on other planets, and to be
important repositories of sediment-stored climate change records. Three major
field projects are planning to access subglacial lakes in 2011/2012: Lake Vostok
(Russia), Lake Ellsworth (UK), and Lake Whillans (US- the WISSARD project), so
this conference will also be an excellent venue to discuss technological
challenges including clean access of pristine environments (prevention of
microbial and chemical contamination of the subsurface world from above) and the
challenges of drilling through deep ice under high pressure, or the challenges
of making a large enough hole in the ice so that robots can be deployed. The
four major themes of the conference are: 1) Subglacial aquatic environments as
habitats for life: (a) life detection in subglacial lakes and (b)
hydrochemistry/limnology/biogeochemistry of subglacial lakes. (2) The role of
sub-ice water in subglacial hydrology: (a) ice sheet evolution and lake
development and (b) lake discharges and ice sheet responses. (3) Sedimentary
records in subglacial aquatic environments: (a) studies of sediments from former
subglacial lakes and (b) potential proxies held in lake- floor sediments and
detection methods. (4) Technological challenges in the exploration of subglacial
aquatic environments: (a) clean lake-access techniques and (b) probe and
instrumentation design. The results of the conference will be widely
disseminated (an AGU monograph, several reports to the scientific community, web
accessible recordings and simultaneous web casts of the conference itself, as
well as outreach to the public media). Participants will come from several
countries, therefore the conference will foster international collaboration.
Inclusion of early career scientists and students in the presentation and
discussion of a necessarily interdisciplinary, integrated, and truly cutting
edge area of Antarctic science will be extremely valuable in training the next
generation of Antarctic researchers. In summary, the long-term objective of the
conference is to establish a sustainable, vibrant and growing Antarctic
subglacial aquatic environment program. NSF funds will be used to support
student participants, some invited speakers and program committee members, and a
few other meeting contributors that require financial assistance. Travel awards
will be evenly distributed based on geographical location with priority given to
students.