* 0947950
* NSF GK-12 Graduate STEM Fellows in K-12 Education GLACIER-Global Change Initiative-Education & Research
* EHR,DGE
* 03/15/2010,02/28/2017
* Sucharita Gopal, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 02/28/2017
* USD 2,854,102.00

Global-scale environmental changes are critical to our survival as they may
affect the capacity of the Earth to sustain life. From the perspective of
education and research, the topic of global change presents a rich domain of
inquiry, exploration, and discovery at all grade levels. GLACIER's primary goal
is to provide graduate fellows a strong interdisciplinary perspective on global
change research by training them to observe and analyze both physical and
anthropogenic processes and their consequences at a variety of spatial and
temporal scales. GLACIER fellows will also have the opportunity to enhance their
teaching skills and learn how to translate their research into exciting and
dynamic STEM classroom lessons in grades 5- 8. GLACIER will also train teachers
to use geospatial technologies (such as remote sensing, Global Positioning
Systems (GPS), and Geographical Information Systems (GIS)); learn about methods
and field work used to study global change, create sustainable curricula for
grades 5-8 based on an inter-disciplinary approach, and cultivate new ways of
engaging their students to think about environmental problems.

Broader Impacts: GLACIER will help educate a citizenry that can make informed
decisions about the environment, and to train future generation of scientists
with a multi-disciplinary perspective and strong analytical skills. Finally,
systematic evaluation criteria will provide feedback regarding the value of our
multi-disciplinary focus. GLACIER will strengthen the ties between Boston
University and two partner school districts of Cambridge and Brookline, as well
as enhance existing links to local museums, zoo, aquarium, and other field
sites.



