* 0947046
* Acquisition of a Solid State NMR Instrument at Rutgers University for Research and Teaching Activities in New Jersey Area
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2013
* Martha Greenblatt, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 01/31/2013
* USD 332,854.00

With this award from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities:
Departmental Multi-User Instrumentation program (CRIF:MU), Professors Eric L.
Garfunkel and colleagues Tewodros Asefa, Martha Greenblatt, Frank Jordan and
Bozena Michniak from the Department of Chemistry at Rutgers University New
Brunswick will acquire a 400 MHz NMR spectrometer for the study of solids. The
instrument will be used to support research activities such as: 1) sample
composition of nanoporous materials and inorganic catalysts; 2) polymers used
for drug delivery applications; 3) inorganic catalysts capable of effecting
fundamental transformations to yield fuels and chemicals; 4) thermoelectric
materials useful for energy transformation; 5) mesoporous metal oxide,
semiconductor and polymer gel electrolytes for energy applications; and 6)
biopolymers and biomolecules useful for treatment of diseases and disease
diagnostics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy
is one of the most powerful tools available to chemists for the elucidation of
the structure of molecules. It is used to identify unknown substances, to
characterize specific arrangements of atoms within molecules, and to study the
dynamics of interactions between molecules in solids and in solution. Because
this particular instrument will analyze substances in the solid state it will
provide valuable structural information on a variety on insoluble materials.
Access to state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential to chemists who are
carrying out frontier research. The results from these NMR studies will have an
impact in synthetic organic/inorganic chemistry, materials and biochemistry.