* 0947267
* WAVACS: Water Vapour in the Climate System Workshop; Cargese, Corsica; September 14-26, 2009
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2010
* Elisabeth Moyer, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Bradley F. Smull
* 08/31/2010
* USD 10,000.00

Water vapor is a key element essential to most forms of life and one which
connects multiple spheres within the earth system. Techniques to accurately
track its movement and transformations (e.g., use of isotopic tracers for
hydrological processes, microphysical studies of in-cloud processes, and
representations of water vapor transport and precipitation processes within
global atmospheric circulation models) are continuously evolving. These and
other related topics will be the focus of a joint American-European summer
school titled "Water Vapour in the Climate System", to be held September 14-26,
2009, in Cargese, Corsica.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A mix of established scientists,
students and postdoctoral research associates drawn from diverse communities
including numerical modelers, data analysts, and experts in satellite and in-
situ observing systems will gather to exchange information on the latest
advances and techniques within this active arena of research. Partner European
agencies will supply meeting facilities and host services, while funds
distributed under this grant will provide partial travel support for
approximately one dozen U.S.-based students and postdoctoral research associates
attending this summer school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the
workshop is high because it will bring together both established and early-
career researchers from a broad range of sub-disciplines. Broader impacts stem
from the societal importance of global cloud and precipitation processes that
hinge on the water vapor cycle, the recruitment of a diverse group of attendees
including members of underrepresented groups, and promotion of international
collaborations.