* 0947224
* LTREB: Climatic change and community organization across three trophic levels: long-term research at a sentinel site in semiarid north-central Chile
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2015
* Peter Meserve, Northern Illinois University
* Continuing Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 03/31/2015
* USD 64,421.00

Ecologists continue to debate the relative importance of biotic interactions
such as predation, competition, and herbivory versus abiotic factors such as
climate in regulating population and community dynamics. This project, now in
its twentieth year, started as a large&amp;#8208;scale investigation of the
importance of biotic interactions in a Chilean semiarid thorn scrub community.
Excluding predators has had significant though transient effects on plants,
herbivores and their predators, while high rainfall events have resulted in
dramatic responses by all community members. Three of 5 El Niño (high rainfall)
events during the last 10 years portend more frequent and intense El Niños, a
predicted consequence of global climate change. These in turn may significantly
alter the dynamics of important community components. Current objectives of the
project are to assess the impact of changes in precipitation patterns on native
vs. introduced species (especially rabbits and hares), in light of recent
changes in the precipitation regime. New experiments will exclude rabbits or
hares , and both rabbits or hares and small mammals, allowing the investigators
to quantify the impacts of these herbivores while testing predictions for how
global climate change-related alterations in precipitation will affect native
plants, primary consumers, their predators, and interactions among these
components. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The increasing evidence for effects of
stronger and more frequent El Niño events in this Chilean community will provide
a baseline for comparison with ongoing changes in arid&amp;#8208;semiarid
systems worldwide. The project depends on a strong, intellectual collaboration
with Chilean scientists and their students, and provides valuable training for
students and technicians in the fields of ecology, environmental biology,
environmental management and conservation, and global change. &lt;br/&gt;