* 0947822
* Collaborative Research: Rolling Deck to Repository (R2R): Transforming the Academic Fleet Into an Integrated Global Observing System
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Andrew Maffei, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* James Holik
* 08/31/2015
* USD 950,231.00

This proposal presents a new approach to improve data preservation and
accessibility ? the Rolling Deck to Repository (R2R) Project ? a comprehensive
plan for fleet-wide data management. R2R will be a central shore-side data
gateway through which underway data from each expedition are routinely cataloged
and transmitted from UNOLS ship operators to long-term national archives. R2R
will provide essential data documentation services including the production of
standardized cruise-level metadata, data inventories, navigation products, and
an operations report for every expedition. Tools for routine logging of over-
the-side sensor deployments and sampling stations will be developed and deployed
to facilitate creation of a sampling ?event log? for each cruise. In partnership
with the Shipboard Automated Meteorological and Oceanographic System (SAMOS;
http://samos.coaps.fsu.edu/) Data Assembly Center (DAC), R2R protocols will be
established for near real-time transfer and automated Quality Assessment (QA) of
meteorological and thermosalinograph data providing direct feedback to operators
while the cruise is underway. R2R will coordinate the development of routines
for post-cruise QA of underway data types, with initial development focused on
geophysical sensors (multibeam sonar, subbottom profilers, magnetics, gravity),
and subsequent expansion to other sensors (CTD, ADCP, etc). Using R2R tools,
underway data will be categorized and sufficiently documented for submission to
long-term National Data Centers (NDCs) operated by NOAA, and to DACs specialized
in the reduction and analysis of specific data types. Our approach will be to
leverage and augment the existing centralized information resources of the UNOLS
office, ship operators, and NDCs to facilitate the documentation and delivery of
oceanographic data from ?rolling deck? to ?repository.? Our vision is that
working directly with ship operators and technicians will ensure more complete
and consistent acquisition, quality, preservation, and dissemination of these
high-value data, thereby transforming the academic fleet into an integrated
global observing system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Access to
research vessels is becoming increasingly more expensive and difficult. The R2R
project will help to leverage these costs for the benefit of the entire ocean
science community and any other potential users of the data that will be
routinely collected, checked and properly archived. As the proposers state, this
will essentially make the UNOLS fleet an observatory system that will have
coastal, regional and global scope, providing data sets useful to current and
future researchers. Going forward with this project, even though it may seem
expensive will in the long run make our investment in the research vessels,
instrumentation and operational costs much more cost effective.&lt;br/&gt;