* 0947814
* State Science Policies:   Modeling Their Origins, Nature, Fit, and Effects on Local Universities
* SBE,SBE
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2011
* Maryann Feldman, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Julia I. Lane
* 09/30/2011
* USD 182,982.00

Each of the fifty U.S. states has adopted science and innovation policy
initiatives aimed at improving economic performance. These policies seek to
leverage the research capacities of universities in the state, under the logic
that those institutions are essential actors in both increasing the state's
prominence as a center for technological and scientific progress and building
the state's commercialization infrastructure to facilitate entrepreneurship and
firm growth. States have become increasingly active in science policy since the
1980s. Unfortunately, there have been few attempts systematically to study the
origins of these policies and the nature of the incentives and mechanisms they
provide. Archival records of state programs exist but remain difficult to
categorize. Relatedly, little attention has been paid to how individual states'
policies relate to the states' socioeconomic, institutional, and academic
contexts. Finally, although these policies attempt to leverage universities and
move research in specific directions, little is known about how universities are
in fact being affected. &lt;br/&gt;To address these knowledge gaps, this study
utilizes multidisciplinary theoretical models, extensive longitudinal datasets,
and a mix of econometric and case-study methods to examine four research
questions regarding state science policy initiatives: (1) Origins: When and why
do states adopt science and innovation policies involving universities? (2)
Nature: How might state science and innovation policies be systematically
described, categorized, and differentiated? (3) Fit: To what extent have state
policymakers matched their science and innovation policies to their states' and
universities' distinctive characteristics? 4) University effects: What impacts
have state science and innovation policy initiatives had on both public and
private universities in the state? &lt;br/&gt;This study formulates and
investigates multidisciplinary theoretical models to examine how state science
and innovation policies come to be formed, how those policies might be
systematically described, categorized, and compared, how the policies fit with
the states' distinctive socioeconomic and institutional contexts, and how the
policies subsequently affect organizational structures, processes, and research
capacity of universities in those states. Thus, the project is designed to build
understanding of not only why states and institutions have acted the way they
have but also, perhaps even more fundamentally, the range of potential state
actions possible, the reasoning behind them, and their likely effects.
&lt;br/&gt;At the same time, this study is designed to inform policy development
and for the development of understanding and infrastructure for future projects.
Questions about the origins, nature, fit, and university effects of state
science and innovation policies are certainly not trivial. State policy
initiatives hold prospects for stimulating innovation and broader economic
development, but they pose trade-offs against other state priorities. State
efforts to develop markets for knowledge may significantly alter university
incentive systems and behaviors in ways that may threaten prospects for
innovation and continued U.S. competitiveness. Until researchers begin to
conduct informed across-state and across-institution analyses, state officials
will continue to invest in science and innovation policies without sufficient
information on the range of potential alternative choices and their
implications. Ultimately, of course, states are interested in the implications
of their policies on economic growth. Effectively addressing those ultimate
outcomes depend upon first understanding the intermediate issues addressed in
the four research questions outlined here. This study is designed to provide
foundational models for subsequent, comprehensive investigation of the longer-
term economic influences of states' investments in science and innovation
policies. &lt;br/&gt;