* 0947821
* Neogene Paleoecology of the Beardmore Glacier Region
* GEO,OPP
* 06/15/2010,09/30/2016
* Allan Ashworth, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* thomas wilch
* 09/30/2016
* USD 100,197.00

Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this project is to sample two
beds in the Meyer Desert Formation, which are known to be especially
fossiliferous containing plants, insects, other arthropods, freshwater mollusks,
and fish. There is a possibility that the teeth and bones of a small marsupial
could also be found. Previous studies have demonstrated that these horizons
contain unique fossil assemblages that provide information used to reconstruct
paleoenvironments and paleoclimate. The fossils represent organisms previously
not found in Antarctica and consequently their study will lead to the
development of new hypotheses concerning southern hemisphere biogeography. The
new discoveries will also increase knowledge of paleoenvironments and
paleoclimates as well as biogeographic relationships of the biota of the
southern hemisphere. For some organisms, such as Nothofagus (Southern Beech) or
the trechine groundbeetle, fossils would confirm that Antarctica was inhabited
as part of Gondwana. For other fossils, such as the cyclorrhaphan fly or
freshwater mollusks not expected to have inhabited Antarctica, the discoveries
will require a reassessment of phylogenetic interpretations and a
reinvestigation of the role of Antarctica in the evolutionary history of those
organisms. The new fossil-based knowledge will require integration with
interpretations from cladistics and molecular genetics to develop more
comprehensive phylogenetic hypotheses for a range of
organisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: &lt;br/&gt;The discovery of
fossils in Antarctica and implications for climate change has proven to be
popular with the media. This attention will help disseminate the results of this
study. Before the field season, the PI will work with local media and with area
schools to set up field interviews and web casts from Antarctica. The project
will also involve the training of a graduate student in the field and in the
follow up studies of the fossils in the laboratory.