* 0947953
* EAGER: Improvability Theory for Hospital Emergency Department: A System-Theoretic Method to Reduce Crowding
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,10/31/2010
* Jingshan Li, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Russell Barton
* 10/31/2010
* USD 220,000.00

This grant provides funding for the establishment of an analytical theory of
improvability for the hospital's emergency department (ED). Specifically, it
intends to develop analytical methods that can be used to improve the ED
performance through modeling and analysis of patient flow, redistributing
limited resources, and through identifying and mitigating bottlenecks. The
approach of the research would be based on analytical investigation of the
stochastic processes that describe the patient flow in ED. A system-theoretic
method, extended from production systems, will be used to model ED as a complex
network. The challenge of this research lies in finding appropriate
characterization of the complexity in ED, discovering indicators leading to
optimal system configurations, and identifying bottlenecks based on real-time
data obtained from clinical information system.

If successful, the results of this research will establish a novel analytical
method to study patient flow in ED. Such a method will enable us to evaluate the
ED performance, identify bottlenecks, distribute resources optimally and design
operating policies to achieve less crowding and the best quality of care. The
successful completion of this research will lead to new methodologies for health
care systems research. It will provide a solid foundation for an integrated
study of the hospital as a whole and for health care supply chain research.
Finally, the results obtained will be applicable not only to health care systems
but also to other systems with high variability, service cost and high cost of
failure, such as civil emergency response systems, critical supply chains,
information networks, etc.