* 0947923
* New, GK-12: SCWIBLES - Santa Cruz-Watsonville Inquiry-Based Learning in Environmental Sciences
* EHR,DGE
* 03/15/2010,02/29/2016
* Doris Ash, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 02/29/2016
* USD 2,114,255.00

Environmental science graduate students at the University of California Santa
Cruz will work with teachers and students at Watsonville High School to develop
and implement inquiry-based components of their Environmental Science and
Natural Resources Academy curriculum. The objectives of SCWIBLES (Santa Cruz -
Watsonville Inquiry-Based Learning in Environmental Sciences) are to (1) train
graduate students to effectively represent the process and outcomes of
ecological and evolutionary research to a culturally diverse society, and to
work with diverse stakeholders to identify critical scientific needs for
environmental problem solving, and (2) provide teachers with research experience
and inquiry-based tools to help students become well informed natural resource
stakeholders who can work with scientists to solve environmental problems in the
future. The project includes a summer program for joint Fellow-Teacher research
and curriculum development, a summer program to motivate student involvement in
environmental sciences, mentoring year-long Senior capstone projects, and
community forums to highlight student science activities and STEM-based careers.
Fellows will receive specialized graduate training in educational theory and
practice focused on effective science communication in a multilingual,
multicultural society.

Environmental issues disproportionately affect communities of color, while
professionals in environmental sciences are overwhelmingly white. SCWIBLES aims
to increase the diversity in the environmental sciences by increasing the
academic success and career opportunities for students in a rural public school
district with >75% Hispanic students and a history of under-performance. It will
enhance pathways to jobs and postsecondary education in regionally important
fields of agriculture, environmental management, and green technology.