* 0947088
* Acquisition of Solid-State Probes and Electronics for an Existing NMR Spectrometer
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2013
* Vincent Catalano, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 01/31/2013
* USD 156,987.00

With support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities: Multi-
User program (CRIF:MU), the Department of Chemistry at the University of Nevada,
Reno will refurbish a nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometer and upgrade
it to provide modern solid-state NMR capabilities to the University. The new
instrumentation will be employed in a wide variety of research projects
including the synthesis of unusual polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons,
investigations of the three dimensional solid-state structure of peptides and
proteins, studies of catalysts, analysis of fuel cell membranes, and the
characterization of functional supramolecular polymers.

NMR spectroscopy is a widely used analytical tool in any molecular-synthetic
discipline in chemistry. Spectra, obtained by detecting transitions between
energy levels arising from the nuclear spin properties of atoms, provide
information on the arrangement and connectivity of atoms in molecules and
materials. These data enable researchers to identify unknown substances and to
determine their structures. This particular instrument will analyze substances
in the solid state thereby providing valuable structural information on a
variety of insoluble materials. The instrumentation will also allow the
incorporation of solid-state NMR experiments into undergraduate courses. This
NMR spectrometer will be used by others in the Chemistry Department,
investigators in the Chemical and Material Engineering Departments and by
researchers throughout the state. As the only generally available solid-state
NMR spectrometer in Nevada, the instrument is expected to have a broad impact on
research and education in the state.