* 0947097
* National Astronomy and Ionoshere Center Proposal for Renewal and Reinvestment Funds
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2009,03/31/2012
* Donald Campbell, Cornell University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Ralph Gaume
* 03/31/2012
* USD 3,100,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Under the term of this award, the National Astronomy and Ionosphere Center
(NAIC) will perform infrastructure improvements to facilities of the Arecibo
Observatory in Arecibo, Puerto Rico, at which the cornerstone research
instrument is the 1000-ft diameter Arecibo telescope. As the world's largest
single-dish radio/radar telescope and most powerful radar system, the
Observatory enables forefront research in the areas of astronomy, planetary
studies, and space and atmospheric sciences by providing unique capabilities and
state-of-the-art instrumentation for data collection and analysis to its
multidisciplinary user community.

To address critical safety needs, environmental compliance and energy efficiency
at its facilities, NAIC will replace outdated air conditioning systems, upgrade
fire detection and suppression systems, and perform a structural condition
survey of the telescope to inspect and redress potential safety or structural
deficiencies. In addition, this award supports refurbishment of the S-band
planetary radar transmitter, including replacement of its klystron amplifier
tubes, which are urgently needed to maintain reliable, full-power operations.
These infrastructure investments are pertinent to reducing future operations
costs of the facility, to ensuring the safety of staff and visitors at the
Observatory, and to maintaining efficient, environmentally complaint, and
reliable science operations.

NAIC will also acquire a 12-meter-class steerable radio antenna needed for
Arecibo Observatory's participation in phase-referenced very long baseline
interferometry (VLBI) observations, including worldwide collaborations that
enable astronomers across continents to correlate observational data to achieve
the highest resolution images of cosmic radio sources. Moreover, the antenna
will be used as a teaching instrument, particularly in partnership with the
University of Puerto Rico-Humacao, to engage students and faculty in
astronomical research and instrumentation and to enhance technical workforce
development in the region. Plans to make the antenna remotely controllable will
potentially extend these educational collaborations to other Puerto Rican and
mainland institutions.