* 0947837
* A Multi-Institutional Post-Doctoral Program for Climate/Earth System Modeling
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2014
* James Kinter, Institute of Global Environment and Society
* Standard Grant
* Eric T. DeWeaver
* 09/30/2014
* USD 1,199,506.00

The Center for Ocean-Land-Atmosphere Studies (COLA) will manage and coordinate a
multi-institutional post-doctoral program that will help prepare the next
generation of climate- and Earth-system modelers to work at major U.S. modeling
centers. Research conducted by the post-doctoral research associates in the
program, in collaboration with and mentored by scientists at the leading
national laboratories in climate modeling, will advance understanding of climate
dynamics and variability through intensive modeling. The expected outcome is
rapid acceleration of improvements in U.S. climate models.

The program will be integrated with the research program already in place at
COLA and will enable highly-qualified scientists at the post-doctoral level to
gain experience working in the national climate- and Earth-system modeling
laboratories, including the National Center for Atmospheric Research and the
Department of Energy laboratories that are engaged in various aspects of climate
modeling. The program is envisioned to expand to include laboratories operated
by other agencies as well. The post-doctoral program will provide a home for
talented and highly-qualified individuals to conduct original research under the
guidance of mentors from COLA and in collaboration with scientists at the
Nation's climate modeling laboratories. The program will also address a critical
need for scientists who are capable of modeling the Earth system at the system
level, which is essential in order to provide the Nation with the scientific
information that will be needed to make decisions on mitigation of and
adaptation to the consequences of global climate change.