* 0947791
* Between State and Profit:  An Analysis of Changes in Nonprofit Interorganizational Networks and Tactics in the Energy Efficiency Field 1973-2006
* SBE,SES
* 03/30/2009,08/31/2012
* Rachael Shwom, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Quinetta Roberson
* 08/31/2012
* USD 131,873.00

This project investigates the complex and changing relationships between non-
profit, governmental, and private business organizations as they variously
cooperate or conflict with regard to energy efficiency policies and activities.
Since the 1970?s energy crisis, organizations from all three of these sectors
have worked to increase energy efficiency, often in very different ways.
Conflicts about how energy efficiency should be defined and promoted sometimes
have often led to combative actions like lawsuits. However, some organizations
have also overcome their differences to collaborate in defining and promoting
energy efficiency. &lt;br/&gt;This study will examine how relationships between
nonprofit, government and business organizations have changed over time and the
factors that influence these changes. The researchers will pay special attention
to non-profits as a new set of forces affecting the interactions between
business and government. Data from 1973 to the present on both combative and
cooperative interactions around energy efficiency will give us an overall
picture of how interactions have evolved. Social networks analyses will be
conducted and six intensive case studies will examine the factors involved in
nonprofit organizational decision making. &lt;br/&gt;New cooperative approaches
between business, government, and the non-profit sector are key to meeting a
number of complex challenges that currently face society. In addition to
generating insights about effective and ineffective relationships in the energy
sector, results from this study should provide some insights into how to enhance
collaborative interaction around important policy issues generallly.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;