* 0947896
* New GK-12: Using the STEM Dimensions of Bioenergy Sustainability to Bring Leading-edge Graduate Research to K-12 Learning Settings
* EHR,DGE
* 03/15/2010,12/31/2016
* Jennifer Lau, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 12/31/2016
* USD 2,657,827.00

Abstract: Using the STEM Dimensions of Bioenergy Sustainability to Bring
Leading-edge Graduate Research to K-12 Learning Settings.

The intellectual focus of this new GK-12 project at the W.K. Kellogg Biological
Station (KBS) is on the ecological dimensions of bioenergy sustainability.
Graduate students in Michigan State University?s Ecology, Evolutionary Biology &
Behavior and Environmental Science & Public Policy programs who are engaged in
STEM research at KBS will partner with teachers in the KBS K-12 Partnership for
Science Literacy, the new Department of Energy Great Lakes Bioenergy Research
Center (GLBRC), and the NSF Long-Term Ecological Research (LTER) project on the
Ecology of Agricultural Landscapes. Project activities include establishing
schoolyard science research plots in K-12 Partner districts that mimic aspects
of GLBRC research plots and serve as the foundation for a schoolyard research
network. Fellows will work collaboratively with each other, their advisors, and
project partners to incorporate their own research into K-12 research and
inquiry activities that address Michigan and national science education
standards.

Fellows will improve their ability to place their research in its broader
societal and global contexts, to collaborate across disciplines, to integrate
their research and teaching, and to communicate their research to professional,
K-12 and public audiences. The opportunity to work collaboratively with fellows
on authentic research related to pressing national needs will enhance the
professional development of the K-12 partner teachers and enrich the education
of K-12 students. This project will also enhance ongoing efforts at KBS to
recruit a greater number and diversity of young people into STEM science
disciplines.

