* 0947813
* New GK-12: The Boat-of Knowledge in the Science Classroom (BooKS in Classroom)
* EHR,DGE
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2018
* Tiao Chang, Ohio University
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 03/31/2018
* USD 2,674,654.00

Abstract (NSF 0947813): The Boat-of-Knowledge in the Science Classroom (BooKS in
Classroom)

The BooKS in Classroom aims to enhance and broaden science and engineering
education of graduate fellows at Ohio University and improve their communication
skills. Each year, nine graduate fellows will work with nine school teachers to
conduct on-boat samplings and experiments related to their research along the
Ohio River from Marietta to Gallipolis. These activities will be remotely
transmitted to school classrooms through inquiry-designed activities to an
online virtual Boat-of-Knowledge to build a sustainable curriculum. The project
will enhance understanding of graduate fellows in their research and improve
communication and presentation skills using hands-on activities from the river
boat to classrooms. It will provide professional development for teachers to
enrich learning environments of high school students.

Activities of the BooKS in Classroom will enable the graduate fellows and school
teachers to engage in real-world interactions and develop sustaining enthusiasm.
The participating high school students will experience increased interest and
effectiveness of science learning by hands-on sampling on the river boat and
activities of the virtual Boat-of-Knowledge. The project will result in
significant impacts on the science education of high school teachers and
students in the economically and educationally depressed region of the Ohio
River by bringing their most familiar environment, a neighboring river, to their
classrooms. It will strengthen the graduate program at Ohio University to
sustain partnerships with local school districts for STEM programs.