* 0947805
* Third IEEE Workshop on Enabling the Future Service-Oriented Internet: Towards Socially-Aware Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* George Michailidis, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Min Song
* 08/31/2011
* USD 15,000.00

This travel award supports participation in the 3rd IEEE Workshop on Enabling
the Future Service-Oriented Internet (EFSOI): Towards Socially-Aware Networks
take place in conjunction with IEEE Globecom 2009, in Honolulu, HI. December 4,
2009. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This technical workshop is a relative new venue for
presenting new research results in the fast emerging area in networking, namely
that of service-oriented and socially-aware networks. The workshop recognizes
the convergence of various communications technologies and the emergence of a
number of socio-technical applications leading to a crucial national need to
engage and educate the next generation of researchers and educators in the
modeling and understanding of service oriented infrastructures, networks and
virtual collaboration systems. Thus attendance at EFSOI provides a valuable a
research and career development experience for graduate students and post-
doctoral researchers from United States academic institutions. Participants will
have the opportunity to present their work, attend panel and keynote speech
sessions, and interact with peers engaged in state-of-the-art research in the
field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Approximately 10-15 US-based graduate students and
post-doctoral researchers are provided the opportunity to attend EFSOI. The
travel awards will target graduate students, in particular female and under-
represented minority students, since they often have limited travel funds to
attend workshops; attendance at such events is an important part of their
educational experience.&lt;br/&gt;