* 0947992
* Science for a Sustainable Future: Developing the Next Generation of Diverse Scientists
* EHR,DGE
* 02/15/2010,01/31/2016
* Vanessa Lougheed, University of Texas at El Paso
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 01/31/2016
* USD 2,857,595.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Technical: This project will fund and engage 9 minority
graduate students (GK-12 Fellows) per year to build their science and teaching
portfolios and develop leadership and teaching skills, ultimately preparing top
scholars in environmental, geological, and biological sciences. The Fellows will
serve as role models and instructors in Early College High School (ECHS) classes
in a predominantly Hispanic community. The ECHS is an innovative program that
enables students to earn up to two years of college credit in addition to their
high school diploma, and provides them with skills to increase their success in
college. ECHS students will benefit from interacting with GK-12 Fellows in their
classrooms, from teacher training to improve long-term capacities for
interdisciplinary science , and from the development of lesson plans in ?Science
for a Sustainable Future? focused on the arid southwest. The proposed
?Scientists in Residence? program may serve as a scalable model for recruiting
students into science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical: This proposal will actively
recruit minority graduate students and will train them to be scientists,
instructors, and leaders of the future. With its growing Ph.D. programs, top
faculty, and current demographic, UTEP is poised to lead the way for training
minority Ph.D. future scientists and leaders, and will allow for the students to
address specific challenges facing our border, desert populations, including
limited water resources in a changing climate, the potential for alternative
energy resources, environmental health issues in a multi-national community, and
geological hazards facing the region.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;