* 0947670
* EAGER: Algorithmic aspects of molecular circuits and molecular machines
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Ashish Goel, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 07/31/2011
* USD 200,000.00

Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;Proposal #: 0947670&lt;br/&gt;PI: Ashish
Goel&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We are used to thinking of DNA as a biological
molecule. However, DNA, its cousin the RNA, and other associated molecules such
as enzymes, are also engineering building blocks. Think of them as
?combinatorial Legos? which fit together and inter-operate not just by mechanics
and geometry but also using the chemical sequence imprinted on them. This has
many revolutionary potential applications. This also poses many mathematical and
algorithmic questions which are both interesting in their own right and also
provide a framework to devise useful experimental techniques. The PI proposes to
conduct research in the emerging field of ?molecular algorithms?, i.e.,
algorithms which are meant to be implemented on molecules. This study will
proceed in two broad directions: molecular machines and molecular circuits. The
two areas are linked both thematically and in terms of techniques. We will
constantly consult with practitioners in this field, so that the results of this
research are both novel and useful.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit:
Molecular algorithms require tools and techniques that are considerably
different from traditional algorithms. We can not assume building blocks such as
memories, actuators, sensors, transistors, processors etc; rather, these are
often the things we are trying to devise using more basic primitives such as DNA
hybridization, enzymatic reactions, and migration. Consequently, advances in
molecular algorithms are likely to require novel mathematical techniques that
will enrich the disciplines of coding theory, combinatorial algorithms, and
probabilistic analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broad impact: Molecular machines
have been proposed as sensors, actuators, and drug delivery mechanisms.
Molecular circuits have the potential to finely control other molecular
processes. Much of the hard work in developing these ideas is being done by
experimentalists. However, theoretical tools such as the one we propose to
develop also have an important role to play in realizing the full potential of
this area and in deciding upon the most promising experimental directions. In
addition, molecular algorithms could facilitate sophisticated tasks such as
counting, shape recognition, precisely controlled crystal growth etc. at nano-
scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI has developed a class in molecular
algorithms which he will update and teach bi-annually. Also, many graduate
students will receive valuable research experience in this important
area.&lt;br/&gt;