* 0947869
* New, GK-12: Ingenuity Incubators Develop NSF Fellow Potential and Prepare Tech Students for Engineering
* EDU,DGE
* 03/15/2010,07/31/2016
* Douglas Cooper, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 07/31/2016
* USD 2,721,405.00

NSF GK-12 Proposal # 0947869 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI - Doug Cooper ? University
of Connecticut&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract: Ingenuity Incubators Prepare
Technical High School Students for College Engineering
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through collaboration with teachers and students in the
Connecticut Technical High School (Tech) System, NSF-funded PhD Fellows will
obtain new perspectives on innovative research in sustainable engineering. By
working with Tech School students in the classroom, the NSF Fellows will be
challenged to expand their collaborative, leadership, teaching and communication
skills. They will participate in training and educational activities that will
nurture a thoughtful interest in K-12 education. They will seek to elevate the
interest and preparedness of Tech School students for their transition into
college science or engineering studies, and further develop and enrich the STEM
instructional proficiency of Tech School teachers. In this project, NSF Fellows
will work in Tech Schools to integrate their novel research in sustainable
engineering into a creative innovation project-based classroom curriculum.
Specifically, they will mentor pioneering Ingenuity Incubators, which are
supplementary activities designed to enhance creativity, knowledge acquisition,
leadership and communication skills. Emphasis will be placed on recruitment of
NSF Fellows from underrepresented groups. Many Tech Schools are located in
economically-depressed regions of Connecticut and enroll significant under-
represented minority and women populations. This project will thus have a
positive impact on educational engagement and diversity. The innovative programs
of this work will strengthen the basic research and GK-12 instructional methods
and training activities to the benefit of educational systems in Connecticut.
Through systematic dissemination of results, this project will ultimately
benefit GK-12 best-practices across the nation.&lt;br/&gt;