* 0947980
* Graduate Teaching Fellows in Community Situated Research: The Triple Helix of University, K-12, and Community Knowledge Production
* EHR,DGE
* 02/15/2010,01/31/2017
* Jonathan Dordick, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 01/31/2017
* USD 2,850,762.00

Graduate Teaching Fellows in Community Situated Research: The Triple Helix of
University, K-12, and Community Knowledge Production Institution: Rensselaer
Polytechnic Institute (RPI) PI and Co-PI(s): Ron Eglash (RPI), Lupita Montoya
(RPI), Jonathan Dordick (RPI), Daniel Stilson (Albany Schools)

Abstract

In RPI?s Community Situated Research project, graduate fellows will examine the
potential relations between their STEM research, and the social issues facing
local low-income and minority communities (health, environment, poverty, crime,
information access, etc.). These same local communities will also be the
location for the fellows? middle school collaborative teaching program. Thus
graduate fellows will gain a greater awareness of the connections between their
research disciplines and pressing social issues, as well as the training that
enables them to communicate these connections to the public. On the GK-12 side,
studies show that many minority students are disinterested in STEM academics
because they do not see its relevance to their particular lives. By working with
graduate fellows trained as ?civic scientists,? (along with content from our
international program) GK-12 teachers will gain new opportunities to engage
those disenfranchised students. It is critical that graduate teaching fellows
and their faculty mentors are empowered to select projects situated at the
frontiers of STEM research, and not merely applications of established
knowledge. Science and Technology Studies graduate students and community
mentors will be researching the social and environmental issues in these
communities to help find the intersections with STEM research. A studio class
will create new educational technologies that translate the grad fellows? STEM
research (eg microchips for chemical analysis) into learning labs for the middle
school students. Rather than a one-way ?trickle-down? of knowledge, we will
explore the possibilities for a ?triple helix? collaboration between university,
GK-12, and community knowledge production.