* 0947782
* Advocating for an Inventive and Transformative Recovery in National STEM Education
* SBE,SBE
* 09/15/2009,11/30/2012
* Margret Hjalmarson, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Joshua Rosenbloom
* 11/30/2012
* USD 168,593.00

The US Department of Education is disbursing about $5 billion in ARRA funds to
states aimed at promoting innovations in the educational system. The stated
model for disbursing these funds is to support the goals of the Elementary and
Secondary Education Act and the America Competes Act of 2007, within the framing
of No Child Left Behind. There is extensive scientific discussion about how to
allocate and measure the impact of this $5 billion. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this project is to convene an expert panel to examine the proposed
framework for disbursing the funds for innovation in education from the points
of view of learning, technology, science and economics in the light of prior
reform efforts. The resulting papers and monograph draw on the theoretical and
empirical literature to describe policies and practices that provide a
scientific basis for the federal and state investments of the innovation
dollars. Such investments include: (a) ?start at the top? programs that link
high school teachers and students and faculty and undergraduates with authentic
science practices with likely economic payoff, (b) richer forms of assessment of
authentic science and mathematics learning, and (c) more sophisticated economic
measures of student achievement. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
potential broader impact of this project is the provision of a scientific basis
for the definition, implementation and measurement of outcomes associated with
investments in educational innovation. The broader impacts include the
generation of richer measures of achievement in student learning and of STEM
investment outcomes in general. In addition, the project supports policies that
involve modern assessments and sophisticated economic tracking of achievement,
each of which is key to the successful management of what is likely the largest
investment in innovation in education ever attempted by the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;