* 0947904
* Collaborative Research: Origin of the Alexander Terrane in the Arctic Realm?
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2013
* George Gehrels, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 08/31/2013
* USD 199,993.00

This project will test the hypothesis that much of southern Alaska formed along
the Arctic margin of Canada, with transport to its present position only in the
relatively recent geologic past. Such a displacement history is counter to the
more traditional view that these rocks, and most other portions of western North
America (e.g., Baja California), have moved northward along the continental
margin. It also differs from previous suggestions that these rocks formed along
the western margin of the paleo-Pacific and are truly exotic to North America.
Fortunately, recent technological developments have provided a technique that
will provide a robust evaluation of these possible displacement scenarios. The
technique involves the determination of ages of zircon crystals in the displaced
rocks and in potential correlatives in the western US, along the western margin
of the paleo-Pacific, and in the Canadian Arctic. The occurrence of similar ages
would suggest potential linkages, whereas the occurrence of different ages of
zircon crystals in rocks of the same age would be inconsistent with geographic
proximity. This project will provide opportunities for undergraduate and
graduate students at two universities to participate in a research project that
involves both field studies in frontier regions and laboratory analyses
utilizing sophisticated instrumentation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Primary
activities involved in this project will include:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1.
Conducting geologic field studies and collecting samples from Paleozoic strata
of the Alexander terrane in southeast Alaska and the Pearya terrane in the
Canadian Arctic. These studies will be based from zodiacs and a live-aboard boat
(presently operated by the University of Arizona) in SE Alaska and with
helicopter support in the Canadian Arctic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Determining
U-Pb ages and Hf isotope ratios of detrital zircons utilizing a new Laser
Ablation-ICPMS system (Nu HR ICPMS) and SEM system (Hitachi 3400N and Gatan
Chroma CL) at the University of Arizona.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Comparison of
our new data with U-Pb ages and Hf isotope information from other assemblages in
the circum-Pacific and circum-Arctic realms in an effort to test various
possible displacement models for the Alexander terrane.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much of the field and lab research will be conducted by
graduate students at the University of Arizona and the University of Iowa.
Undergraduate students will be involved as field assistants, with possible
senior-thesis-type projects available as appropriate.