* 0947138
* The evolutionary genetics of reinforcement: an empirical study in neotropical Costus
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2010,08/31/2012
* Kathleen Kay, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 08/31/2012
* USD 135,000.00

Understanding the role that natural selection plays in the origin of species is
a central goal of evolutionary biology. Population genetics theory shows that,
in special circumstances, natural selection can reinforce reproductive barriers
between recently diverged species living in the same geographic area, but this
theory has not been adequately addressed with data from natural systems. This
project examines the evolutionary genetics of this process in a rapidly
speciating group of tropical plants for which prior research has found evidence
of reinforcement of reproductive barriers. The research uses genetic mapping
techniques to characterize the genetic basis of the traits and mechanisms that
reproductively isolate two recently diverged species, field experiments to
better understand the ecological consequences of those traits, and molecular
markers to assess historical patterns of gene flow between the
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The idea that natural selection can directly favor
speciation is important, because it shows a direct link between the processes of
adaptation and speciation and because it elucidates a route for diversification
to occur without prolonged periods of geographic isolation. This research
empirically addresses the circumstances under which selection can reinforce
speciation in a comprehensive way that links ecological factors and the
underlying genetic processes. The results will be broadly applicable to
understanding how certain groups of organisms and geographic areas have
diversified without long periods of time or geographic isolation. The project
will train young scientists in molecular genetics and evolution, and provide
opportunities for them to conduct field research in a tropical
rainforest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;