* 0947944
* New, GK-12 Connections in the Classroom:  Molecules to Muscles (C2M2)
* EDU,DGE
* 06/15/2010,05/31/2016
* SARAH MORGAN, University of Southern Mississippi
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 05/31/2016
* USD 2,344,900.00

The goal of Connections in the Classroom: Molecules to Muscles (C2M2) is to
enhance graduate fellows' communication and teaching skills in an
interdisciplinary research and education setting. The interdisciplinary research
theme ?molecules to muscles? is used as a vehicle to increase relevancy of
science coursework to high school students by relating research advances in
areas important to them (i.e. sports, soldier protection), while fellows will
gain the ability to communicate to non-scientific audiences and researchers
outside their field through an interdisciplinary team approach. Research
improving human performance transcends the boundaries of individual scientific
disciplines and requires seamless communication between biologists, chemists,
biochemists, materials scientists and engineers. Eight fellows will be recruited
each year from the College of Science and Technology to work with HS science
teachers to develop and deliver classroom activities based on fellows? research,
ranging from polymer composites for sporting equipment to biochemical processes
of respiration. Fellows, teachers and high school students will gain
appreciation for the integrative nature of scientific advancements through a
unique interdisciplinary approach. C2M2 will impact a diverse group of fellows,
teachers and HS students with the goal of developing future scientific leaders.
Mississippi ranks 49th in participation in the high-tech industry and has the
highest percentage African American population, a segment particularly
underrepresented in advanced STEM degrees and careers, and The University of
Southern Mississippi hosts a one-third minority student population. Results will
be disseminated through a web-site, publications and presentations at education
and scientific conferences. Industry support will help sustain GK-12 activities.