* 0947368
* Collaborative Research:  Testing a Mechanism for the Productivity-Beta Diversity Relationship in Plants
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2014
* Susan Harrison, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 08/31/2014
* USD 347,314.00

Intellectual merit: Globally, the diversity of plants and animals is highest in
regions where rainfall and solar energy are abundant, which yields high rates of
carbon capture via photosynthesis termed primary productivity. This project will
analyze a previously unexamined aspect of this pattern, namely, how productivity
affects the degree to which plants are specialized on different soils, which can
drive the variation in species composition among different locations. In
productive climates, this project will test the hypothesis that plant
communities on different soils will be highly distinct because intensified
competition leads to narrower soil niches, whereas in colder or more arid
climates less distinctiveness of plant communities across soil boundaries is
predicted. These predictions will be tested by comparing plant communities on
chemically unusual soils such as serpentine, limestone, and dolomite, to those
on nearby normal soils, across gradients of high to low rainfall in California
and the Ozarks. To better understand the mechanisms for the observed patterns,
experimental manipulations of rainfall and plant competition in neighboring
serpentine and non-serpentine plant communities in California will be conducted.
This research is important because plant species and communities endemic to
particular soils are important contributors to global botanical diversity. Our
results will help understand how climate controls plant diversity, plant
community composition, and the degree to which plant communities are affected by
biological invasions.

Broader impacts: A graduate student from an underrepresented group and several
undergraduates will be trained with this award. Data will be made available to
researchers, agency scientists, and nonprofit environmental groups through the
data archives of the Knowledge Network for Biocomplexity
(knb.ecoinformatics.org) and the UC Natural Reserve System Data Registry.