* 0947121
* CAREER:     Fluid - Sediment Interactions over Complex Coastal Topography
* ENG,CBET
* 06/23/2009,02/28/2011
* Diane Foster, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Horst Henning Winter
* 02/28/2011
* USD 167,916.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL NO.:
CTS-0348203&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATORS: D. FOSTER&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION:
OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CAREER: FLUID-SEDIMENT INTERACTIONS
OVER COMPLEX COASTAL TOPOGRAPHY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will
significantly advance predictive capability for non-cohesive sediment transport
over complex topographies in shallow coastal waters. The coastal environment
exhibits complex feedback between waves, mean currents, and beaches at scales
ranging from sand grains to coastlines. This effort concerns the transport of
sediment over small-scale flat and rippled beds. A combined modeling and
observational effort provides an exciting opportunity to gain new knowledge of
the dominant processes that govern the fluid-sediment interface in the coastal
region. A new process-based model will couple three-dimensional flow, sediment
transport, and morphologic modules for the prediction of bedform generation,
migration, and total sediment transport. A key feature of the simulations is the
validation against experimental data at the exact same conditions. Broad impacts
of the work include improved fundamental understanding of non-cohesive sediment
transport potentially leading to significant advances in predictive capabilities
of large-scale beach evolution. A lecture series will be developed based on the
research and a laboratory course on sediment transport will be incorporated into
an existing course. The integration of research, education and diversity
capitalizes on the existing resources at Ohio State University for a successful
outreach program. Efforts to diversify the engineering field will focus on
providing a culturally and gender diverse environment for graduate students and
mentoring young women to develop the skills and interests needed to thrive.
Participation with the Future Engineers Summer Workshop to stimulate the
interest of young women in junior high school in coastal engineering is
especially noteworthy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;