* 0947783
* EAGER:   The Role of Plant-Soil Feedbacks on Species Potential to Expand their Distributional Ranges in Response to Climate Change
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Sarah McCarthy-Neumann, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 07/31/2012
* USD 247,752.00

Many plant species are expected to shift their distributional ranges in response
to global warming. The ecological and economic consequences of such shifts could
be enormous and have serious implications for conservation of local
biodiversity, for the economic value of local forests (e.g., economically
relevant species might expand to new areas, or might experience a reduction on
their current ranges), and also for preservation of relevant ecosystem functions
(e.g., soil erosion prevention, replenishment of water table, carbon storage,
and recreational activities).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is important to consider
that in addition to climate, many other factors will also shape the future
composition of plant communities. For instance, plants can change the
composition and abundance of soil organisms as well as the chemistry and
structure of soil in ways that alter subsequent plant survival and growth. This
process, referred to as plant-soil feedbacks will likely have a large impact on
colonization success of migrant plant species as they may be released from their
natural soil pathogens and/or deprived of key beneficial organisms that have
become specialized on them in their native range. At this time, we have little
or no information on how plant-soil interactions may influence plant species
responses to climate change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this
project is to conduct exploratory work that evaluates the role that plant-soil
feedbacks may play on the migratory potential of dominant temperate tree species
within the Great Lakes region. The combination of our ongoing field and proposed
greenhouse studies will supply natural resources managers with realistic
information on the species that will be able to establish or persist within the
region under changing climate, helping to implement successful conservation and
management programs.