* 0947329
* Combined Use of 15N Natural Abundances and Tracers to Elucidate Above- and Belowground C  and N Cycle Linkages during Forest Succession
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Knute Nadelhoffer, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 08/31/2013
* USD 311,271.00

Re-growing forests across the North Temperate Zone presently remove about 15% of
fossil fuel carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions. It is unclear, however, how long and
to what extent these forests will continue to sequester CO2 and thereby offset a
major fraction of human-derived CO2 emissions. Recent measurements suggest that,
in contrast to the long-held idea that ecosystem CO2 uptake declines to zero
over time, forests can continue storing carbon for centuries after
establishment. For this to occur, nitrogen cycling patterns and rates must
change as tree species composition of the forest shifts during succession. How
this occurs is not well understood, however, so this project will investigate
mechanisms by which nitrogen cycling influences carbon uptake. The research will
be conducted using novel, multi-scale, stable nitrogen isotope approaches in a
large-scale, bold, experimental forest setting in northern Michigan where losses
of maturing, early successional tree species are being accelerated by stem
girdling. Carbon uptake by the experimental forest is being compared to a nearby
non-manipulated forest under separate funding. The NSF-supported research here
focuses on nitrogen exchanges between late-successional tree species, their
fungal symbionts and soils as they control forest carbon balances.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results will provide a more complete understanding of
controls on forest growth across successional stages and will improve
predictions of temperate forest CO2 uptake and carbon balances. The study will
serve as a resource for 'Kindergarten-to-Gray' environmental education and
insights derived from this research will inform decisions of policymakers and
resource managers regarding forest carbon sequestration and provision of
ecosystem services.