* 0947777
* A Novel Rodent Model for the Neurophysiology of Visual Object Recognition
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* David Cox, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Cropper
* 08/31/2011
* USD 149,999.00

Humans recognize visual objects so effortlessly that is easy to overlook what an
impressive computational feat this represents. At present, little is known about
how the brain achieves robust visual object recognition, and reproducing this
ability remains a major stumbling block in the construction of useful computer
vision systems. In neurobiological research, rodent models have long been valued
for their superior accessibility, with a wide range of powerful experimental
techniques in widespread use. While rodents have not traditionally been used as
a model system for object vision, recent behavioral evidence suggests that rats
possess surprisingly advanced visual object recognition abilities. Building on
these findings, the present project seeks to fill gaps in our knowledge of the
neuronal mechanisms of vision using microelectrodes to record directly from
neurons in the rat visual system. This work holds great potential to establish
rodents as a new and powerful model for studying the neurophysiology of object
recognition. The availability of a simpler, more accessible model can greatly
accelerate progress in deciphering the computational underpinnings of high-level
vision in the brain, which can, in turn, inform the construction of artificial
vision systems for robotics and machine understanding of images. The project
will also provide training opportunities for one postdoctoral fellow, and two
undergraduate students, who will be directly involved in the data collection and
analysis.