* 0947245
* Collaborative Research:   EAGER -  Eco-Evolutionary Feedback on Community Assembly
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Kimberly Schulz, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 08/31/2012
* USD 166,167.00

Understanding the interplay between ecological and evolutionary processes is
essential for developing a robust theory of community assembly. With the
imminent construction of numerous temporary ponds in an experimental forest near
Syracuse, NY, there is the unique opportunity to use these systems as models for
testing several aspects of how ecological and evolutionary factors feedback as
species colonize new habitats. The project will manipulate independently both
genetic and species diversity of invertebrates immediately after pond
construction, and measure how initial establishment influences subsequent
genetic diversity, species diversity, and the evolution of life history traits.
Through a controlled, large-scale, field experiment, the project addresses three
questions: (1) To what extent do species interactions versus dispersal
limitation influence community assembly? (2) How does genetic diversity
influence community assembly? (3) How does the assembling community influence
important fitness traits? The immediate results of this EAGER should provide
insight into how ecological (e.g., species diversity and interactions) and
evolutionary factors (e.g., genetic diversity and evolution of life history
traits) interact when influencing the dynamics of this landscape of communities.
Taking advantage of this time-limited opportunity to control the pond
communities from their construction will also lead to more interesting longer-
term studies as the communities develop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
result in the training of one post-doctoral fellow, one graduate student and
several undergraduates (several of whom are women and/or members of ethnic
groups that are underrepresented in science). Public outreach will be
accomplished by adding a module related to this award to an existing outreach
website (www.life.uiuc.edu/caceres/teachers). CÃ¡ceres and Schulz will develop
the lessons together, using state standards from both New York and Illinois.
Project participants will be part of a multi-disciplinary research team
evaluating the role of constructed temporary ponds in restoration efforts,
especially in the conservation of endangered amphibians.