* 0947765
* RAPID: Courseware Development for Computational Astrophysics
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2010
* Dinshaw Balsara, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2010
* USD 70,533.00

AST-0947765 Balsara

The last few years have seen computational astrophysics move from being a fringe
activity in astrophysics to being a mainstream activity. It is still quite a
young field that is catching on fast, especially among the younger astronomers
who are more computer-aware. It would be very advantageous to make computational
astrophysics a mainstream topic in the training of young astronomers. However,
the absence of a standard text in computational astrophysics is a major
impediment in achieving that goal. Dr. Balsara is part-way through writing such
a text book, loosely patterned after the very successful text 'Numerical
Recipes', but progress has been quite slow. This award relieves Dr. Balsara from
other duties and permits a concentrated push to take the book to completion. It
also supports a graduate student who is producing high-quality solutions to the
problems in the text, and some travel for presentation, consultation, and
collaboration.

The book to be produced teaches the background material with a lot of intuitive
arguments and ample pieces of example code. Its first half is essentially a one-
semester course, while the second half is more of a research monograph. The
resultant text will be of great value to practicing scientists in, or thinking
of joining, the field of computational astrophysics, as well as of use in high
level courses. It is, therefore, hoped that the text will draw more people into
the field, as well as catalyze new research in this field.

This award is made under the "Grants for Rapid Response Research (RAPID)"
program.