* 0947043
* Acquisition of a High Resolution Scanning Electron Microscope for Research and Education in Nanochemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2012
* Mark Hoffmann, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 12/31/2012
* USD 442,976.00

With support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities:
Multiuser program (CRIF:MU), the Department of Chemistry at the University of
North Dakota will acquire a cyber-enabled high resolution scanning electron
microscope (SEM). The University has designated nanotechnology as a focus for
research and the microscope will be used by investigators at the University of
North Dakota and at North Dakota tribal colleges to enhance nanochemistry
research and education. Research activities that will be enabled by the new
instrumentation include the design of new nanomaterials, such as nanotubes,
nanowires, fluorescent nanoparticles, metal-modified silica nanoparticles and
polymer-based nanocatalysts, and the characterization of these nanomaterials.
Fundamental studies on the formation and characterization of secondary organic
aerosols will provide significant information regarding the role of these
substances in environmental pollution. A scanning electron microscope probes a
material by scanning it with a beam of electrons that interact with surface
atoms to produce signals that contain high resolution images of the surface
structure. Since the nanoparticles to be investigated in these studies can be as
small as several nanometers in diameter, a high resolution SEM is an important
tool for investigating their structures. This level of detail is indispensable
in designing and characterizing new nanomaterials. The infrastructure made
available with this grant will be used in teaching and training a broad range of
young scientists, including significant numbers of Native American scientists,
in important, cutting-edge, experimental methods.