* 0947897
* Optoelectronic Supramolecular Block-Copolymer Assemblies Aided by Donor-Acceptor Interactions
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* John Tovar, University of the Sciences in Philadelphia
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2012
* USD 296,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ultimate goal of this exploratory
project is the design, synthesis and functional characterization of a new class
of nanostructured materials ? block copolymer supramolecular assemblies. The
major aspects to be addressed in this study are: i) donor-acceptor interactions
in supramolecular assemblies; ii) distribution of the components in the
assemblies and at the interfaces; iii) the effect of nanoscopic confinement of
electroluminescent additives on their optoelectronic properties; iv) the
benefits and limitations of electroluminescent supramolecular assemblies for
OLEDs, solar cells, and other energy harvesting and conversion applications.
This project will include cooperative efforts in (a) synthesis of efficient
electroluminescent additives and (b) characterization of donor-acceptor
assemblies aiming (c) development and optimization of novel materials for
efficient energy conversion and energy harvesting. Upon completion of this
research project, the fundamental knowledge of the sequence molecular structure
- mesoscale organization - optoelectronic properties - of this new material will
be gained. This knowledge will be applied toward a range of important
applications of the donor-acceptor block copolymer assemblies in the emerging
fields of renewable energy harvesting and efficient energy conversion.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
directed towards the rational design of novel class of nanostructured polymeric
materials. These materials can open a venue to technical innovations in flexible
electronics, large area displays, efficient plastic solar cells, energy
conservation. Therefore, highly efficient technologies based on this approach
are extremely beneficial to society as they aid to conserve natural resources.
The project stipulates strong collaboration with scientists at the National
Institute of Standards. The educational component is closely tied to research
objectives. The students of both undergraduate and graduate levels will be
involved in the project, thus gaining experience and knowledge of the modern
instrumentation and techniques in diverse areas of materials science, chemistry,
and nanotechnology in an intellectually stimulating research environment.