* 0947087
* CRIF-MU:  Acquisition of a Computer Cluster for Molecular Sciences
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2012
* Carl Carrano, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 12/31/2012
* USD 147,708.00

With support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities:
Multiuser Program (CRIF:MU), the Department of Chemistry at San Diego State
University will acquire a 60 core computer cluster and 30 laptop computers. The
computing cluster will be used by researchers to study a number of problems in
the chemical sciences and in a novel outreach program to area high schools.
Research areas to be investigated include bi-functional catalysis, model studies
of thin films, molecular dynamics investigations of the stability of mutants,
solving the vibrational Schrödinger equation for large systems and the effect of
black body radiation on atomic transition frequencies. In the high school
outreach program, faculty, undergraduate and graduate students from San Diego
State University will assist in chemistry instruction at the high schools using
molecular modeling and visualization software.

A computer cluster is a group of linked computers that work in concert to
achieve vastly more computational power that the individual machines. These
clusters make it possible to solve complex problems in computational chemistry.
Such calculations, often used in conjunction with experimental data, allow
chemists to generate virtual images of many types of complex chemical phenomena.
The computational infrastructure made available by this award will be used in
sophisticated research projects and to introduce students to scientific
computing.