* 0947177
* RCN:  Refining and diversifying ecological immunology
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2010,06/30/2016
* Lynn Martin, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* rollie clem
* 06/30/2016
* USD 490,481.00

Immunity to parasites has historically been understudied in evolutionary
ecology. In recent years efforts to understand the causes and consequences of
natural variation in immune function in wild animals, termed ecological
immunology, has transformed multiple realms of biology. To foster continued
productivity and expansion of this new field, theoretical refinement and
methodological consistency will be critical. This grant will help bring together
36 internationally recognized ecologists, evolutionary biologists, and
immunologists to i) develop new techniques and concepts, ii) enhance breadth and
depth of research questions, iii) establish new interdisciplinary
collaborations, and iv) stimulate outreach and training opportunities for
schoolteachers and the public (through a routinely updated website). This
network will be open to all scientists. The current network membership is highly
diverse, with 50% female members and many individuals who identify themselves as
belonging to minorities. Such a diverse group, in conjunction with meetings held
outside the USA (2 out of 5 over a five year period), will foster a sense of
international community and expose early-career participants to a multitude of
scientific and social cultures. Also, the direct engagement of high school
teachers in this program will augment the inclusion of evolutionary thinking in
American elementary, middle and high school classrooms. In sum, the network will
provide novel perspective to evolutionary biology and immunology, both of which
should be insightful for human health. Pedagogically, this network will provide
training for students from underrepresented backgrounds and expose high school
teachers, their students, and the interested public to a field of truly
integrative, modern science.