* 0947956
* Effects of Hydrogen on Kinetic Processes in Nominally Anhydrous Minerals
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2014
* George Rossman, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 03/31/2014
* USD 350,002.00

A major reservoir of water within our planet is the water bound in minerals that
we would nominally consider to be anhydrous. Such minerals include olivine,
garnets and pyroxenes. This water is most commonly bound in the form of hydroxyl
(OH) groups. It has an important influence on a wide variety of processes in the
geological world, and may be particularly important in the deep earth. This
project follows on previous work by a team of researchers that has been studying
these minerals for over two decades and is now focusing on an effort to use
secondary ion mass spectroscopy (SIMS) in combination with infrared (IR)
spectroscopy to quantify hydrogen concentrations in these phases. It is proposed
to apply this technique to study processes relevant to hydrogen transport and
its effects on kinetic processes in the Earth's mantle. The proposed program
will be divided into a calibration effort, the measurement of the diffusion
processes of hydrogen in the important upper mantle mineral olivine, and the
characterization of minute inclusions of water that result from the gradual loss
of bound water from its mineral host.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers currently
accept that a volume of water equal to or greater than all the water in the
oceans of our planet is bound in minerals nominally considered anhydrous. This
water is an important reservoir in the terrestrial water cycle, a source of
volatiles that drives processes in the mantle, and an agent that impacts
physical and chemical properties of the host such as diffusion, radiation
stability, color, dielectric constant, and melting. The research proposed here
will broaden our understanding of the important roles trace amounts of hydrous
components play in the properties of solid materials. It will improve the
ability of this laboratory to offer its services to a range of visitors who come
to analyze hydrogen using these facilities. Furthermore, the community will
benefit from our development of new standards for SIMS analysis of hydrogen in
minerals, which will be shared with other labs. Traces of bound water in
minerals also occur in a variety of synthetic products of our technological
world such as semiconductor supports, optical crystals, fibers, and oscillator
crystals. In many of these hosts, the trace components play a major role in
determining the properties of the material. Analytical methods used to study
minerals have a direct carry-over to the study of synthetic technological
products.