* 0947594
* Conference: NSF Travel Support for Students Attending the 5th IEEE Vehicular Power and Propulsion Conference (VPPC 2009), September 7-11, 2009, Dearborn, Michigan
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2009,02/28/2010
* David Wenzhong Gao, Tennessee Technological University
* Standard Grant
* George Maracas
* 02/28/2010
* USD 5,800.00

The objectives of the award are to sponsor 20 students to attend the 5th IEEE
Vehicular Power and Propulsion Conference (VPPC 2009), to be held in Dearborn,
Michigan. September 7-11, 2009. VPPC09 is co-sponsored by IEEE Power Electronics
Society (PELS) and IEEE Vehicular Technology Society (VTS). This year the
conference will feature the theme of sustainability: hybrid, plug-in, fuel cell
and battery technology. A merit-based student selection criterion will be
adopted to select the student awardees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
The VPPC 09 aims to provide a forum for the sustainability of future
transportation through the developments and applications of hybrid, plug-in and
battery powered and propelled vehicles. This conference will enhance integration
of research and education in power and energy engineering using the exemplary
vehicular power systems. By attending technical tutorials and paper sessions in
this conference, students will be exposed to state of the art science and
technology in order to become leaders in future clean and efficient vehicle
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The outcomes of this conference
will help reduce automobile emission to improve our environment and reduce our
dependence on foreign oil to enhance national security. Far-reaching benefits
for our society and nation include accelerating environmentally-friendly hybrid
electric vehicles research and development; training of well-qualified
workforce; and participation of underrepresented groups in vehicular power
engineering, a rapidly evolving area faced with international competition. This
conference provides outreach opportunity to attract more minority and female
students into the power engineering field. &lt;br/&gt;