* 0947175
* Experimental Investigation of Glaucophane Solid Solution with Several Calcic Amphiboles
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2014
* David Jenkins, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 01/31/2014
* USD 254,155.00

This proposal is to investigate experimentally the extent and nature of mineral
solid solution compositions between the sodic amphibole glaucophane and several
common calcic amphiboles. These types of sodic-calcic-amphiboles are typical of
high-pressure metamorphic rocks observed around the world. Although there have
been empirical observations relating compositional changes in such amphiboles to
their tectonic settings, these compositional changes have yet to be calibrated
quantitatively. The information obtained in this study will help geologists to
determine the pressure-temperature history of orogenic belts or subduction zones
from the compositional variations of sodic-calcic-amphiboles.

This study will focus on the compositional joins tremolite-glaucophane,
magnesiohornblende-glaucophane, and pargasite-glaucophane in the chemical system
Na2O-MgO-CaO-Al2O3-SiO2-H2O. These compositional joins comprise the most common
compositional variations in sodic-calcic-amphiboles. The presence of a
miscibility gap for the tremolite-glaucophane join is well established from
field evidence and supported by preliminary experimental data obtained in this
lab. A major goal of the current proposal will be to define the location of this
miscibility gap as accurately as possible because of the tight constraints that
it places on the derived thermodynamic mixing properties of the end-member
components. Location of the miscibility gap in temperature-composition space
will be determined by compositional reversals using various methods, such as the
dissolution of end-member tremolite and glaucophane to compositions along the
miscibility gap and possibly by exsolution of initially homogeneous amphibole.
Miscibility gaps will also be sought along the other joins. For each of the
joins being studied, care will be taken to determine the extent of long- and
short-range cation order by a combination of infrared spectroscopy in the OH-
stretching region and the use of bond-length versus ionic-radius relationships
from single-crystal structural refinements of suitably large crystals. Selected
crystals from each join will be examined by high-resolution transmission
electron microscopy to document the presence of chain-multiplicity faults that
might induce a certain degree of apparent rather than true solid solution. The
information from this study can be used to calibrate variations in the
compositions of sodic-calcic-amphiboles with pressure, temperature, and
coexisting mineral assemblage. This, in turn, will be of particular interest to
those using variations in sodic-calcic-amphibole compositions to determine the
tectonic history of accretionary or collision zones. This proposal includes
funding for graduate and undergraduate students. In cooperation with a local
high school, mentoring of selected Earth science honors students will be
included as part of this research project.