* 0947132
* RAPID: Structure of Contact Networks and the Spread of Flu-like Infectious Diseases: Implications for Dynamics and Control
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2009,01/31/2011
* Marcus Feldman, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 01/31/2011
* USD 103,133.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Anthropologist Dr. James Holland Jones
and geneticist Dr. Marcus Feldman, both of Stanford University, will use
Wireless Sensor Network (WSN) technology to identify the temporal network
dynamics during typical days in a school setting. Understanding the structure of
freely-forming groups and how that relates to the overall social structure
remains a major social science challenge. The data collected in this project
will contribute significantly to improving this understanding. The data also
will help to model disease and epidemic dynamics on real-world contact networks,
which has never been done before due to the lack of appropriate data. Such
dynamic modeling will make it possible to test different control scenarios to
prevent the spread of flu-like diseases in
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participants will have small wireless sensors
attached to them; these sensors send and receive radio signals to and from other
sensors nearby. This technology will allow the researchers to collect dynamic
contact network data with unparalleled precision. In contract, traditional self-
reports of group identities show marked recall biases. Based on the collected
data, the researchers will employ and extend classical theories of small group
formation and stochastic network evolution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to
contributing to social science theory, this project has significant policy
importance because social structure and the processes that underlie its
formation are fundamental features of the transmission and control of infectious
agents. Given the importance of social processes on group formation, and the
emergence of novel swine-origin influenza A(H1N1), there is an urgent need for
contact network data in order to understand the social structure through which
influenza spreads.