* 0947781
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Heterogeneous integration of Nanotubes and Nanowires on flexible polymers with CMOS Circuitry
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2011
* Sameer Sonkusale, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Anupama Kaul
* 08/31/2011
* USD 70,707.00

EAGER: Collaborative Research: Heterogeneous integration of Nanotubes and
Nanowires on flexible polymers with CMOS Circuitry

The objective of this research is to develop and investigate a highly versatile,
low cost assembly and integration approach for incorporating various
nanomaterials such as carbon nanotubes and nanowires on to flexible parylene-C
thin films and CMOS substrates. The approach to achieve the above goal is to use
low voltage field assisted assembly technology. The resulting nanomaterials
based sensors on flexible substrates will be connected with peripheral
electronic silicon circuitry to enable integrated sensing applications.

The intellectual merits of the proposed research lies in the heterogeneous
integration of novel nanomaterials on to flexible substrates and their
integration with electronic readout circuits. This includes engineering the
metallization chemistry on the foundry fabricated electronic circuitry to
facilitate integration of different nanomaterials with low contact resistances,
fabrication and full characterization of such assemblies.

The broader impacts of the proposed research are advances in sensing and
monitoring applications that require high sensitivity, low power and arrays of
sensors. The direct applications include detection of hazardous gases and
pollutants for environmental monitoring and healthcare applications. In addition
to training graduate students, the PIs will involve undergraduate students in
their research efforts, especially students from women and under-represented
groups. The results from this collaborative research will be disseminated
through the NSF Center for High-rate Nanomanufacturing, and various professional
meetings and conferences.

