* 0947767
* Exploring Ligand Binding Energy Landscape and Quantifying Specificity of Biomolecular Recognition
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2010,08/31/2015
* Jin Wang, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 08/31/2015
* USD 891,425.00

Biological function encompasses a high degree of specificity, from molecules to
genes to organs. Understanding biological specificity is vitally important for
understanding biological function. This project is aimed at finding a
theoretical guiding principle and a unified framework for investigating the
specificity of biological function. The approaches to the project are threefold.
First, a ligand binding energy landscape framework to uncover and quantify
biological molecular specificity will be developed. This will lead to the
quantification of intrinsic specificity in a unified way based on the underlying
physical principles. This approach could not have been accomplished
systematically before. The application of a ligand binding energy landscape
constitutes a shift of thinking from conventional specificity to intrinsic
specificity. Second, since specificity is an integral aspect of molecular
recognition, this high specificity criterion for molecular recognition can serve
as an optimization scheme. This optimization scheme will be applied to bio-
molecular binding free energy estimates crucial for understanding affinity and
specificity. Third, explorations will be carried out in keeping with the
possibility of two-dimensional characterization of biomolecular recognition and
function with both affinity and specificity instead of conventional
characterization with affinity alone. In vitro and in vivo studies will be
performed in close collaboration with other experimental researchers, to test
the framework of specificity on biological targeting systems of Cox-2 and Ras
proteins, crucial for signal transduction process and function.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major intellectual merit of this project is that the
understanding of the principles and mechanisms of grand challenge problems in
bio-molecular recognition specificity can be achieved through the development of
a ligand binding energy landscape framework and quantification of intrinsic
specificity. The principles learned can be used to develop optimization method
for binding specificity, and quantitatively characterize biomolecular
recognition and function with both affinity and specificity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this proposal are the potential
applications of the methods developed here to the ligand screening and
engineering design for realizing and enhancing specific biological function. The
educational aspects of the proposal will have broad impact on students and post
doctorals at the interface of biology, chemistry and physics, through the
integration of research and education in designing and introducing a new
computational biology program, a theoretical biological physics/biophysical
chemistry course, a biological physics seminar series and collaborative research
training.