* 0948947
* ULTRA-Ex: Collaborative Research: Urban Sustainability and Push-Pull Drivers of Residential Change: Washington, D.C., Baltimore, Maryland, and the Chesapeake Bay
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2010,06/30/2014
* Peter Armbruster, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 06/30/2014
* USD 258,400.00

This research addresses the question, "What is the relationship between
environmental rehabilitation and urban revitalization?" More specifically, this
research investigates the relationships between 1) urban sustainability
policies, investments, and outcomes; 2) drivers of urbanization; and 3) long-
term dynamics of urban residential neighborhoods. Three inter-related themes
will be used to examine these relationships: a) urban forests and open space, b)
environmental quality, and c) vector-borne diseases. These research themes are
contextualized in a framework that considers vulnerability to climate change and
environmental justice. To answer these questions, this research addresses
several types of opportunities for theoretical advance in understanding urban
systems. Traditional social analysis incorporates several "push-pull" factors
such as crime, poor government services, and high taxes; expensive and
deteriorating housing; small building lots, and racial tension; but there is
little emphasis on environmental parameters. This project introduces a novel
approach to push-pull driver analysis by incorporating environmental parameters,
particularly at a fine resolution. In addition to examining long-term, social-
ecological push-pull changes over time, this project explores the utility of a
panarchy approach for understanding the relationship between environmental
rehabilitation and urban revitalization at the neighborhood level. This project
examines the dynamic understanding of neighborhood change from one phase to
another: What causes neighborhoods to decline? What causes neighborhoods to
reorganize, revitalize, and prosper? Dimensions of change are also examined. A
focus on slow and fast changing variables and attention to both change and
persistence correspond to an interest in types and rates of change. Numerous
types of data and analyses will be employed, including hi-resolution, remotely
sensed data, long-term Census data, parcel-level cadastral data, key-informant
surveys, water and air sampling, and micro-habitat analysis. In addition to
these data and analyses, three workshops - one for each research theme - bring
together all of the members of the DC-BC ULTRA community. These workshops
develop a Community of Practice that coalesces around the idea of just,
sustainable cities and provides opportunities for interactions among
constituencies and communication about research findings with multiple groups.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project adopts a fully integrated research-
education-outreach model that includes researchers, students, and decision-
makers. Researchers and managers collaborate in a full research-application
cycle: a) identify questions, b) collect new data and share existing data, c)
analyze data, d) interpret results, e) apply findings, and f) identify new
questions. Students are engaged in relevant content through coursework and
continue to work on the project through paid fellowships, internships, and
capstone or thesis projects. Students are recruited from classes and across the
DC Consortium and universities in the Baltimore region to apply for paid ULTRA
research fellowships. ULTRA Fellows work directly with researchers and managers
on projects, attend ULTRA workshops, and contribute to manuscripts. The broad
array of opportunities in the natural and social sciences and from basic
research to applied internships are designed to attract a diverse student group
and diverse set of interests.