* 0948751
* Biosynthesis of Fungal Natural Products on Collaborating Iterative Polyketide Synthases
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2010,02/29/2016
* Istvan Molnar, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* ranajeet ghose
* 02/29/2016
* USD 580,378.00

Polyketides are one of the largest families of natural products with an
astonishing structural variety and a remarkable range of biological activities.
Polyketides are biosynthesized in fungi by polyketide synthase (PKS)
multienzymes whose individual enzymatic domains are used repeatedly. While only
a single PKS multienzyme is sufficient to produce most fungal polyketides, some
of these natural products are assembled by two collaborating fungal PKSs. Such
collaborations represent significant departures from the canonical biosynthetic
logic of fungal polyketide biosynthesis. The overarching goal of the current
project is to clarify the presently unknown molecular mechanistic details of the
assembly of polyketides on such collaborating PKSs, using the biosynthesis of
resorcylic acid lactones (RAL) and the related dihydroxybenzeneacetic acid
lactones (DAL) as models. Specifically, the project aims to: 1: Characterize the
biosynthesis of dehydrocurvularin, a DAL-type natural product; 2: Express RAL
and DAL polyketide synthetases, their appropriate mutants, and hybrid enzymes in
alternative microbial hosts, and evaluate the production of polyketides using
these enzymes and synthetic substrates; and 3: Demonstrate combinatorial
biosynthesis by combining related biosynthetic pathways. These experiments will
clarify the programming rules that dictate the assembly of polyketides from
simpler metabolites, and control the final shape (cyclization patterns) of such
natural products. The lessons learned will advance our understanding of
iterative enzymatic catalysis, and contribute to the development of
combinatorial biosynthetic methods for the production of "designer" polyketides
that may be used as novel agrochemicals or high value specialty chemicals in the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Equally
important, the project will incorporate training, education and outreach
activities. Extensive research-based training opportunities will be provided to
graduate and undergraduate students, including those from minority and
underrepresented groups. The project will also train community college
undergraduate student interns, and may host high school seniors as interns under
the auspices of a successful outreach program of the University of Arizona. All
students will learn the interdisciplinary science of microbial metabolite
biosynthesis and the practice of combinatorial biosynthesis, thus preparing them
for careers in the biotechnology industry and in academic research. Further,
professional development opportunities will also be provided to K-12 educators
to learn about natural products and their biosynthesis by microorganisms: this
knowledge may later be integrated into their science
curricula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly supported by the
Metabolic Biochemistry Program of the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences and the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division.