* 0948921
* An Investigation of Biophysical Variables in Stiff and Hypertropic Mutant Sporangiophores of Phycomyces Blakesleeanus
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2014
* Joseph K. Ortega, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 02/28/2014
* USD 239,162.00

Previous research by the Principal Investigator (PI) has derived, developed, and
established quantitative biophysical equations that describe expansive growth of
the large cylindrical single-celled sporangiophores of Phycomyces blakesleeanus
and other cells with walls, i.e. algal, fungal, and plant cells. The objective
of the current research project is to obtain insight into relationships between
the biophysical variables and associated biological processes that control
expansive growth and growth behavior by using mutant sporangiophores that
exhibit abnormal growth behavior. The research will focus on strains of stiff
and hypertropic mutant sporangiophores which exhibit weak and enhanced tropic
responses and growth responses, respectively. Biophysical experiments will be
conducted to determine the magnitude and behavior of relevant biophysical
variables for stiff and hypertropic mutant sporangiophores. The obtained results
will be compared to those of wild type sporangiophores. Research conducted for
the prior NSF Grant (MCB-0640542) proposes a fungal wall chemistry hypothesis
which can explain the observed behavior of relevant biophysical variables during
anoxia, during light and avoidance growth responses, and for different stages of
sporangiophore development during steady growth. In the current research
project, the fungal wall chemistry hypothesis is complemented with new
theoretical findings that provide quantitative relationships between relevant
biophysical variables and biological processes that are integral to expansive
growth. Importantly, the fungal wall chemistry hypothesis together with these
newly proposed quantitative relationships can reconcile the previously
established quantitative biophysical equations for expansive growth with other
previously proposed biological models for growth of algal, fungal, and plant
cells. The fungal wall chemistry hypothesis and the newly proposed quantitative
relationships will be used to analyze and interpret the experimental results
obtained from stiff and hypertropic mutant sporangiophores and wild type
sporangiophores. In the near future, the results of the proposed research and
the sequencing of the genome can provide new insight into the functions of genes
and their products in expansive growth and regulation of expansive growth of
fungal cells. As the sporangiophores exhibit growth responses to sensory
stimuli, the results can provide new insight into the functions of genes and
their products in sensory transduction pathways.

Broader Impacts

The results of the proposed research will be integrated into two new graduate
bioengineering courses that the PI introduced, developed, and teaches: Cellular
Bioengineering I and II. Participating graduate students will be encouraged to
teach one of the undergraduate laboratory courses so that the PI may mentor them
through the course for the first semester and develop their confidence and
teaching skills so that they can teach the second semester more independently.
Graduate and undergraduate students, which include members of underrepresented
groups, will participate in all aspects of the research project. The PI and
participating students will conduct workshops for the Society of Hispanic
Professional Engineers student chapter's annual outreach conference for high
school and middle school students in the Denver metropolitan area.