* 0948914
* ULTRA-Ex: Dynamics of Urban Ecosystem Services and Their Relationship to Ecohydrology in the Los Angeles Area
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,02/28/2014
* Stephanie Pincetl, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2014
* USD 388,298.00

The magnitude, patterns, and processes of ecosystem services in the urban
environment are poorly understood, however, and their management may create
disservices that cause other environmental problems or unanticipated
socioeconomic impacts. While urban forests and ecosystems mitigate stormwater
flows, remove pollutants, and cool the urban environment, they also have
associated costs, including extensive water requirements. Urban forests are
complex to create, maintain, and protect, and the distribution of vegetation and
associated benefits are often unevenly distributed. As water resources become
scarcer, this distribution of urban ecosystems will involve even more complex
trade-offs. Los Angeles is located in a semi-arid region, and widespread
development has created an artificial urban ecosystem through extensive use of
irrigation. In the face of current water shortages, decision-makers have
responded by raising water rates and restricting residential landscape watering.
Projected population and urban growth as well as future climate change (higher
temperatures and lower precipitation) are creating unparalleled challenges for
resource managers. Better tools are needed that allow urban managers to balance
the trade-offs between ecosystem services and disservices associated with water
and vegetation. This collaborative research project will focus on water
management and water consumption associated with the urban forest and outdoor
landscaping in the city of Los Angeles, California. The investigators will focus
on the following questions: (1) What is the institutional framework for water
management in the city of Los Angeles? (2) What is the magnitude and variability
of landscape water use in the city? (3) What is the spatial distribution of
urban vegetation, and how does it relate to landscape water use and to socio-
demographic differences? (4) What ecosystem services are supported by landscape
water use and what are some of the potential costs of such services? The
investigators' goal is to integrate ecohydrology into a comprehensive
understanding of ecosystem services and disservices, and their interactions with
the human dimension of institutional management and organizational structure in
the broader Los Angeles region. They will use a range of research methods
combining a diverse set of data, models, and experimental and theoretical
approaches to develop a first-order model of the ecohydrology of the city of Los
Angeles. They will attempt to proximate indoor and outdoor water use within
defined regions of this highly complex urban environment, and they will develop
schemes for better understanding the effects of institutional water management
and water use, including differential impacts across the
city.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address critical uncertainties in
the understanding of the costs and benefits of ecosystem services, examining
both the biophysical and human institutional dimensions and the interactions
between ecosystem services, ecohydrology (coupled interactions of ecosystems and
hydrological processes), and institutions. Project findings will be conveyed to
numerous non-profit agencies in the region devoted to a range of ecosystem
activities, including restoring local river watersheds and improving indoor and
outdoor water use. Project scientists will collaborate in annual public seminars
with non-profits and other groups that are addressing watershed health and
runoff (intimately related to urban landscaping and water consumption). The
project also will support the interdisciplinary education of undergraduate and
graduate students and will provide comprehensive mentoring for a postdoctoral
scholar in the various disciplines associated with the proposed project. This
award was funded as an Urban Long-Term Research Area Exploratory (ULTRA-Ex)
award as the result of a special competition jointly supported by the National
Science Foundation and the U.S. Department of Agriculture Forest Service. Funds
for this specific award were provided by the U.S. Department of Agriculture
Forest Service.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;