* 0948893
* III/EAGER: Temporal Relationships Among Clusters in Data Streams (TRACDS)
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Margaret Dunham, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2013
* USD 212,000.00

State-of-the-art data stream clustering algorithms developed by the data mining
community do not utilize the temporal order of events and therefore in the
resulting clustering all temporal information is lost. This is quite strange as
one of the salient features of data streams is temporal ordering of events. In
this project we develop a technique to efficiently incorporate temporal ordering
into the clustering process and prove its usefulness on large, high-throughput
data streams. Temporal ordering is introduced into the data stream clustering
process by dynamically constructing an evolving Markov Chain where the states
represent clusters. Our approach is based on the previously developed Extensible
Markov Model (EMM). The results of this project will provide a framework upon
which important stream mining applications such as anomaly detection and
prediction of future events are easily implemented. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By
showing that state-of-the-art data steam clustering algorithms can incorporate
temporal order information efficiently, this project will have a broad impact on
many areas where temporal order is essential. As examples, NOAA Hurricane Data
and NASA satellite data will be used throughout this project. Results, including
open source software will be distributed via the project Web site
(http://lyle.smu.edu/ida/tracds).