* 0948260
* EAGER: Designing Touch-Sound Interfaces to Geospatial Information for Visually-Impaired Users
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Chris Harding, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2012
* USD 117,951.00

The increasing use of geospatial information (that is to say, data connected to
a location on Earth) in applications such as Google Maps and Google Earth
underscores its growing importance to mainstream computing. However, nearly all
such geospatial applications use a highly visual interface and are therefore
largely inaccessible to visually-impaired users. Although today's most widely
used solutions for touch interfaces (point haptic devices) are rudimentary when
compared to the richness and complexity of human touch, ongoing developments
suggest that it will eventually become technically possible to design and
implement a system that uses touch and sound to convey many different forms of
geospatial data. The PI's ultimate goal is to create such a system that will
allow visually-impaired users to effectively access and interact with geospatial
information. In this exploratory project, he will conduct research on how to
design such touch/sound based systems. The work will cut across disciplines and
actively involve visually-impaired persons as users and designers, in order to
leverage the unique perspective on the use and design of non-visual interfaces
that visually-impaired users have; a significant part of the research will be
carried out by a visually-impaired graduate research assistant. The expected
outcomes of the PI's four step research plan will include an analysis of the
goals and needs of visually-impaired users and their support personnel regarding
geospatial information, a list of potential tasks for this context, a catalog of
how different touch/sound methods could be used for these tasks, and an
evaluation of some of these methods with visually-impaired users.

Broader Impacts: The interdisciplinary human-computer interaction program at the
PI's institution has recently admitted its first visually-impaired graduate
student, who will contribute his technical skills and his connections to the
visually-impaired community to this project. The results of this work will
impact the quality of touch/sound user interfaces by providing designers with a
broader overview, by helping them consider multiple alternatives, and by
enabling them to make more informed and inclusive design decisions. While these
new user interfaces will initially benefit primarily persons with visual
impairments in accessing and interacting with geospatial data, it is likely that
some of the tasks and methods explored in this research will have relevance for
enhancing future interfaces to geospatial data for sighted users as well.