* 0948476
* Fundamental Cyberinfrastructure for Productive Science and Engineering: Identification of Barriers to and Enablers of Successful Projects
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Nancy Wilkins-Diehr, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Mark Suchman
* 08/31/2012
* USD 299,999.00

This research identifies the science drivers, necessary infrastructure, required
education, and current barriers and enablers to implementing cyber-resources and
engaging the research populations who would use them. The digital component of
science and engineering research continues to increase and there is considerable
pressure to develop and support cyberinfrastructure for various research
communities. Some cyberinfrastructure projects fundamentally change the way
science is conducted while others do not and it is not clear which problems or
communities should receive these resources. To help inform cyberinfrastructure
investment decisions, this project identifies the types of scientific and
engineering problems and the types of communities that can most benefit from the
development and availability of cyberinfrastructure tools. This research uses
large-scale focus groups to perform an in-depth cyberinfrastructure needs
analysis, identify areas of potential scientific or engineering improvement and
discovery, and enumerate non-technological facets that must be addressed for
cyberinfrastructure tools to be successful. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
addresses a significant theoretical and practical problem: how to identify and
support scientific and engineering collaborative teams, some of which may be
pre-emergent or may not currently be using cyberinfrastructure. The results will
show how cyberinfrastructure can catalyze research collaborations enabling a
transformation in additional scientific and engineering
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Investigating the science drivers of potential,
nascent and existing collaborations is a crucial step in identifying, nurturing,
and supporting the teams that will be central to future advances in science and
engineering. Results will help prioritize funding decisions about
cyberinfrastructure tool development and deployment to enhance sustainability,
maximize scientific impact, and enable participants from under-represented
groups and minority institutions to participate in scientific and engineering
collaborations. &lt;br/&gt;