* 0948142
* Workshop on Campus Bridging Technologies
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2010
* Kenneth Klingenstein, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2010
* USD 49,273.00

The National Science Foundation?s strategy for 21st century innovation depends
explicitly on the creation and effective use of cyberinfrastructure. The NSF-
and Indiana University- funded workshop Available technologies, best practices,
and strategies for bridging from campus to international collaborations will
examine the question ?Given millions of dollars of investment in US
cyberinfrastructure, technical and non-technical implementation efforts within
the next 12-18 months could significantly improve the overall effectiveness of
cyberinfrastructure as regards the ability of researchers and students to move
much more easily across various levels of campus bridging: within the campus;
from campus to national facilities; and across national boundaries to
international collaborations?? We will draw on our experiences from the NSF-
sponsored 2008 workshop, Cyberinfrastructure Software Sustainability and
Reusability, to ensure that this workshop produces effective outcomes,
including:&lt;br/&gt; * Specific recommendations to the NSF regarding a variety
of campus bridging activities, suitable for implementation in 12-18 months based
on adoption and hardening of existing technologies&lt;br/&gt; * Recommendations
to NSF regarding possible future funding strategies related to the general area
of campus bridging&lt;br/&gt; * Cross-fertilization of ideas as a result of
bringing together diverse communities of practice&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this activity is in the identification of important
challenges facing the nation's science and engineering research communities, and
assembling a group of leaders and workshop participants who will be qualified to
offer excellent intellectual as well as practical insight on ways to identify
best practices and strategies for bridging cyberinfrastructure from the campus
level to international collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact
of this activity will result from suggestions about how to better integrate
smaller schools, particularly Minority Serving Institutions, in to the national
cyberinfrstructure.