* 0948510
* Genome-Wide Diversity In Village Dogs: Unvcovering The History Of  Dog Domestication, The Genetics Of Natural Dog Populations, &amp; Consequences Of Artificial Selection In Breed D
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2011
* Andrew Clark, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 07/31/2011
* USD 296,385.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dogs descended from Eurasian gray
wolves, but where and how this process occurred is poorly understood. Much
genetic research has focused on breed dogs, but the diverse populations of semi-
feral "village" dogs are likely an important key for understanding dog
domestication. In this project, samples will be collected and analyzed for
village dogs across Eurasia and compared to samples from breed dogs and wolves.
Genotyping will be done on high-throughput (60,000 marker) arrays yielding
unprecedented resolution of the dog genome, but only a partial picture of
genetic diversity since these markers consist largely of variants found from the
boxer and poodle genomes. Therefore, sequencing a subset of village dogs and
wolves will be done to detect novel variation in these groups and determine how
much biased marker ascertainment affects genetic inference from these
arrays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As high-throughput genomic tools are developed for
more and more organisms, tremendous research opportunities exist for studying
related populations and species. Developing methods of genetic inference robust
to ascertainment bias is crucial for utilizing these tools. This study will
likely to challenge current theories of dog origins and develop village dogs
into a useful system for the study of domestication, speciation, behavior and
morphology.