* 0948724
* Discovering Hadean Earth
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2010,04/30/2015
* T. Mark Harrison, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 04/30/2015
* USD 299,042.00

Intellectual merit. The first 500 million years of Earth history - the Hadean
Eon - is a period of 'lost' time as there is virtually no rock record preserved
from this interval. However, the PI and colleagues have samples of detrital and
xenocrystic zircons from western Australia (Jack Hills) with ages between 4.0
and 4.4 Ga. A massive analysis campaign has identified many thousands of these
ancient zircons, and investigations of these grains have been interpreted to
suggest the presence of liquid water at the Earth's surface, significant growth
of continental crust, a mature sediment recycling system, and perhaps operation
of plate boundary-type processes during the Hadean. Such evidence suggests the
possibility that the very early planet was much more similar to the present day
Earth than previously thought and this stimulates and justifies new
measurements. Analytical developments, analysis programs, and experiments are
proposed to address the following questions: 1) Could Hadean Jack Hills zircons
have been formed by impacts? 2) Do Hadean zircons record the terrestrial
counterpart to the ~3.9 Ga lunar cataclysm? 3) What happened to the highly
enriched (low Lu/Hf) reservoir seen in 3.9- 4.3 Ga zircons? 4) Do mineral
inclusions in >4 Ga zircons retain a pristine Hadean record? 5) Are available
barometers applicable to inclusions in Hadean zircons? 6) Do Pu-U variations in
Hadean zircons reflect water-mediated fractionation? and 7) Are the collective
isotopic, mineralogical, and thermometry data evidence of Hadean continental
recycling and plate boundary interactions? Proposed investigations include: 1)
Laser ablation ICPMS measurement of initial 176Hf/177Hf in 3.9-3.6 Ga zircons,
2) U-Th-Pb ion microprobe depth profiling of >4 Ga zircons, and 3)
characterization of zircons formed in terrestrial impact melts, 4) Hadean Pu-U
geochemistry from fission Xe isotopes, 5) Nd isotopic systematics of Jack Hills
zircon, 6) NanoSIMS analysis of Si/Al in micron-sized muscovite, 7) K-Ca dating
of Hadean muscovite inclusions, and 8) calibration of the Si-in-muscovite
barometer for peraluminous granitoids.

Broader Impacts. This research will directly benefit the UCLA graduate students
supported by this project. Once trained on the ion microprobe, these students in
turn provide support to visitors (including numerous graduate students) to the
NSF-supported Keck Center for Isotope Geochemistry (see below). Several small
projects have been identified that will be used to engender undergraduate
research opportunities. Research outcomes are of international interest and
could be akin to the results of a planetary exploration mission if the Hadean
paradigm is overturned. This project showcases scientific and technical
leadership in a field of global interest, aids in capturing the imagination of
young people considering a career in science and technology, and provides
training opportunities for young scientists. Research results will be
communicated to the scientific community via high citation impact scientific
journals and to the public through sustained outreach activities (see
http://sims.ess.ucla.edu/outreach/outreach.php).