* 0948502
* RUI:   Ontogeny of circadian rhythm in organs and pleiotropic effects of circadian genes
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2015
* Kristen Curran, University of Wisconsin-Whitewater
* Standard Grant
* Steven Klein
* 04/30/2015
* USD 208,650.00

The long term objective of this project is to understand how specific organs
synchronize with the brain and the external environment during embryonic
development. The first aim supports this objective through a systematic analysis
of when during tadpole development the eye, ear, nose, heart, and kidney display
a fully functional circadian rhythm. Molecular approaches will be used to
illustrate time of day-dependent changes in gene expression in developing organs
to establish when during development they exhibit a mature circadian rhythm.
Another long term objective is to ask whether circadian rhythm is necessary for
proper organ development. Somites are blocks of tissue that are formed in pairs
on each side of the developing spinal cord at regular intervals during
vertebrate development. They form the muscle and skin of the back and vertebrae
in the adult. The second aim supports the long term objectives by using a
molecular genetic approach to decrease or increase the amount of xNOCTURNIN
protein available in the cells of the early embryo and analyze for affects on
somite formation and segmentation. The result will shed light on whether genes
like xNocturnin may have other functions during early development apart from
controlling circadian physiology. Successful completion of these experiments
over three years will provide training and summer income for 8-12 undergraduates
in the area of Developmental and Molecular Biology.