* 0948041
* Cascades To Coast GK-12: Enhancing STEM Education through Environmental Sustainability
* EHR,DGE
* 03/15/2010,07/31/2016
* Marion Dresner, Portland State University
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 07/31/2016
* USD 2,727,544.00

Cascades to Coast GK-12: Enhancing STEM Education through Environmental
Sustainability&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Cascades to Coast GK-12 project will
establish partnerships between Portland State University?s School of the
Environment (SOE) and three Oregon school districts toward the goals of
enhancing middle, high school and graduate STEM education around the theme of
environmental sustainability. The project will support fifty GK-12 PhD
Fellowships for advanced graduate students to work directly with teachers to
engage over 1500 sixth through ninth grade students in inquiry and field studies
designed to increase understanding of key concepts in the physical and
biological sciences and environmental sustainability. The project?s geographic
breadth, from Oregon?s Cascade Mountains to the Pacific Ocean, will provide an
opportunity to create a learning community across diverse school districts and
ecosystems. Project activities include a summer training institute, the
development of a required year long graduate seminar "Public Communication,
Education and Careers", teacher professional development workshops, and end-of-
year student poster conference. Project outcomes include: developing and
improving Fellows? skills in teaching and public outreach to diverse audiences;
institutionalizing K-12 activities and public outreach into SOE graduate
curricula; increasing teachers? knowledge of current science content and their
skills in creating engaging inquiry activities; increasing students? knowledge
about the scientific principles underlying environmental sustainability and
contributing to the STEM education knowledge base by sharing field-tested,
theme-based science inquiry projects and related curricula. A website will be
developed to share project ideas, environmental data acquired, and final tested
and refined curriculum units. A robust evaluation will guide continuous
improvement, disseminate findings, and support continuation of successful
components. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;