* 0948131
* Si and Fe Isotope Geochemistry at High Pressure and Temperature
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2014
* Anat Shahar, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 03/31/2014
* USD 210,961.00

Intellectual Merit. One of the main goals in earth science research is to
determine the chemical composition of the Earth and its primary reservoirs.
Isotopic and chemical mass balance calculations have been used extensively to
better constrain fundamental issues such as the structure of mantle convection
and determination of the light element contents in the core. Much work has
focused on chemical partitioning experiments over a large range of pressures and
temperatures. Although it has been assumed that pressure was not an important
variable for isotopic fractionation among coexisting phases, new calculations of
vibrational frequencies suggest that this assumption may not be true, and high P
conditions may significantly influence stable isotopic variations within
planetary bodies. It is well known that pressure can produce dramatic changes in
material properties and mineral equilibria, but its effect on isotopic
fractionation has not been well characterized. With the advent of new high-
precision isotope ratio measurement techniques and development of high-pressure
apparatus, there is great potential for interdisciplinary research in this
field. It is proposed to investigate the effect of pressure on isotope
fractionation, and specifically under conditions of core formation, as a
function of mineralogy throughout the earth's mantle. Stable isotope
geochemistry and experimental petrology/mineral physics methods will be applied
to determine fractionation mechanisms. Isotopically spiked experiments will be
conducted at high P-T conditions and run products analyzed to determine isotopic
fractionation between coexisting phases. The results will be applied to
understand the composition of the Earth's core and its interaction with the
overlying mantle. Specific research questions include: [1] how does pressure
affect isotopic fractionation of the non-traditional stable isotopes (Si, Fe)?
[2] do fractionation factors change throughout the Earth's mantle as a function
of pressure and hence mineralogy? [3] do large-scale processes such as core
formation leave a stable isotopic signature that can be measured
today?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broad Impacts. This project is defining a new field
in the geosciences, necessitating the need for training in both mineral
physics/experimental petrology and isotope geochemistry. A new female Staff
member is named as a PI on this proposal and is responsible for much of the work
therein. Results from the proposed study will be disseminated primarily through
scientific journals and by participation at scientific conferences from both
fields.