* 0948277
* EAR-PF: RECALIBRATING THE SILURIAN SYSTEM USING INTEGRATED HIGH-RESOLUTION BIOCHEMOSTRATIGRAPHY AND GEOCHRONOLOGY: A CASE STUDY FOR THE PALEOZOIC ERA
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2012
* Bradley Cramer, Cramer                  Bradley        D
* Fellowship Award
* Lina Patino
* 01/31/2012
* USD 170,000.00

Dr. Bradley Cramer has been granted an NSF Earth Sciences Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a research and education plan at the Kansas Geological
Survey and the University of Kansas. The proposed research will undertake an
investigation to significantly improve the Silurian timescale (444 to 416
million years ago) and better constrain our understanding of the rates of
Paleozoic global climate change (542 to 251 million years ago). This project
will integrate high-resolution biostratigraphy of conodonts and graptolites,
high-resolution carbonate carbon isotope chemostratigraphy, new single grain
zircon U/Pb age dates, and the Average Spectral Misfit (ASM) method of orbital
tuning to produce a Silurian timescale with resolution and fidelity approaching
that of modern global climate records. The proposed research will include study
areas from the United States, the United Kingdom, Sweden, and Estonia.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will increase the resolution of the
Silurian portion of the Geologic Timescale by more than an order of magnitude,
and when completed, will mark a significant improvement in our ability to tell
time in the deep past, at the scale of thousands of years. Resolving the deep-
time climate history of the Earth to such short timescales would allow over 500
million years of global climate change to be directly brought to bear on our
understanding of the modern climate system and significantly improve our
understanding of the natural variability within the ocean-atmosphere system.
Research methods and results will be integrated into course material to be
taught by the PI at the KU, Department of Geology, and both graduate and
undergraduate students will be included in the field and laboratory portions of
the proposed research to provide hands-on training for students.