* 0948952
* ULTRA-Ex: Positioning Rust-Belt Cities for a Sustainable Future:  A Systems Approach to Enhancing Urban Quality of Life
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2009,03/31/2012
* Myrna Hall, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 03/31/2012
* USD 300,000.00

Once dominated by energy-intensive, ferrous-based industries, "Rust Belt"?
cities in the Northeast and Midwest were the backbone of the U.S. economy. Over
the last 50 years, however, their populations and economies contracted
dramatically with many social and ecological ramifications. By re-envisioning
blighted urban spaces and reconnecting to regional natural productive capacity,
Rust Belt cities may arrive at a more sustainable social and ecological future.
This collaborative research project will engage university-based scholars,
government scientists, and local stakeholders in an examination of the process
of urban greening to mitigate rust belt urban "blight" while enhancing the
socioecological metabolism of these cities. The investigators' objectives are to
use the theory of socioecological metabolism and behavioral decision theory to
assess how the socioecological metabolism of a typical Rust Belt city has
changed over time as well as its vulnerability to future external factors, such
as restrictions in oil availability, climate change, and reverse migration from
the Sunbelt. They also will investigate how city revitalization emphasizing
natural ecosystem processes via green infrastructure might affect
socioecological metabolism at both the city/regional and the
household/neighborhood levels in the future. The investigators will explore with
local government and citizen stakeholders the institutional and societal
constraints that may limit transitioning to this new city form and how urban
ecosystem science can be transferred from the scientific community to local
actors. They also will explore the potential range of socioecological options
and possibilities of land-use and land-cover structure and management and how it
can contribute to long-term future sustainability and quality of life in Rust
Belt cities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance the scientific
understanding of the human dimensions of urban ecosystem material and energy
flows within the socioecological metabolism framework, particularly as related
to the necessity of: providing reliable energy sources to support urban
metabolism and understanding how alternative land-use and land-cover patterns
will impact energy budgets, water. and air quality. The project will advance the
scientific understanding of socioecological metabolism and its utility in urban
planning, particularly with respect to urban greening; and it will provide an
educational tool to cultivate urban citizens' interest about urban fauna and its
evolution over time, ecosystem services, and biodiversity. The value of this
work is not limited to Rust Belt cities. More broadly, the project will provide
knowledge about the human dimensions of urban green revitalization, which has
become an important national initiative, and a suite of tools designed with and
for managers and decision makers that will help them explore alternative urban
design and planning policies to mitigate the impact of potential external
events, incorporate regional ecosystem production capacity, evaluate physical
opportunities for green infrastructure, honor citizen preferences, and educate
the community toward new paradigms in urban form. This award was funded as an
Urban Long-Term Research Area Exploratory (ULTRA-Ex) award as the result of a
special competition jointly supported by the National Science Foundation and the
U.S. Department of Agriculture Forest Service. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;