* 0948706
* Collaborative Research: Deciphering Sierran Magma Sources and Modes of Diversification Using Trace Element, O, and Hf  Isotopic Analyses of Zircon
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2010,02/29/2016
* Jade Star Lackey, Pomona College
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 02/29/2016
* USD 87,145.00

Intellectual Merit: The large Mesozoic to Cenozoic US Cordilleran batholiths are
among the most voluminous and impressive records of igneous activity on Earth
and represent the product of complex tectonic and igneous processes that led to
a major period of crustal growth. Modern interdisciplinary studies of the
batholiths have transformed our understanding of how and on what time scale
large continental arc magma systems develop. Important new constraints on the
rates and budgets of crustal growth in arc settings and the coupling and
decoupling between mantle and crust during arc magmatism have fundamentally
changed our perception of arc geodynamics. Nevertheless, there remain critical
unresolved issues concerning the mode of construction and diversification of
large arc magma systems, whether large magma chambers in arcs are common or rare
(or ephemeral or long-lived), where in the arc crust-mantle column magmas
acquire their fundamental geochemical/isotopic signatures, and to what extent
this signature reflects magmatic sources and/or is obscured by subsequent open
system magmatic processes. As a step towards answering these questions, this
project seeks to evaluate arc magmatic processes using in situ measurements of
trace elements and O and Hf isotopes in zircon from several large-volume
intrusions comprising the central Sierra Nevada batholith. Specific questions
that this project addresses include: (1) what are relative contributions of
crustal and mantle components to continental arc magmas? (2) At what depths
(sub-arc mantle, lower crust, middle crust?) do granitoid melts acquire their
fundamental geochemical and isotopic signatures, and what are the distinct
components that contribute to the magmas? (3) How much of the geochemical and
isotopic signature of shallow crustal input is superimposed on primary magmas?
(4) Are large and seemingly homogeneous plutons well mixed, or are they amalgams
of many discrete injections that do not interact? (5) Recent studies of volcanic
and plutonic rocks suggest they consist of crystals having disparate histories
and sources. What is the extent and significance of such heterogeneities? Zircon
is the focus of this study because it is the preeminent crustal geochronometer
for igneous rocks, and it retains a rich archive of other information that can
be exploited to assess magma parentage. Intracrystalline geochemical and isotope
variations in zircons and elemental and isotopic variation within populations of
zircon have provided remarkably detailed records of magmatic evolution. In
addition, because Hf isotopes are sensitive indicators of the mantle extraction
age of igneous rocks, and O isotopes cleanly trace mantle versus supracrustal
rock contributions to magmas, coupled analysis of Hf and O in zircons has proven
to be a powerful tool for determining the volumes of new crustal growth versus
recycling of crust. The proposed work will use zircon isotopic and trace element
records from petrologically well-characterized plutons and intrusive suites in
the central Sierra Nevada batholith to examine the questions posed above.
Special collaborations with workers studying the Tuolumne and John Muir
intrusive suites (Scott Patterson, Allen Glazner, and colleagues) are designed
to help resolve debates on how plutons and batholiths are assembled.

Broader Impacts: This project will provide research training for graduate and
undergraduate students at San Jose State University (SJSU) and undergraduates at
Pomona College and the other four Claremont Colleges. Students will be engaged
in all stages of the project, ultimately presenting their results at national
and possibly international conferences, and publishing their results in refereed
journals. Pomona and SJSU are both primarily undergraduate institutions (SJSU is
also a minority institution). The project also partners a mid-career scientist
who has worked for over a decade in the central Sierra Nevada batholith with a
junior faculty member who has already made important contributions to
understanding of the batholith. This project will also foster international and
inter-institutional collaborations involving leading labs at UCLA, UC-Santa Cruz
USGS, Stanford, and Vrije University (Amsterdam).