* 0948304
* Single-Event and Long-Term Dynamics of Nonplanar Fault Systems
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2012
* Brittany Erickson, Erickson                Brittany       A
* Continuing Grant
* Lina Patino
* 08/31/2012
* USD 170,000.00

Dr. Brittany A. Erickson has been granted the NSF Earth Sciences postdoctoral
fellowship to carry out a research and education plan at Stanford University.
Interdisciplinary research between the fields of geophysics and mathematics will
be conducted in order to understand unknown phenomena emerging from earthquake
simulations with certain physical features that have not been previously
studied. This work will study dynamic models of fault systems in order to
explore how small-scale nonplanar features influence single event rupture
behavior, as well as long term interactions in fault networks. Single-event and
long-term modeling of fault networks has never been studied with such an
intricately detailed description of fault topography that will be considered. It
has been suggested that faults with complex geometries, including bends and
fault branching, affect such rupture properties as nucleation, propagation and
arrest. Understanding how and why ruptures break multiple fault segments, or
jump to nearby fault lines plays an important role in seismic hazard assessment.
The goals of this project are: (1) to understand how the incorporation of such
physical features as small-scale non-planar features and off-fault plasticity
affect rupture dynamics, (2) to explore the path through which ruptures
propagate in a geometrically complicated fault network, (3) to further develop
computer codes to be able to solve the quasi-static problem and simulate long
term dynamics, (4) to compute statistics associated with jumping and branching
of faults with small scale roughness. High performance numerical coding of
single event and long term earthquake dynamics on nonplanar faults will be
developed and the code will be simulated on clusters of computers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results from this work will greatly affect seismic
hazard estimates of earthquake nucleation, rupture behavior, jumping and
branching in real fault networks. It will determine the regions more susceptible
to greater earthquake damage. Furthermore, the possibility for an earthquake
rupture to jump from one fault to another implies that the duration of the
rupture process can be longer than expected if only one fault is involved and
consequently increase the amount of damaging ground motion to structures and
buildings. This project will properly quantify the statistics involved with
earthquake rupture and allow for a proper assessment of the risk and damages
associated with earthquake activities. The education plan includes sharing of
mathematical knowledge in courses and workshops for the geophysicists involved
in order to educate researchers in computational science.