* 0948542
* Collaborative Research:  Timing, Extent, and Spatial Progression of Neogene Displacement Transfer, Southern Walker Lane, Western Great Basin
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2010,07/31/2014
* John Oldow, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 07/31/2014
* USD 199,757.00

Northwesterly displacement of the Sierra Nevada with respect to the Great Basin
in the western US Cordillera has been ongoing for the last 12 to 15 Ma. This
motion is accommodated by a complicated and incompletely understood belt of
deformation along the western margin of the Great Basin that links major,
misaligned strike-slip faults in eastern California and western Nevada. Based on
previous research and our preliminary work, we have identified that the deformed
belt underlies a region of nearly 15,000 km2 and contains large tectonic blocks
that both translate toward the northwest as the crust is pulled apart and also
undergo vertical-axis rotations of 20° to 90°. In this project, we will provide
a better understanding of the dimensions of the tectonic blocks, how far they
have moved laterally, to what degree they experienced vertical-axis rotation,
and the spatial-temporal pattern of deformation. Much of the western borderland
of North America and many parts of other continents around the world reside in
similar tectonic settings and record comparable histories of deformation. This
study will provide the opportunity to better understand how and to what degree
the translation and rotation of large crustal blocks is accommodated as the
continental crust is fragmented in response to the relative movement of
lithospheric plates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Crustal response to
displacement transfer in structural stepovers linking misaligned segments of
large-magnitude transcurrent faults is accommodated by components of
translational and rotational displacement and strain and results in complex
three-dimensional arrays of structures. The mechanisms by which rotational and
translational strain are accommodated either by rigid-blocks and/or by
distributed strain and to what degree the translational and rotational processes
are coupled in space-time are poorly understood. In this study, we integrate
detailed and regional geologic mapping with thermochronologic, structural, and
paleomagnetic analysis to unravel the history of transcurrent structures
separating the Sierra Nevada and central Great Basin. The objective of the work
is to characterize transcurrent and high-angle normal fault displacement,
estimate slip on low-angle detachment faults, and assess the relation between
translational deformation and differential rotation. Our research results will
provide the needed detailed understanding of the spatial and temporal pattern of
deformation and supply the constraints to differentiate between coeval and
serial translational and rotational deformation histories within the stepover
system and provide the means to assess whether or to what degree rotation is
accommodated by rigid-body motion or distributed strain processes.&lt;br/&gt;