* 0948570
* Strain Accommodation in the Walker Lane: Understanding the Evolution of a Diffuse Plate Boundary with Geochronology and Geodesy
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2010,02/28/2014
* Andrew Newman, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* David Fountain
* 02/28/2014
* USD 279,442.00

This study brings together a team of scientists from Georgia Institute of
Technology to investigate the discrepancies between short- and long-term strain
rates in the Walker Lane region of eastern California and western Nevada; an
evolving segment of the Pacific-North America plate boundary. To accomplish this
objective, existing geodetic infrastructure, including regional campaign and
continuous GPS data, is augmented with 10 new monuments in the region. All
campaign sites will be measured in three annual campaigns between 2010 and 2012.
Analysis of the GPS data will yield a detailed image of the present-day strain
field. Geologic mapping incorporating evaluation of aerial photography, field
surveying and cosmogenic nuclide geochronology of offset alluvial fans are used
to determine the dates, and hence the long-term rates, of motion across normal
faults. The integration of the long-term geologic and short-term geodetic
datasets will yield a comprehensive view of the distributed strain field over
late Pleistocene to Recent time scales along this important plate boundary fault
system. Ultimately, this will lead to improved understanding of how the
structurally complex lithosphere behaves along evolving plate boundaries.

Along some plate boundary systems, including the San Andreas and North Anatolian
faults, rates of tectonic deformation appear to be constant over a wide range of
time scales. However, on parts of other plate boundary zones short-term rates
determined from GPS measurements do not coincide with longer-term geologically
inferred slip rates. For example, late Pleistocene rates of deformation across
the eastern California shear zone in the Mojave Desert and in the central Walker
Lane, determined from tectono-geomorphic fault studies, yield rates that are
only one-half to one-third the short-term rate determined from GPS data. The
mismatch between short- and long-term rates in the Walker Lane is contrary to
current understanding, and has important implications for how tectonic
deformation is accommodated in the lithosphere, and ultimately the relationship
of this deformation to earthquake hazards. By determining rates of tectonic
activity in the Walker Lave over annual to 100,000 year timescales will provide
new insights into how fault systems behave and evolve over multiple earthquake
cycles, and address several fundamental questions about crustal strain
distribution: How constant are rates of strain accumulation and release in time
and space? Are geologic slip rates averaged over multiple earthquake cycles
comparable with short-term rates of deformation determined from GPS data? If
discrepancies between short- and long-term rates of deformation exist, over what
temporal and spatial scales does the discrepancy occur? Are these differences
related to the structural complexity of a specific region or are they
characteristic of entire plate boundaries?