* 0948638
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Acquisition of Complex Verb Constructions in Q'anjob'al (Maya)
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2010,01/31/2012
* Clifton Pye, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 01/31/2012
* USD 11,990.00

This dissertation project documents the acquisition of the verbal complex in
Q'anjob'al Maya. The project will be conducted by Mateo Pedro, a native speaker
of Q'anjob'al, under the direction of Dr. Clifton Pye. Q'anjob'al is an under-
documented and endangered language spoken by spoken by approximately 99,211
people in four Guatemalan communities. Q'anjob'al uses ergative prefixes to
cross-reference the subject of transitive verbs and absolutive markers to cross-
reference the subjects of intransitive verbs. Q'anjob'al has split ergativity in
aspectless dependent clauses, in which the ergative prefixes cross-reference the
subjects of intransitive verbs. Transitive verbs in the same aspectless
dependent contexts take an intransitive suffix. Aspect is marked by a separate
prefix.

The dissertation project will use the Q'anjob'al data to evaluate the Root
Infinitive Hypothesis (Wexler 1998). This hypothesis argues that even though
children know the contexts of finite clauses, they optionally use nonfinite verb
forms in root clauses. A conspicuous weakness of work on the Root Infinitive
Hypothesis has been the lack of acquisition data from languages with
agglutinative inflectional systems. The agglutinative morphology of Q'anjob'al
will make it obvious when children produce one or another adult verb form in
place of an aspectualy marked verb, or simply omit part of the verbal morphology
and produce a non-adult form. More importantly, this project will add
significantly to our knowledge of the constellation of verb forms that children
produce when acquiring Mayan languages.

Another goal of the project is to train native speakers of Q'anjob'al to code
the morphosyntax of the Q'anjob'al child data, and make the coded transcriptions
available to other scholars and the Q'anjob'al community via the Adquisici√≥n de
Lenguas Mayas archive (www.almaya.org).