* 0948466
* Collaborative Research: Constraining Arc Processes through Comprehensive Geochemical Study of the Chilean Southern Volcanic Zone
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2013
* Joerg Schaefer, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 07/31/2013
* USD 143,479.00

Volcanism at convergent margins is one of the most visible and important
manifestations of the circulation of the solid Earth, with importance both for
our understanding of Earth processes, and for hazards to human beings from
eruptions and seismicity. Understanding these processes requires comprehensive
data sets that make use of the most important geochemical tools, collected in
the context of a "natural experiment" provided by the Earth. New developments in
analytical geochemistry and collaboration with Chilean volcanologists provide a
unique opportunity for such a study. The Chilean "southern volcanic zone"
provides an experiment to see how the continental crust influences volcanic
behavior and products. The thickness and age of the crust change progressively
from south to north, permitting two competing hypotheses to be rigorously
evaluated. The first hypothesis proposes that changes in volcanism result from
the influence of the crust on melting processes in the mantle below, and that
erupted melts can be interpreted in terms of the processes that take place at
depth to create convergent margin volcanoes. The second argues that the crust
modifies magmas beyond recognition, so that their compositions reflect shallow
crustal processes rather than deeper mantle processes. A comprehensive study of
volcanoes along the gradient provided by southern Chile will permit a detailed
test of these hypotheses, and a new understanding of what controls convergent
magma compositions.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The tools that will be used to solve
this problem include the necessary field work and geological understanding
provided by Chilean colleagues, standard tools of major elements, trace
elements, and long-lived radiogenic isotopes. The new perspectives come from the
combination of this classical approach with oxygen isotopes, U-series studies,
and the cosmogenic nuclide 10Be. Oxygen isotopes are particularly sensitive to
crustal contamination; U-series and 10Be reflect mantle processes. Seeing how
these tracers co-vary will constrain the crust and mantle contributions.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This work will answer fundamental questions about solid
Earth circulation that relate to our overall understanding to the plate tectonic
cycle. It also integrates efforts of US, Swiss, French and Chilean
investigators. Some of the volcanoes have had important historical eruptive
activity, and this work will be useful to future hazard evaluation.
Undergraduates, graduate students and post-docs are all receiving training in
volcanology, the logistics of managing field expeditions, and advanced tools of
chemical analysis.