* 0948953
* Acquisition of a Single-Crystal X-ray Diffractometer for Earth and Planetary Materials Research and Education at Northwestern University
* GEO,EAR
* 11/01/2010,10/31/2012
* Steven Jacobsen, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 10/31/2012
* USD 176,155.00

This Instrumentation and Facilities award through the NSF Division of Earth
Sciences will support acquisition of a high-precision, single-crystal X-ray
diffractometer to carry out topical geomaterials research and education in the
Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences (EPS) at Northwestern University.
X-ray diffraction allows definitive identification of minerals at the grain-size
scale and determination of crystal structures and related physical properties of
materials in the crust-mantle system. This instrument will be interfaced with
the PI?s unique high-pressure ultrasonic system for basic mineral physics
research on thermodynamic equations of state for Earth and planetary materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The instrument will be installed in the new EPS Integrated
Laboratories of Northwestern (EPSILoN), a new interdisciplinary research and
graduate training facility with five adjoining laboratories for
mineralogy/mineral physics, stable isotope geochemistry, organic geochemistry,
and sedimentary and aqueous geochemistry. Basic research in the PI?s laboratory,
currently supported by the faculty early career development program (CAREER)
seeks to understand the role of water cycling between the crust and mantle from
atomic to geophysical scales. New knowledge of the effects of hydration on the
structure and elasticity of mantle materials is applied to remote (geophysical)
detection of water in the deep mantle. In addition, the instrument will serve
broader departmental and regional needs for specialized mineral phase analysis,
characterization, and applied laboratory instruction for undergraduate and
graduate courses in Earth materials at Northwestern. Research with the proposed
diffractometer has broader impacts as the PI engages in technology transfer
between high-pressure geosciences and applied materials research.&lt;br/&gt;