* 0948076
* Workshop:  Research Frontiers in Bioinspired Energy
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2010,06/30/2012
* Dorothy Zolandz, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Ram Gupta
* 06/30/2012
* USD 180,000.00

0948076&lt;br/&gt;Zolandz&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will address the
need for a more in depth, interdisciplinary, and cross agency exploration of
bioinspired energy conversion systems. The workshop will discuss molecular-level
frontiers of energy processes in nature, focusing on biological energy capture,
storage, and transformation processes. The workshop will also identify gaps in
knowledge, identify barriers to transitioning the current state of knowledge
into applications, and suggest underdeveloped research opportunities that might
exist beyond disciplinary boundaries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will meet the need for a more in
depth, interdisciplinary, and cross agency exploration of bioinspired energy
conversion systems. Many researchers are exploring biological energy systems,
particularly in the biological and engineering disciplines. The researchers
typically receive funding from different agencies which have varied missions.
There can be great benefit from interactions between researchers funded by these
different programs, but this does not always happen naturally as each agency
works towards its own mission. Consequently, the workshop has the potential to
catalyze new research partnerships and to suggest new research topics for
members of the scientific and engineering communities to pursue relative to
these systems, and their use as models for energy
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
workshop has potential benefits to society, as its outcomes will encourage and
facilitate the understanding and development of biologically-inspired energy
systems to meet future energy needs. Specifically, understanding and mimicking
the biochemical reactions in organisms, which capture, store, and transform
energy in a variety of ways, is one logical direction to find such new sources
of energy. Furthermore, the workshop will also broaden communication between
researchers working on different aspects of biological energy systems. It will
inform members of the research community and funding agency managers of current
and potential future developments relevant to these systems, and their use as
models for energy applications.