* 0948530
* Collaborative Research: Constraining P-T-t-D Paths of Metamorphic Tectonites with the TitaniQ Thermobarometer
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2014
* Jay Thomas, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 04/30/2014
* USD 91,107.00

Collaborative Research: Constraining P-T-t-D paths of metamorphic tectoniteswith
the TitaniQ thermobarometer

Intellectual merit: The recent development of several trace-element thermometers
has provided powerful new tools for geologists to constrain pressure-
temperature-time-deformation (P-T-t-D) histories of many crustal rocks to
understand their tectonic and petrologic histories. Key to this approach is the
recent development of a Ti-in-quartz (TitaniQ) thermobarometer that can ideally
provide T or P information from the content of Ti dissolved in quartz. This
approach remains to be tested in a well-characterized environment. To this end,
an integrated microstructural, petrologic, and geochemical study is proposed to
evaluate P-T-t-D paths of metamorphic tectonites from well characterized and
previously dated gneisses, schists, and mylonites from the Strafford Dome
complex (Vermont). These rocks record progressive deformation during crenulation
cleavage development and, locally, complete transposition of the S1 fabric and
mylonitization. S1 is preserved as quartz-rich inclusions suites in minerals
such as garnet, staurolite, and kyanite, suggesting that CL imaging combined
with in situ analyses of Ti-in-quartz in different microstructural contexts from
the same sample may elucidate discrete segments of the P-T-t-D path. Electron
backscatter and CL imaging will be used to investigate the strain field
associated with P-T conditions and provide insight into the physical processes
associated with quartz reequilibration with respect to Ti distributions. What is
unique about this study is the potential to determine not just the temperature,
but also the depth at which a fabric is developed.

Broader impacts: The proposed research efforts will foster collaboration at the
interface of tectonics, petrology, and geochemistry. The project will support
the research programs of two early career geoscientists (Webb and Thomas) and
enhance graduate and undergraduate student education and training through the
use of cutting-edge technology and hands-on field and laboratory experiences.
Students will gain experience in linking observations from micron to plate
scales. The results of this work will be broadly applicable to many problems in
continental tectonics and disseminated at international meetings and in peer
reviewed journals. Samples, field data and analytical data collected during the
course of this study will be used in L. Webb's class, Microstructural Analysis
and P-T-t-D Paths, for senior level undergraduate and graduate students at UVM.
Photomicrograghs, CL images, and analytical data sets will be available to the
scientific community for research and teaching through an NSF supported Database
System for Metamorphic Geochemistry 'MetPetDB'.