* 0948262
* Acquisition of a spinner magnetometer and ancillary paleomagnetic equipment at Montclair State University
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2012
* Stefanie Brachfeld, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 03/31/2012
* USD 132,443.00

The proposal provides funding for the acquisition of basic paleomagnetic and
rock magnetic equipment for the geology program at Montclair State University.
The award provides funding to obtain an AGICO JR6 spinner magnetometer, a D-Tech
alternating field demagnetizer, and ASC thermal demagnetizer, and an ASC impulse
magnetizer. This equipment complements existing rock magnetic facilities at
Montclair State University and is allowing the principal investigator and her
students to conduct a full range of paleomagnetic and rock magnetic experiments
on a variety of natural and experimentally produced samples, including studies
of the carriers of magnetization that contribute to magnetic anomalies on Earth
and Mars (including Antarctic dropstones and experiments of synthesized Martian
basalts), as well as paired paleomagnetic and paleoclimate studies around the
Antarctic margin aimed at assessing ocean-ice-sheet interactions during the late
Pleistocene and Holocene. The award contributes to the development of research
infrastructure at Montclair State University and the development of research
partnerships with other organizations. The equipment complements existing
laboratory instrumentation and is facilitating new undergraduate and graduate
research projects. The new equipment is leading to the development of new
courses in paleomagnetism and environmental magnetism, and is providing
opportunities for outreach activities with middle school science teachers.
Research conducted using the equipment obtained through this award are being
disseminated at national and international geoscience society meetings
(including the results of student research projects) and in the peer-reviewed
scientific literature.