* 0948445
* RUI-Antiaromatic Hydrocarbon Dications and Hydrocarbon/Heterocylic Dianions: The Relationship between Delocalization and Antiaromaticity
* MPS,CHE
* 04/15/2010,08/31/2013
* Nancy Mills, Trinity University
* Standard Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 08/31/2013
* USD 249,784.00

The Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms Program supports Professor
Nancy S. Mills at Trinity University whose proposal describes the evaluation of
the antiaromaticity of indenylidene dications through changes in the placement
of substituents and changes in the manner in which the ring systems are linked
together. The extension to indenyl systems has the potential to provide
antiaromatic species with a broader range of antiaromaticity because the indenyl
cation has been shown to be more antiaromatic than the fluorenyl cation. In
addition, the local antiaromaticity of the 5-membered ring can be probed through
1H NMR shifts, and its inherent antiaromaticity varied through substitution on
the 5-membered ring. These two approaches are not possible for the fluorenyl
system whose central 5-membered ring possessed neither protons to be used as a
probe nor the possibility of substitution. The opportunity to examine the effect
of substituents on both 5-and 6-membered rings in the indenyl system, coupled
with the potential for enhanced antiaromaticity of an indenyl system makes this
an exciting system for examination. Extension of the investigations of
antiaromatic hydrocarbon dianions to the dianion of di-and tribenzannulated
heptafulvalene and to antiaromatic heterocyclic dianions is also proposed.

With the support of the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms Program in
the Chemistry Division at the National Science Foundation, Dr. Mills' research
will study aromaticity, a key concept in organic chemistry. This study will help
to explain the stability of chemical compounds and guide the design of new
molecules. Trinity University has an active undergraduate research program that
emphasizes the early exposure of undergraduates to research. Students will be
exposed to the theory that explains the key concepts of aromaticity and see how
these are validated by experimental observations. In addition, the research will
help support the activities of a research/teaching post-doctoral associate,
patterned after the Dreyfus Scholar/Fellow program. Because Trinity University
has a relatively large cohort of research /teaching post-doctoral fellows,
currently four in chemistry, the department is able to implement a series of
activities designed to prepare this group for successful academic careers at
principally undergraduate institutions (PUIs).