* 0948275
* Fourth ACM InternationalWorkshop on Underwater Networks (WUWNet?09) Student Travel Awards.  The workshop will be held in Berkeley, California on November 3, 2009
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Jun-Hong (June) Cui, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Zygmunt J. Haas
* 08/31/2010
* USD 5,000.00

This project supports travel for U.S. students to the Fourth ACM International
Workshop on Underwater Networks (ACM WUWNet 2009). The travel support is for
students who might not otherwise be able to attend the
workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With respect to intellectual merit, this workshop
has established itself as an important workshop on underwater communication and
networking. This topic area is of great significance due to the inherent
technical challenges for communications and system design in the harsh
underwater environment and due to its potential to enable transformative new
capabilities for environmental and maritime security applications. The workshop
seeks to encourage the participation of graduate students from electrical
engineering, computer engineering, computer science, and other related
disciplines. Students present their work in technical presentations, posters,
and demonstrations and also participate in workshop organization and
logistics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With respect to broader impacts, the travel
support can improve the education of graduate students through participation in
the workshop and associated interaction with leading researchers and other
students. The selection process emphasizes support for those students who might
not otherwise be able to attend the workshop. The selection process also
considers the student's research activity in underwater communication and
networking. Preference will be given to women and other students from
underrepresented groups, thus addressing the need for increased diversity in
research.