* 0948246
* EAR-PF: An experimental study of temperature-dependent frictional healing processes: Implications for plate boundary tectonics and post-seismic healing
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2010,11/30/2013
* Daniel King, King                    Daniel         S
* Continuing Grant
* Lina Patino
* 11/30/2013
* USD 170,000.00

Dr. Daniel King has been awarded an NSF Earth Sciences Postdoctoral Fellowship
to develop an integrated program of research and education at Penn State
University. The goal of this project is to develop our understanding of the
micro-scale physical mechanisms and the geological implications of frictional
healing. Specifically, this project will involve experimental investigation of
the role of thermally-activated processes on the mechanical evolution of quasi-
stationary synthetic fault gouge. Mechanical data and microstructural
observations will be analyzed within the context of theory for both frictional
sliding and intragranular plastic deformation. The proposed research will
contribute to developing a more complete understanding of the relationship
between seismicity and viscous flow at scales ranging from individual grains to
plate boundaries. The results of this study are expected to increase our
understanding of fault zone processes and the mechanics of earthquakes. Results
from experiments on olivine fault gouge, a material for which little data on
frictional properties exists, are especially important for developing a
mechanistic understanding of earthquake processes in the oceanic crust. The
proposed research also includes plans to directly involve undergraduate students
in the proposed research by completing discrete portions of the project as
senior research projects. These projects are designed so that students can gain
general research skills and specific technical skills. This educational
component will also further the professional development of Dr. King by
providing an opportunity to develop skills in advising and directing research
projects.