* 0948521
* Workshop:  User Interface Software and Technology (UIST) 2009 Doctoral Symposium
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Steven Feiner, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2010
* USD 20,000.00

This is funding to support a doctoral research symposium (workshop) of
approximately 8 promising doctoral students from the United States and abroad,
along with distinguished research faculty. The event will take place in
conjunction with and immediately preceding the 22nd ACM Symposium on User
Interface Software and Technology (UIST 2009), to be held October 4-7 in
Victoria, British Columbia, Canada, and sponsored by the Association for
Computing Machinery's Special Interest Group on Human Computer Interaction
(SIGCHI). The UIST conference is the premier international forum for presenting
innovations in the software and technology of human computer interaction. It
brings together researchers and practitioners from diverse areas that include
traditional graphical and web user interfaces, tangible and ubiquitous
computing, virtual and augmented reality, multimedia, new input and output
devices, and computer-supported cooperative work. Although UIST is a long-
standing annual conference, this workshop will be just the 7th doctoral research
symposium associated with the conference (NSF has supported these events from
their inception). The three goals of this full-day event are to increase the
exposure and visibility of the participants' work within the community, to help
establish a sense of community among this next generation of researchers, and to
help foster their research efforts by providing substantive feedback and
guidance from a group of senior researchers in a supportive and interactive
environment. Student participants will make formal presentations of their work
during the workshop, and will receive feedback from a faculty panel. The
feedback is geared to helping students understand and articulate how their work
is positioned relative to other research, whether their topics are adequately
focused for thesis research projects, whether their methods are correctly chosen
and applied, and whether their results are appropriately analyzed and presented.
Student position papers will be published in the UIST Conference Companion, and
the students will also present posters relating to their work at a special
session the first night of the conference.

Broader Impacts: The doctoral symposium will help expand the participation of
young researchers pursuing graduate studies in the field of user interface
software and technology, by providing them an opportunity to gain wider exposure
in the community for their innovative work and to obtain feedback and guidance
from senior members of the research community. It will further help foster a
sense of community among these young researchers, by allowing them to create a
social network both among themselves and with senior researchers at a critical
stage in their professional development. Because the students and faculty
constitute a diverse group across a variety of dimensions, the students'
horizons are broadened to the future benefit of the field. The organizers of the
event will make special efforts to attract students from institutions not
historically heavily represented at UIST and to foster diversity across under-
represented groups.