* 0948997
* Development of a Scalable and Sustainable Infrastructure for Global, Collaborative Engineering Design Education
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Spencer Magleby, Brigham Young University
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Cheville
* 08/31/2012
* USD 350,000.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research, a scalable approach to
enable students to acquire important attributes of global competence will be
developed. The central idea behind the research is to bring together
international student design teams which collaborate on design projects via
Internet-based communication and design tools. At the same time, the teams will
be used as a test bed to study and develop methods for collaborative design
education. Thus the research has two main objectives: 1) to develop and refine a
scalable framework and&lt;br/&gt;supporting infrastructure that allows
engineering students to learn and practice best-in-class methods for global
engineering design, and 2) to provide an environment to study, develop, refine
and validate methods and technologies for Internet-based collaborative, global
engineering design education. These two objectives are synergistic and will be
pursued simultaneously. The research will be conducted as a pilot program run
for two years. During the first year, teams at Brigham Young University will be
matched with teams abroad on a design-and-build project. The project will be
conducted within the context of a class. The main focus of the first year will
be on understanding implementation issues, i.e., answering questions such as
?How should projects be selected?,? and ?How can technology be used to support
effective collaboration?? For the second year, teams at four universities in the
U.S. will be matched with teams abroad. The focus of the second year will be on
evaluating how well this approach is able to develop key attributes of global
competence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impact
of the research could be far reaching and significant. The research is seen as a
necessary first step towards the possible development of a national network of
U.S. teams partnered with international teams. Although we are here proposing
only a pilot program, we consider a main criterion of success to be whether the
program is extensible to schools beyond those in the pilot. If successful, many
students could thereby acquire and practice global engineering
skills.&lt;br/&gt;