* 0948015
* Sensitive and Versatile Tropospheric Hydrogen Chloride (HCl) Instrument
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2014
* Azer Yalin, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 01/31/2014
* USD 228,132.00

Hydrogen chloride (HCl) gas is key to the understanding of tropospheric halogen
cycles, since it is a relatively abundant gas-phase halogen species that serves
as a source, an intermediate, or an end product in the chemistry of more
reactive chlorine compounds. It is, however, greatly undersampled in the
troposphere. Accurate in situ measurements of HCl are critically needed to
better quantify its sources, sinks, transport, and ultimately to better
understand the processes that govern tropospheric halogen activation. This
project will develop an ultra-sensitive optical sensor for HCl gas. The sensor
is based on cavity ring-down spectroscopy (CRDS), a method for high-sensitivity
optical absorption. Recent advances in optical spectroscopy make possible the
development of a versatile (i.e., small, lightweight, low power consumption),
accurate and specific HCl sensor with high sensitivity and time response. The
HCl sensor will employ a near-infrared diode laser for continuous-wave CRDS.
Although the sensor is primarily targeted at HCl detection, it will allow
simultaneous methane detection with high sensitivity and precision. The
development of such an instrument will facilitate studies of the atmospheric
role of HCl and may enable deployment on mobile platforms, such as ships and
aircraft.

Improved understanding of halogen activation in general, and HCl in particular,
has broad implications for modeling of both regional air quality and climate.
Within polluted coastal environments, HCl is a primary product in acid
displacement reactions with sea salt and is a key source for atomic chlorine.
Halogen activation cycles involving HCl may also influence the climate system
through the oxidation of methane and other organic gases, conversion of marine
sulfur emissions to sulfate aerosol, and, potentially, regulation of
tropospheric ozone and other oxidant levels. In terms of future instrumentation,
the sensor design and architecture proposed here will provide a blueprint for
development of similar sensors for other species relevant to atmospheric
chemistry (e.g., acetylene, ammonia). The project will also provide unique
educational opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students in mechanical
engineering at Colorado State University (CSU). Particular efforts will be made
to recruit women students and students from underrepresented groups to
participate in the project. The students will design and develop a state-of-the-
art instrument for atmospheric sensing and will interact with researchers in
atmospheric chemistry at CSU, from other universities, and from nearby federal
environmental research laboratories. Results of the research will be
incorporated into courses at CSU, and disseminated at academic conferences.