* 0948680
* Collaborative Research: Tectonic Links, Magma Fluxes, and Single Mineral Geochemistry in Plutonic Systems From 5-30 km Depth, Cascades Core, Washington
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2014
* Scott Paterson, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 05/31/2014
* USD 137,571.00

Collaborative Research: Tectonic links, magma fluxes, and single mineral
geochemistry in plutonic systems from 5-30 km depth, Cascades core,
Washington&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. Continental magmatic arcs
are the site of massive additions of mantle derived magmas which serve to drive
melting, thickening, and reorganization of the crust. Much of what we know about
Cretaceous and older continental magmatic arcs results from studies of the
physics and chemistry of plutonic rocks, and the derivative data strongly
influence models of crustal growth and evolution. In contrast to modern arcs
where single eruptive units may be analyzed, plutons record a much richer,
albeit complex, history and represent a much greater percentage of the total
magmatic flux than volcanic rocks alone. Critical questions concern how and at
what rate intermediate composition magmas move through the crustal column, and
how the crust accommodates these potentially large fluxes? Key to answering
these questions is to understand how large masses of crystallized magmas or
plutons and batholiths are constructed. To address these questions,
collaborative research is proposed to better understand sub-arc magmatic
plumbing systems. This project focuses on the roots of a continental magmatic
arc in the North Cascades that comprises three well-exposed intrusive bodies
emplaced at different depths in the crust. Integrated field mapping, structural
analysis, mineral geochemistry, high-precision geochronology and coupled
isotopic studies will be employed to [1] determine the degree to which plutons
represent single magma batches or complex mixtures of partially crystallized
magmas of different origins, [2] estimate magma flux rates and timescales for
melt generation, transport, and eruption of intermediate composition magmas, and
[3] evaluate potential linkages between regional tectonic strain and magma
formation. This multidisciplinary collaborative research is expected to
contribute significantly to understanding of magma plumbing systems and the
formation of plutons in continental magmatic arcs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts. This research will support Ph.D. students at MIT and USC, and at least
2 M.S. students at SJSU, and multiple undergraduate student assistants at all 4
institutions. Bpth SJSU PIs have supervised 2 B.S. research projects supported
by their most recent grants, and Paterson teaches a formal research class at USC
that has involved &gt;20 undergraduates in NSF-supported research. Graduate
students from SJSU and USC will visit Kent's lab at OSU to conduct their own
analyses, and the MIT graduate student will visit SJSU and assist in SHRIMP
analyses. Four M.S. students at SJSU have gone to MIT to carry out U-Pb dating
under the tutelage of PI Bowring and his students, and this type of interaction
is expected to continue. All of the PIs routinely incorporate their research in
class lectures and use research samples in lab courses. Most importantly, The
PI's are demonstrating to a large cross section of new students the power of
strongly interdisciplinary and collaborative work.