* 0948320
* Estimating and communicating climate impacts on groundwater and surface water resources in northern Mozambique
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2013
* Michele Minihane, Minihane, Michele R
* Continuing Grant
* Lina Patino
* 07/31/2013
* USD 170,000.00

Dr. Michele R Minihane has been granted the NSF Earth Sciences postdoctoral
fellowship to carry out a research and education plan at the University of
Washington, Seattle. The project will quantify the impacts of changing climate
on the future availability of groundwater and surface water in a region with
limited historic hydrological measurements and communicate the potential changes
in a meaningful way to the local community and planners. The research will
combine remote sensing data, field measurements, and personal interviews to
build and calibrate a regional-scale hydrologic model for northern Mozambique.
Downscaled data from global climate circulation models will provide inputs for
future hydrologic conditions allowing the model to estimate the impacts of
climate scenarios on water resource availability in the region. The research
will be conducted in collaboration with individuals living and working in
Mozambique to both increase community support and to facilitate more effective
in-country dissemination of results. Today, access to clean water is a pressing
challenge in many parts of the world, including areas in southeastern Africa,
will likely become more water-stressed in the future. To further complicate the
challenges, these regions typically lack the reliable long-term hydrologic
datasets used for water resources planning. This project will address both needs
by developing methods to evaluate current groundwater and surface water resource
availability from limited available data and by creating models to quantify the
local future water availability with climate change. The project will
potentially directly impact water resources planning in northern Mozambique,
making it easier for local policy makers to understand and predict water
availability in the region and thereby providing health and economic benefits to
the region. A critical piece of this work will be development of strategies to
effectively communicate these results to the local communities and water
resources planners. Results will also be shared with non-governmental
organizations and donor agencies interested in improving health and economic
conditions in rural Africa. The study will focus on provinces in northern
Mozambique, but the modeling methodologies and communications strategies
developed will be broadly applicable to other regions in Africa and around the
world. The results will also be shared through a publicly available website and
through collaborations and conferences in Africa and the United States.