* 0948578
* Archaeological Reconnaissance to Locate French and English Plantations in Dominica (Eastern Caribbean) 1700-1900
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Mark Hauser, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2010
* USD 25,000.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Mark W. Hauser will conduct one
field season of archaeological and ethnohistoric research in the Parish of St.
Marks, Dominica. The proposed research is an intensive archaeological survey in
Dominica (Eastern Caribbean) to identify and record discrete archaeological
components associated with transfers from French to British imperial control
(pre 1763 and post 1763). The survey will focus on areas of Dominica where
different kinds of evidence suggest that there were early settlements associated
with French settlers and continued occupation into the nineteenth century under
British control. The research questions addressed are: 1) the role of political
boundaries in shaping the movement of ideas, peoples and things, 2) the ways in
which diversity in ideas, peoples and things is managed within these political
boundaries, and 3) how the logistics required to link the metropoles and
colonies of empires provided a potential cause for change in the political and
economic networks of settlers. Dominica as a frontier colony was a contested
terrain where the differences between metropolitan dictates and colonial
practices was heightened.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The nature of the research
questions require basic data in areas that allow the identification of early
plantation settlements with continued occupation: A) using a combination of
archaeological strategies locate structural features and cultural deposits
associated with a limited number of plantations with both pre and post 1763
deposits; B) establish a chronology for these features through archaeological
excavation; and C) map the organization of each of the plantations in order to
establish the range of variation of land use. Specifically by looking at the
organization of space and the kinds of economic networks represented in material
remains, this project will examine how colonial empires "administered
diversity".&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The Dominica Plantation Settlement Project
will provide much needed information at both theoretical and substantive levels.
The intellectual merit of the research rests in its ability to address
archaeologically the ways in which empires administer colonies and colonies
administer subjects. It will be a crucial first step in a larger project which
seeks to identify some of the common characteristics and substantive differences
between Atlantic era empires (including Spain, Britain, France and Netherlands)
and empires more commonly described in the archaeological literature (Aztec,
Inca, and Roman) through an analysis of colonial holdings in the
Caribbean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this high-risk study are
that it will contribute significant information during a poorly understood
period in colonial Dominican history. The increase in knowledge that comes from
documenting plantation settlements will provide comparative data for other
colonial holdings and provide the basis for major revisions in our consideration
of slavery and colonialism. Dominica and U.S. students and volunteers will
participate in the project to enhance their training and increase their
knowledge of the importance of Dominica's early colonial history. This research
will further international collaboration with local scholars.