* 0948816
* HSD:  Land-User Interactions and Spatial Externalities in Organic Farming (Upper Midwest, USA) and Agrobiodiversity Production (Bolivia)
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2009,11/30/2013
* Karl Zimmerer, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 11/30/2013
* USD 635,453.00

Rapid and profound changes in agricultural land use, such as expanded organic
farming and the decline of agrobiodiversity production, are leading to increased
interest in spatial clustering within diverse agricultural landscapes where
neighboring farmers grow the same crops, using the same or similar technological
approaches, management techniques, and environment- and resource-related
practices. This interdisciplinary research project will examine the dynamics of
human-social interactions in the recent changes that involve agriculture,
environmental factors and impacts, and economic development by focusing on
empirical case studies of organic dairy farming in the Upper Midwest of the U.S.
and high-agrobiodiversity maize agriculture in central Bolivia. These dynamics
will be examined using the economic and geographical perspective of spatial
externalities. Analysis will be centered on farmer-farmer interactions
(neighboring and networked) and farmer-institution interactions. The primary
research methodologies will be econometrics, microeconomic modeling, spatial
statistics, remote sensing, survey analysis, institutional and ethnographic
interviews, and analyses of land-use and land-cover change. The major hypotheses
on which the investigators will focus is that decentralized farmer decisions to
convert to organic methods (Upper Midwest) and to switch from high-
agrobiodiversity maize to alfalfa (Bolivia) will tend to create and reinforce
land use clustering. The microeconomic foundation for the clustering hypothesis
is that both positive and negative spatial externalities affect the magnitude
and spatial pattern of agricultural landscape change. This research will develop
an original research-and-education approach toward spatial externalities that
will offer new and important contributions in the following areas: (1) a
microeconomic model of farmer returns under spatial externalities in land use,
(2) an econometric analysis of land-use change with strategies to identify the
presence and importance of spatial externalities, (3) a method for integrating
qualitative research and structured survey data to sharpen the estimates of the
direction and magnitude of spatial externalities, and (4) a comparative analysis
of land user interactions and their effects on organic dairy farming and
agrobiodiversity farming outcomes.

The project will enhance fundamental knowledge about the complex ways that
farmers interact with each other and with institutions to pursue socially and
environmentally desirable goals. The social significance and value of this
research is based on the design and development of management policies that
require understanding the basic human-social dynamics of spatial interactions in
farming systems. Changes in agricultural land use, such as expanded organic
farming and the decline of agrobiodiversity production, are leading to
heightened interest in spatial clustering within diverse agricultural landscapes
where neighboring farmers grow the same crops, using the same or similar
technological approaches, management techniques, and environment- and resource-
related practices. National, state, and local government agencies and
international development, environment, and conservation organizations are all
interested in agricultural management policies for both environmental and
development purposes. The overall design of this project entails an integrated
research-and-education approach with an emphasis on education. Project results
will be used to design policies to enhance environmental and economic
development outcomes. An award resulting from the FY 2007 NSF-wide competition
on Human and Social Dynamics (HSD) supports this project. All NSF directorates
and offices are involved in the coordinated management of the HSD competition
and the portfolio of HSD awards.

