* 0948213
* MARGINS Post-Doctoral Fellowship: A synthesis model for the Fly River dispersal system, Papua New Guinea
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2013
* Sergio Fagherazzi, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 03/31/2013
* USD 187,509.00

The PI will merge all the existing results from the MARGINS Gulf of Papua focus
site in a high resolution numerical model to represent the entire Fly River
system. This holistic approach will allow determining how transport through the
entire system alters the magnitude and delivery of sediments to marine
depositional sinks. The PI will spend each semester of the two years
postdoctoral fellowship at a different institution (Boston University,
University of Washington, UC Berkeley and Colorado University), collaborating
with scientists actively engaged in research projects in the Fly River system.
The developed model will interface thorough the exchanges of water and sediment
fluxes four components (middle Fly and Strickland rivers, tidal river, tidal
delta, and continental shelf) and will be able to follow the path of water and
sediments from the uplands to the shelf slope. The synthesis model will be used
to determine the sediment dispersal pathways and fluxes in the entire system and
assess gaps in the Source to Sink program. The model will also simulate how
tides modulate sediment and water fluxes in the lower reaches of the river, the
role of tidal floodplains in storing sediments and how sea-level rise and
backwater effects create blocked valleys and tie channels in the middle Fly and
Strickland rivers, among others. &lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts include the support
of new, young post-doc who will teach undergraduate classes and provide a proof
of concept for CSDMS. It will also lead to a comprehensive model for large
rivers solving both terrestrial and marine processes can be used as a predictive
tool to assess the impact of climate change, sea-level oscillations, and human
activities on coastal areas. The societal relevance of the project is global,
since many large rivers are densely populated. &lt;br/&gt;