* 0948228
* EAR-PF: Resolving the tempo of edifice development and rhyolite formation in a large-caldera system, Atitlan, Guatemala
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2012
* Heather Cunningham, Cunningham              Heather        S
* Fellowship Award
* Lina Patino
* 01/31/2012
* USD 170,000.00

Dr. Heather S Cunningham has been granted the NSF Earth Sciences Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a research and education plan at the University of
Wisconsin - Madison. The investigation aims to detail the short- and long-term
trends in caldera edifice development at Atitlán Caldera, Guatemala. Selected
volcanic ash and lavas representing the large silicic eruptions, associated
scoria layers and cone-growth phases will be collected during a field campaign
for geochemical analysis. Major and trace element data will be integrated into
petrologic models to determine how large silicic magma bodies develop and if
they are related by shallow-level modification processes such as fractional
crystallization, magma mixing or assimilation. Isotopic data (87Sr/86Sr and
143Nd/144Nd) will be measured to support petrologic models since these isotopic
ratios are distinctive to source composition. To constrain eruptive age,
40Ar/39Ar isotopes will be analyzed on phenocrysts in distinctive eruptive
units. 230Th/238U disequilibrium will be measured on volcanic ash to resolve
whether large silicic bodies are rapidly differentiated from a homogeneous
source, such as a deep crustal hot zone, formed by the coalescence of several
magma bodies or the product of crustal assimilation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By
resolving the time scales and processes that lead to large-caldera eruptions and
associated cone-building phases potential volcanic risk can be inferred.
However, our understanding of the processes that lead to large caldera-forming
eruptions is limited by the lack of recent, well-exposed deposits. Thus, the
Atitlán volcanic complex is ideally suited to test conflicting models for the
generation of large-volume silicic eruptions and more importantly time scales
over which caldera-systems develop. In addition to the development of
geochemical models, an educational exercise will be created. A Dynamic Digital
Map of Atitlán Caldera will be made available to educators that will allow
students hands-on access to real world data.