* 0948591
* Collaborative Research: High Resolution Imaging of Deep Mantle Structure and Dynamics Using USArray Data
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2014
* Edward Garnero, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 05/31/2014
* USD 140,075.00

USArray Transportable Array (TA) and Backbone Array data will be used in high-
resolution seismic analyses of deep mantle structure and processes, building on
exciting results obtained using data from the initial 5 years of EarthScope
deployment. Arizona State University and University of California, Santa Cruz,
researchers will extend their collaboration, analyzing teleseismic earthquake
signals that traverse the deep mantle in three sub-regions: beneath the southern
U.S.-Gulf of Mexico-Central America-Caribbean, under the eastern and central
Pacific, and beneath Alaska and the northern Pacific. Waveform stacking, Born-
scattering migration, shear-wave splitting and 2.5D/3D waveform modeling
procedures will be applied to broadband P and S arrivals, exploiting the density
and spatial aperture of the USArray data coverage to resolve fine-scale
structures. As the TA progressively moves eastward, special effort will be
focused on the mid- and deep mantle beneath Central America and the Gulf of
Mexico, where tomographic models indicate a tabular high velocity structure
extending through the lower mantle and spreading broadly in the D" region,
putatively associated with the Farallon slab and the long history of subduction
beneath North America. The velocity gradients, structural continuity, structural
fabric, and spatial extent of this feature will be examined using combined
travel time and migration methods, with 2.5D and 3D synthetic seismogram
modeling being used to quantify the elastic and anisotropic structure.
Corresponding downwelling structure deep beneath the subduction zone under
Alaska will be analyzed, and the two convergent zone regions will be compared to
the eastern Central Pacific structure where there is an abrupt lateral
transition from a chemically-distinct large low shear velocity province to
adjacent higher velocity structure in the D" region. Continued collaborations
with mineral physics and geodynamic colleagues will allow us to explore
connections between shallow and deep structures in the mantle and their dynamic
implications for tectonics and evolution of the North American continent.