* 0948021
* Renewable Energy Systems Opportunity for Unified Research Collaboration and Education (RESOURCE)
* EHR,DGE
* 03/15/2010,02/28/2017
* Bryan Jenkins, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 02/28/2017
* USD 2,803,933.00

The Renewable Energy Systems Opportunity for Unified Research Collaboration and
Education (RESOURCE) program will provide two-year fellowships to 25 PhD
students in engineering disciplines over a five-year project. The intellectual
theme for the project will be on the development of sustainable, energy
efficient renewable energy technologies including solar, wind and biofuels.
Graduate fellows will partner with 50 sixth grade school teachers to create
innovative curriculum and educational tools that promote interest in renewable
energy technologies and associated STEM disciplines. Fellows and teachers will
collaborate on communicating STEM subjects to technical and non-technical
audiences, leadership, team building, and teaching. This will enrich the
communication of fellows? research and will also improve their ability to
communicate to different educational communities including those from different
cultural backgrounds.

The intellectual merit of the project is that it will create the model for a new
approach to educating engineering graduate students, while helping GK-12
teachers develop the awareness of the university as a source of new content for
renewable energy classroom lessons and laboratory experiments. It is anticipated
that several of the training elements developed through this program will be
incorporated as an integral part of other STEM graduate programs at UC Davis and
research universities across the nation.

The broader impact of the project is that it directly addresses the national
policy imperative to increase the participation of US citizens, particularly
women and underrepresented minorities, in engineering studies and careers.
Overall, RESOURCE will enhance the pedagogical impact of graduate education to
society.

