* 0948143
* The Next Step in Unravelling the Earth's Impact History: (U-Th)/He  Dating of Impact Structures
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2015
* Kip Hodges, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2015
* USD 306,564.00

Asteroids and comets have bombarded the planets of the Solar System for billions
of years. Here on Earth, active geological processes have either destroyed or
hidden about 90% of these impact craters, and thus far, only 176 impact
structures have been identified. In recent years the scientific community has
realized the importance of impact events on Earth?s geological and biological
history, including the 65 million years old dinosaur mass extinction event that
is linked to the large Chicxulub impact crater. Therefore, determining accurate
and precise ages of these known impact events is vital in our understanding of
the Earth's history. Unfortunately, about 80% of identified terrestrial impact
structures are of unknown or only approximately known age because the
application of traditional dating techniques is not uniformly successful. This
project represents the application of a new dating technique, which in
preliminary studies has shown great promise for improving our understanding of
the extraterrestrial impact history on Earth.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project will involve the use of the
(U-Th)/He geochronological technique to date individual U- and Th-bearing
crystals (e.g., zircon and apatite) from impact materials from 20 small, medium
and large impact structures. The unique properties of the radiogenic daughter
product (4He), i.e., its low closure temperature and high diffusivity, make the
(U-Th)/He technique ideal for dating the brief, but very intense, thermal and
shock metamorphism episode associated with the formation of impact structures.
This project involves a national and international team of scientists from 8
countries and 13 scientific institutions, who will provide impact structure
samples and expertise to test this hypothesis.