* 0948907
* ProTOMAC: Proactive Transmit Opportunity Detection at the MAC Layer for Cognitive Radio Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2009,03/31/2012
* Ahmed Tewfik, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 03/31/2012
* USD 300,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The wide proliferation of wireless services and
applications with increasing bandwidth needs is rapidly creating a spectrum
shortage. However, the problem is caused primarily by inefficient legacy
spectrum allocation and utilization policies, so that even when some
applications suffer from lack of bandwidth, there is idle capacity in the band
they are using or other bands. This project develops and demonstrates a
revolutionary approach for addressing spectrum scarcity and unlocking hidden
communication capacity thereby increasing the reach and utility of wireless
connectivity. The non-traditional communication technique studied in this
research effort detects transmission opportunities that occur when incumbent
primary users enjoy signal to noise ratio values that are higher than the
minimum value required to maintain their quality of service. It then judicially
exploits these opportunities while preserving the current quality of service of
the primary users. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project develops novel change
detection methods that fuse goodness of fit tests and density estimation and
similarity assessment using information theoretic methods to study network
traffic and designs innovative distributed goodness of fit tests and density
estimation and similarity assessment techniques implemented over an asynchronous
communications network. It compares the performance of the distributed goodness
of fit tests and density estimation and similarity assessment techniques with
those of a new class of distributed cumulative sum (cumsum) change detection
methods that it constructs generalizing cumsum methods that have been proposed
in the literature in other application domains. Finally, it demonstrates
experimentally the benefit of using these approaches to unlock hitherto hidden
communication capacity and quantify the increase in local communication capacity
created by using the new schemes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;