* 0948017
* New GK-12: Reach for the Stars: Computational Models for Teaching and Learning in Physics, Astronomy and Computer Science
* EDU,DGE
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2016
* Darren Gergle, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 05/31/2016
* USD 2,722,371.00

Developed around the research theme of computer innovation in modeling and
simulation of complex human and physical systems, co-PIs and their students will
work with local classroom teachers with the goal of taking cutting-edge modeling
and simulation from the fields of computer science, physics and astronomy and
translate them into tools that can teach grade-level appropriate science
content. Each graduate fellow will be partnered with a local classroom teacher
and will engage in a training, development, and implementation process over the
entire year. External evaluators will help us assess progress towards the goals
and benchmarks of the program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More broadly, this work will
build the graduate fellow?s teaching, analytical and communication skills. The
fellows will gain a deeper understanding of the foundations of their research in
deconstructing and isolating the basic concepts of computer science, physics,
and astronomy from their work to teach them to the classroom students. Classroom
teachers will be exposed to cutting-edge scientific research and the research
process as well as forming lasting partnerships with university researchers and
scientists. Classroom students, many from traditionally underrepresented
populations, will gain an improved understanding of science content and the
research process, enabling them to be more informed consumers of science content
presented in the media. Classroom students will also be encouraged to pursue
careers in science, technology, mathematics and engineering from interactions
with the fellows as role models and mentors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;