* 0948901
* EAGER:  Designing Personified Technologies to Account for Children's Social and Moral Development
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Ron Eglash, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2012
* USD 151,562.00

Personified technologies are designed to communicate information and interact
with people using a repertoire of highly social behaviors and human-like
personality traits. Although interactions with personified technologies are
increasingly common in children's everyday experience, little is known about the
implications of such interactions for children?s social and moral development.
In this exploratory project the PI's goal is to seek rigorous empirical evidence
to support the design of personified technologies for children, by investigating
the influence of social features of the technology (e.g., apparent race) on
children's construction of social and moral concepts. Children's experiences in
interacting with technologies appear to extend beyond a simple notion of tool
use, to include emotional connection, social support, and moral judgments which
suggest a highly complex and interactive phenomenon. This research will take
first steps toward the development of a guiding framework that is intended to
better account for children's multifaceted relationships with technology and, in
so doing, will provide insight into implications for design. Though such
approaches are common in the social sciences, few attempts have been made to
develop useful, empirically-informed theoretical frames to guide the design of
(children's) technology. Project outcomes will include examples of personified
technologies that support children's social and moral development, robust design
recommendations that can inform the long-term development of technologies for
adults and children alike, and increased interdisciplinary knowledge about
children's social and moral conceptions of technology.

Broader Impacts: Children navigate a complex world of social entities, natural
phenomena, constructed artifacts, and information systems. What are the
potential consequences of frequent interaction with embodied, socially
intelligent, autonomous entities that exhibit characteristics such as biological
motion, social grace, communicative ability, and apparent intentionality? Will
children begin to conceptualize these technologies as entities that have moral
standing in the world? Does the ability of the technology to recognize and
respond to morally-charged contexts of interaction lead to specific types of
social and moral attributions? This project will provide first answers to
questions such as these. Research outcomes and the design recommendations that
result from this work will impact the design of personified technologies for
children in diverse application domains such as education, entertainment,
therapy, and caretaking. The PI will disseminate project outcomes to the
scholarly and technology design communities, and will work with game designers
in industry to apply the findings directly to off-the-shelf market products.