* 0948857
*  Collaborative Research:  ULTRA-Ex:   Metabolism of Boston
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Sucharita Gopal, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 08/31/2013
* USD 254,361.00

The urbanization and growth of the human population over past decades has
yielded cities of unprecedented size and form, which emit significant quantities
of waste, transform habitat, modify major biogeochemical cycles, alter local
climate, and diminish human health. Carbon exchange is a key indicator of the
intensity and pattern of urban metabolism, but the state of science currently
does not address the close coupling of carbon exchange within and across human
and natural subsystems of urban and urbanizing systems. Almost all research has
focused on urban carbon emissions, or separately on urban vegetation carbon
exchange. Thus, it is not possible to answer basic questions such as whether
natural systems exchange carbon more locally than they do with a metropolitan
region. This research will develop an integrated measurement and analysis
framework for coupled carbon exchange in an urban-to-rural gradient from Boston
to the rural Harvard Forest Long Term Ecological Research Site. This project
will combine ground-based measurements of carbon exchange and energy flows with
socioeconomic, meteorological and satellite measurements and modeling of human
activity and the built and natural environments. These data will be integrated
into a dynamic, Geospatial Information System that will characterize extant
patterns of carbon exchange from daily to seasonal time scales at sub-meter
spatial resolution across the urban-to-rural gradient. This analytical framework
will then be used to forecast carbon exchange impacts of future land use change
and urban growth scenarios, to advance fundamental knowledge about coupling of
carbon exchange in urbanizing systems, and provide policy makers with specific
and relevant information to align urban growth planning with sustainability
goals.

Quantifying climatic, ecological, and socioeconomic drivers of carbon exchange
and energy use will allow for forecasting carbon flows and evaluating policies
aimed at altering flows consistent with social goals. For example, this research
will help evaluate options for achieving Boston's emissions reduction targets.
More broadly, it provides tools for larger-scale efforts like the Massachusetts
Global Warming Solutions Act, the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative, and the
American Clean Energy and Security Act. Because this research includes natural
and social science determinants at fine spatiotemporal resolution, it can
evaluate options that cannot be assessed within a single discipline and
anticipate unintended consequences for the human population. For example, this
research can be used to evaluate how urban forestry, changes in rooftop albedo,
and changes in transportation infrastructure can offset carbon emissions, or to
examine how transportation options affect both carbon emissions and the economic
opportunities available for urban dwellers.