* 0948184
* EAGER: A New Algorithmic and Graph Model for Networking in Challenged Environments
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Jie Wu, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Min Song
* 08/31/2012
* USD 199,391.00

EAGER: A New Algorithmic and Graph Model for Networking in Challenged
Environments&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EAGER proposal presents a
generalized graph model that can capture mobility in Networking in Challenged
Environments (NICE). This model is called a weighted evolving graph which
captures time-space dynamics while remaining simple enough to maintain most of
the elegant structure of the traditional graph model. We &amp;#64257;rst present
several path optimization problems based on different metrics, including
earliest completion, minimum hop, fastest, and maximum reliability. We then
extend several graph concepts in this new model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposal addresses one fundamental issue: can we develop a localized solution in
which the graph is "trimmed" (by removing nodes/links across time and space)
using only local information at each node? The merit of a trimmed graph is the
reduction of searching complexity for routing and broadcasting.&lt;br/&gt;We
plan to apply the proposed model to three different applications: (a) dynamic
sensor networks with frequently switched on/off sensors, (b) mobile networks
with cyclic movement trajectories (such as vehicular networks), and (c) people
networks in which college students carrying iMotes/smart phones maintain contact
records during periodic meetings and classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
graph theoretic model to capture NICE is a simple one. The proposal presents a
promising and unique way of applying this graph model to address a new set of
path optimization problems and other graph concepts. The proposed model can be
applied to three important applications in dynamic sensor networks, DTNs, and
people networks. We envision that insights and results from this research will
provide guidelines for modeling and analyzing NICE. This research will also
exploit and contribute to fundamental theories on dynamic and challenged
networks under the generalized graph abstraction.&lt;br/&gt;