* 0948392
* Functional Block Copolymers as Guides for NanoparticleAssembly: Preparation of Cobalt Nanoparticles from Alkyne-Functional Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2009,04/30/2011
* Robert Grubbs, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 04/30/2011
* USD 255,035.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;Controlling the organization of metallic
nanoparticles in three-dimensional space is an important goal for the
development of nanometer-scale materials for applications including energy
storage, light harvesting, catalysis, and memory storage. One potential route to
this goal involves the exploitation of the tendency for block copolymers to
undergo micro-phase separation in which each polymer block occupies well-defined
spatial regions in the bulk material. Development of such hybrid materials
requires an understanding of the synthesis and behavior of specific functional
block copolymers. Ongoing efforts to control ordering and structure of cobalt
nanoparticles through controlled synthesis of alkyne-functional polymers will be
continued through this grant. The fundamental questions to be addressed by this
research relate to understanding how control over structure of alkyne-functional
block copolymers can provide control over size and shape of cobalt (and other)
nanoparticles. Understanding these relationships will guide subsequent efforts
to prepare polymer-inorganic hybrids containing multiple types of
nanoparticles.&lt;br/&gt;These issues will be approached through the
construction of libraries of selected alkyne-functional block copolymers
followed by an examination of their phase behavior as a function of polymer
size, composition, and cobalt loading. The effects of these variables on the
magnetic properties of the resulting materials and on the nature of the polymer-
cobalt interface will subsequently be examined. The physical crosslinks that the
alkyne-functional polymers in these systems form under mild conditions will be
exploited to control the degree of nanoparticle surface functionalization. This
research will further the understanding of how metallic nanoparticles can be
incorporated into larger assemblies with the aid of multi-block copolymers and
will facilitate future application of these materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
increase the understanding of how specifically-designed organic polymer
molecules can be used to control how nanometer-sized metal particles come
together to form larger materials that show useful magnetic, electronic, and
optical properties. Such designed materials have great potential in a range of
applications including solar cells, batteries, catalysts, and memory storage
devices. Researchers at the undergraduate, graduate, and post-doctoral levels
will be involved in this research and will participate in the communication of
their research to the general public at scientific meetings at the local,
regional, and national levels, including the New England Polymer Chemistry
Workshop, an informal series of regional meetings designed to give graduate
students the opportunity to present their research. The PI will also work
through the Summer Enrichment at Dartmouth (SEAD) program to inform students
from under-resourced urban and rural high schools about opportunities in
scientific research at the college and graduate levels. &lt;br/&gt;