* 0948029
* New GK-12 Program: The CASE (Changing Alaska Science Education) for enhancing understanding of climate change
* EDU,DGE
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2017
* Kevin Winker, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 03/31/2017
* USD 2,792,229.00

ABSTRACT for ?New GK-12 Program: The CASE (Changing Alaska Science Education)
for enhancing understanding of climate change.? (NSF
0948029)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description&lt;br/&gt;Climate change is
one of the most pressing issues facing Alaska today. This new GK-12 program will
partner University of Alaska Fairbanks graduate students with teachers in three
Alaska school districts to advance understanding of scientific concepts related
to climate change and its impacts. A central component of the program will be a
two?week, intensive summer workshop in which graduate fellows and K-12 teachers
will partner with museum professionals to develop themes and teaching activities
directly related to graduate student research. Graduate fellows will develop
hands-on activities, podcasts, and ?kits? that will be permanently available
through a check-out system and website housed at the University of Alaska Museum
of the North. CASE graduate fellows will also receive training in pedagogy,
science communication, and cultural relevancy. The Intellectual Merit of the
project derives from current research in science education that suggests that
students learn best with 1) inquiry-based, real-world experiences, and 2)
culturally relevant lessons and concepts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
significance&lt;br/&gt;Project participants will benefit in myriad ways. K-12
students will become excited about STEM subjects through participation in
inquiry- and research-based investigations. Graduate fellows will gain teaching
and communication skills that will help them throughout their careers. K-12
teachers will benefit from increased content knowledge and professional
development opportunities. UAF and its faculty will benefit from enhanced K-12
outreach capacity and an increased pipeline of underserved students into STEM
careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;