* 0948881
* STUDENT SUPPORT FOR THE INTERNATIONAL SYMPOSIUM ON PLASMA CHEMISTRY, ISPC-2011
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2011
* Alexander Dolgopolsky, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Arvind Atreyae Atreya
* 12/31/2011
* USD 18,000.00

The main objective of this award is to support U.S. students and researchers to
participate in the biennial International Symposium on Plasma Chemistry,
ISPC-2011, to be held July 24-29, 2011, at the Lowes Hotel in Philadelphia.
Funding is provided to provide partial support for up to 40 US graduate and
postdoctoral students for travel expenses, lodging, and registration fees while
attending the conference. Some portion of the funding is planned also to be used
to extend participation of specialists from industry to intensify
university/industry collaborations in the field of plasma chemistry. To qualify,
the digest of a research paper must be submitted to the International Organizing
Committee, accompanied by a personal letter describing the past, current and
future research and by a letter of support from the student?s scientific
advisor.

The biennial forum is organized by the International Society of Plasma
Chemistry, focusing on both the fundamental science and advanced applications of
plasmas in this field. Its charter is to be a forum for exchange of the state-
of-the-art achievements in plasma chemistry and also a tutorial environment for
those new to the field. As such, ISPC-2011 will bring together leading
authorities, as well as beginning researchers, engineers and scientists, in the
field of Plasma Chemistry. Invited speakers will come from industry and
universities in the US, Canada, South and Central America, western and eastern
Europe, Russia, Japan, China, and southeast Asia. It is expected that up to
1,000 scientists and engineers will attend the symposium. The expectation is to
have at least 250 students and young researchers at ISPC-2011. About 100 to 150
of them will be from the US.

Broader impacts are in technology and education. The conference is intended to
aid a range of technological advances, as described above. Educationally, the
tutorial experience mentioned above is obtained through the formal lectures and
poster sessions and by the opportunities the students have to interact with the
leaders in the field during the informal discussion times. The symposium will
also be preceded by a summer school on plasma fundamentals, generation and
applications for the newcomers into the field.