* 0948986
* ULTRA-Ex: Urban Development, Power Relations, and Water Redistribution as Drivers of Wetland Change in the Tampa Bay Region Socioecosystem
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2009,03/31/2013
* Mark Rains, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 03/31/2013
* USD 289,352.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More than one-half of the global human
population now lives in cities. In the U.S., Sun Belt cities like Tampa are
growing rapidly, but rapidly growing cities consume more natural resources than
they produce. Urban ecosystems rely on the redistribution and concentration of
resources from much larger rural areas, but the factors influencing and the
consequences of this resource redistribution remain poorly understood. This
research project will use an interdisciplinary approach to investigate how
social relationships facilitate the transfer of water from a rural to an urban
area, and it will examine how water redistribution modifies social and
ecological systems within the city and in the broader water-providing region.
The focus of this project is the socioecosystem of the Tampa Bay region in west-
central Florida, where water limits urban development. Water is transferred in
this region from rural groundwater wellfields to the Tampa metropolis. Wetlands
along the urban-to-rural corridor provide sentinel response systems that will be
monitored for the effects of groundwater drawdown and other changes (such as
urban land development) made possible by water redistribution. This project will
have three major emphases. First, the investigators will survey residents along
the urban-rural corridor to quantify demographic and geographic variability in
perceptions, values, and awareness of hydrological and wetland change. Second,
in order to document how organizational structure and public feedback affect
policy, the investigators will interview key informants (resource managers,
policy makers) and will observe participant interactions at public water-policy
meetings. Third, they will use geographic information systems to study how
urbanization alters the landscape around wetlands, and they will partner with
water utility and management entities to analyze how the hydrology, plant
community, and organic matter storage of wetlands respond to water
redistribution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Humans have long modified their environment
through the pursuit of necessities and amenities. In turn, people perceive and
reorganize around these environmental changes. Human culture and institutions
thus are components of socioecosystems in which social and biophysical factors
form a complex web of interactions. This project will advance socioecological
theory by elucidating if and how humans develop new policies and behaviors in
response to the very environmental changes that they cause. The research team
includes social and natural scientists from five academic units at the
University of South Florida and from the U.S. Forest Service, and it is
developing models of integrated social and ecological change. The principles
that emerge from this study are likely to help prevent "water wars" that often
accompany urban growth. This award was funded as an Urban Long-Term Research
Area Exploratory (ULTRA-Ex) award as the result of a special competition jointly
supported by the National Science Foundation and the U.S. Department of
Agriculture Forest Service.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;