* 0948426
* A Test for the Extraterrestrial Origin of the Magnetic Spherules/Grains at the Younger Dryas Boundary
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2012
* Mukul Sharma, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 04/30/2012
* USD 88,487.00

The Younger Dryas (YD) event, which began approximately 12,900 years ago, was a
period of abrupt and rapid cooling in the Northern Hemisphere whose primary
cause remains unclear. The cooling event is of ~1400 year duration and its onset
coincides with abrupt Pleistocene megafaunal extinctions and the disappearance
of the Clovis people in North America. The prevalent postulated mechanism has
been a temporary shutdown of the thermohaline circulation following the breakup
of an ice dam in North America. However, a recent paper proposes that the
cooling was triggered by multiple cometary airbursts and/or impacts that
engendered enormous environmental changes. The evidence in support of this
hypothesis is a black layer marking the Younger Dryas boundary in sediments from
North America and Europe. This boundary is enriched in magnetic grains high in
iridium, magnetic microspherules, nanodiamonds, and fullerenes containing extra-
terrestrial He-3. The impact hypothesis is being intensely debated for while the
YD horizon shows evidence of extensive forest fires, it lacks traditional impact
markers. Moreover, the origin of the magnetic spherules and iridium bearing
magnetic grains remains unclear. It is yet to be demonstrated conclusively if
these magnetic grains are meteorite debris or micrometeorites or just
terrestrial grains singed in a forest fire. The purpose of this pilot study is
to test the impact hypothesis by examining the osmium (Os) isotopic composition
and osmium and iridium concentrations in magnetic objects separated from the
appropriate sections at Gainey (Michigan), Murray Springs (Arizona) and Lommel
(Belgium). Additionally, they will also look for evidence of meteorite debris in
high resolution sediment cores from Crystal and Mastodon Lakes in Illinois.