* 0948255
* RUI: Electrophilic Reactions of Fluorosubstituted Alkenes with Chlorosulfonyl Isocyanate and some other Electrophiles
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/2010,04/30/2013
* Dale Shellhamer, Point Loma Nazarene College
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 04/30/2013
* USD 134,277.00

With this Renewal Award, the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms
Program continues to support Professor Dale F. Shellhamer of Point Loma Nazarene
College in his investigations of electrophilic reactions of fluorosubstituted
alkenes. These studies will be focused on the mechanism of the reaction of
chlorosulfonyl isocyanate with monofluoroalkenes to generate fluoro substituted
beta-lactams. Kinetic measurements, product studies and computational chemistry
will be employed to gain an understanding of the factors that cause additions of
chlorosulfonyl isocyanate to change from an apparent one-step process with most
fluoroalkenes to a step-wise process with hydrocarbons and some fluorocarbon
alkenes. Although non-fluorinated lactams and other fluorinated compounds are
often important pharmaceutical agents, fluorinated lactams are largely
unexplored and should prove to be very interesting medicinal
compounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An important aspect of this project will be the
involvement of undergraduate students as researchers in all facets of the
project. Students will gain expertise in organic synthesis, NMR spectroscopy,
mass spectrometry, vibrational spectroscopy and computational chemistry.
Professor Shellhamer has an excellent record of involving undergraduates in
research and inspiring them to go on to advanced study in chemistry and
medicine.