* 0948095
* Primary Magma and Other Features of the Kiglapait Intrusion
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2014
* John Brady, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 04/30/2014
* USD 88,127.00

Most of our direct knowledge of how hot the Earth can be comes from the study of
such modern lavas such as those erupted in Hawaii and Iceland. But the Earth has
an older record of melting and crystallization, locked in rocks that we can see
and sample. One such occurrence on the coast of Labrador represents an intrusion
of magma into the crust of the Earth from the mantle 1.3-billion years ago. This
magma crystallized into olivine-bearing plagioclase rocks called troctolite. A
recent experimental study by a UMass graduate student in the Five-College
Experimental Petrology Laboratory housed at Smith College has shown high melting
temperatures for these rocks at crustal pressures. Extrapolation to higher
pressure suggests that the melted material may have separated from a mantle
source more than a hundred degrees hotter than our familiar ocean basalts. We
will test this inference through further melting experiments. Whatever the
outcome, the results can help us understand the thermal structure of the
Precambrian Earth at this location. In turn it will illuminate the origin of
valuable nickel-cobalt ore deposits from the nearby Labrador coast.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will capitalize on previous NSF support for the
study of this remarkable occurrence of well-preserved rocks called the Kiglapait
Intrusion and its associated anorthosites. Its results will lead to a better
understanding of the origin of the troctolite-related Ni-Co sulfide ores at the
Voisey's Bay mine some 70 km south of the Kiglapait intrusion. Using the model
bulk composition of the intrusion, they have traced the plagioclase - olivine
equilibrium to 15 kbar and found multiple saturation with spinel and two Al-
pyroxenes at 13 kb, 1296 degrees C. It is proposed to extend the study by adding
appropriate olivine to the mix until it saturates. It is expected that the
experiments will lead to the appropriate conditions where a multi-saturated
source temperature is in equilibrium with olivine ~Fo84, which may exceed 1300
degrees C. If proven correct, it would indicate that the source regions of the
Labrador massif anorthosites, and their world-wide companions that are
associated with troctolites, were typically at much high temperatures than
currently thought. It is also planned to perform additional petrologic and
geochemical work using a Cameca Ultra-Chron electron microprobe, including
exploring the partitioning of Sr in plagioclase and apatite in the Kiglapait and
Skaergaard intrusions, determing the Ba content in plagioclase, a study of
phosphorus in olivine as an indicator of crystallization history, and the
completion of the study of the Upper Border Zone of the Kiglapait Intrusion, and
its record of liquid compositions throughout the 1-million-year crystallization
history. Finally, a full sample catalog will be prepared for inclusion with the
Kiglapait sample collection as it is eventually transferred to the American
Museum of Natural History for curation and posting on its web site.