* 0948993
* ULTRA-Ex: Reconsidering the New Normal: The Impact of Trauma on Urban Ecological and Social Diversity
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* John McLachlan, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 09/30/2013
* USD 299,551.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

In recent years, scholars and researchers have used the phrase "new normal" to
refer to the complex and multi-faceted outcomes of post-disaster recovery and
reconstruction processes. Generally, the volatility and chaos occurring
immediately after a trauma are followed by a relative stabilization, usually at
levels and configurations different from the pre-trauma "normal." This
exploratory research project will investigate the impact of trauma on urban
ecological and social systems using post-Katrina New Orleans as a study area.
The investigators will use ecological and social measures to track and
characterize the transition from trauma to stabilization. Data will be analyzed
to measure patterns of ecological and social diversification. "Ecological
diversification" refers to species richness and dominance, community structure
and composition, succession stage, land cover, and other measures. "Social
diversification" tracks human population differentiation in terms of class
(median household income), race, ethnicity, age, education, nativity, gender,
renter/homeowner status, and other metrics. Toward this end, the investigators
have identified two major research objectives. The first will entail a GIS-based
spatial analysis of pre- and post-trauma landscape and social metrics derived
from satellite imagery and the 2000 and 2010 federal census. These data will be
analyzed for diversification and compared to stabilization metrics. This
citywide study will be supplemented with three fine-grained studies in the
neighborhoods of the Lower Ninth Ward, Hollygrove, and Pontchartrain Park.
Qualitative data collected in these neighborhoods will provide insight into the
relationships between trauma and ecological and social diversity, and identify
variation in the timing, pace, and trajectory of neighborhood recovery. The
second objective will involve the organization and coordination of a network of
scholars and practitioners to exchange experience and knowledge and thereby
increase understanding of the complex interactions and connections among trauma,
human actions, and urban ecosystems.

This project will yield several empirical, theoretical, and practical
contributions to understanding the interactions of humans and natural
ecosystems. Empirically, this project will provide extensive numerical data and
analyses on social diversification and post-trauma stabilization at detailed
spatial scales. Theoretically, it will identify feedbacks and reciprocal effects
among patterns of post-trauma urbanization, ecological consequences, and human
responses. Practically, it will establish a broad-based, interdisciplinary
research program that will identify the human and natural system drivers of
post-trauma urban ecosystem changes and develop strategies for responding to
these changes. With respect to broader impacts of the proposed research, the
project will involve an interdisciplinary team of ecologists, biologists,
sociologists, geographers, anthropologists, a civil engineer, a trauma
psychologist, a U.S. Forest Service researcher, and urban planners plus members
of the community who bring traditional knowledge to the project. By leveraging
the research and education resources of three major universities (Tulane
University, the University of New Orleans, and Xavier University, a major HBCU),
this research will foster unique collaborations between ecologists and social
scientists and will broaden participation of underrepresented groups in
generating new knowledge about human-natural system interactions. This award was
funded as an Urban Long-Term Research Area Exploratory (ULTRA-Ex) award as the
result of a special competition jointly supported by the National Science
Foundation and the U.S. Department of Agriculture Forest Service.