* 0948692
* Collaborative Research: Determining the 3D Kinematic Evolution of the Wyoming Laramide, Implications for Processes of Foreland Deformation
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2014
* W.A. Yonkee, Weber State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 03/31/2014
* USD 100,481.00

First-order outstanding questions regarding foreland deformation center on
geodynamic processes that form diverse orientations of basement arches,
mechanisms of basement deformation and its transfer to the sedimentary cover,
and relationships to plate margin stresses. This project will integrate
structural, anisotropy of magnetic susceptibility (AMS), and paleomagnetic
studies of Laramide structures in Wyoming to test various tectonic models of
foreland deformation. Testable models include, temporal changes in stress
directions (possibly associated with flat-slab subduction), spatial variations
in stress and fault orientations (potentially associated with basement
anisotropy), and varying components of shear along differently oriented
structures. Results of this project will further provide data on structural
traps, fracture systems, and fault patterns within the Wyoming foreland, which
will improve understanding of hydrocarbon reservoirs and potential sites for
carbon dioxide sequestration. Finally, this collaborative investigation will be
merged with ongoing paleomagnetic and structural studies of other orogens to
compare processes of mountain building in different settings, and will generate
large data sets for statistical comparisons of various strain and paleostress
methods used in kinematic and mechanical analysis.

The focus of this investigation will be on key structures that display a range
of trends and deformation styles in the Wyoming foreland, and on two
stratigraphic levels (Triassic redbeds and Jurassic limestone) that are well
exposed, carry primary remanent magnetizations, and contain multiple strain
markers. Characteristics of minor fault systems will be measured and analyzed to
estimate paleostress patterns, strain orientations will be estimated from AMS
fabrics and calcite twin analysis, and oriented cores will be drilled for
paleomagnetic analysis to quantify timing and magnitudes of vertical-axis
rotations. Characteristics of fracture patterns will be quantified for selected
well-exposed surfaces to test relationships to fold and fault mechanics. By
integrating multiple data sets, limitations of each set will be reduced.
Critically, paleomagnetic data will be combined with deformation fabrics (minor
faults, AMS, calcite twins, and fractures) and cross sections/3-D restorations
to quantify both vertical-axis rotations and spatial-temporal changes in
paleostress/strain. This project will provide an expansive data base, building
on previous studies, in order to critically test kinematic models and mechanical
processes of Laramide foreland deformation.