* 0948138
* EAGER:  Novel Tunnel Barriers and Electrodes for Advanced Magnetic Tunnel Junctions Suitable for Spin Torque Transfer Magnetic Random Access Memory
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2011
* Jiwei Lu, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 12/31/2011
* USD 100,000.00

ECCS/PCAN/EAGER: Novel Tunnel Barriers and Electrodes for Advanced Magnetic
Tunnel Junctions Suitable for Spin Torque Transfer Magnetic Random Access Memory
Principle investigator: Stuart A. Wolf, University of Virginia Project Summary:
This project is focused on the development of novel tunnel barriers and
electrodes for magnetic tunnel junctions that will be utilized in a new type of
magnetic memory called Spin Torque Transfer Random Access Memory or STT-RAM.
Although there is a worldwide rush to develop this new memory technology, there
are some fundamental challenges that need to be overcome. In particular, finding
materials that allow the junction to be switched with low currents and also have
very long term thermal stability. The goal of this EAGER proposal is to very
quickly demonstrate novel solutions to these challenges and provide a rapid path
to accelerate the development of this technology just as the novel toggle
switching did for the more conventional Magnetic Random Access Memory or MRAM
that has been recently commercialized. A very unique approach is designed to
solve this problem based on developing novel oxides that have exemplary
properties that will enable tunnel junctions utilizing these materials to
satisfy the requirements of very low power switching and excellent thermal
stability (10 year retention of data). In this project the exploration has three
paths that could produce a robust and scalable STT-RAM: (1) new tunnel barriers;
(2) better ferromagnetic electrodes; (3) new material with perpendicular
magnetization. Intellectual Merit: This proposal addresses the development of
novel oxide and other materials and structures that are highly complex and show
strong electronic correlations and emergent behavior. Understanding these
materials and their emergent behavior has a clear intellectual payoff beyond
just revolutionizing the STT-RAM state of the art. Furthermore, these materials
are being prepared using new deposition methods: Biased Target Reactive Ion Beam
Deposition and Pulsed Electron Beam Deposition that provide unprecedented
control of the growth of highly ordered and smooth ultra thin films. The
demonstration of the development of these films using these unique tools that
enable rapid exploration of broad composition space and evaluation of novel
properties provides solutions to a set of important research and technological
challenges. This project has a high degree of Intellectual Merit and will
provide a series of interesting publications in addition to translational
technological solutions. Broader Impacts: If successful, the results of this
project will be immediately incorporated into this new generation of random
access, non-volatile memory which can, in principle be a Universal memory that
replaces SRAM, DRAM and FLASH. UVa?s participation with the Semiconductor
Industry both the large companies as well as a major startup company almost
guarantees that any breakthroughs will be quickly adopted. The solid state
memory industry has a market of over $100 Billion.