* 0948780
* Effects of climate-driven species change on forest carbon and nitrogen cycling
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2015
* Gary Lovett, Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 07/31/2015
* USD 597,157.00

Most studies of the effects of climate change on forests have focused on the
direct effects of predicted changes in temperature and precipitation. However,
it is clear that in addition to the direct effects of climate on the functioning
of forest ecosystems, there will also be indirect effects caused by climate-
driven changes in tree species composition. As the climate warms, the ranges of
North American tree species will gradually shift northward. At any given
location, this will produce a change in tree species, favoring those species
adapted to warmer climates. Because tree species are unique in many different
ways, the change in species composition will alter the functioning of the forest
ecosystem. This species change is not included in most computer models that
predict the effects of climate change on forests. This study will fill that gap
by linking two separate computer models with a statistical model that predicts
how the ranges of tree species will shift as the climate changes, and a
simulation model that predicts the effects of the species change on key aspects
of forest function such as productivity, carbon storage, and nitrogen cycling.
The linked models will be used to forecast the effects of climate change on
forest functioning for several realistic scenarios of climate change over the
next century. This initial effort is focused on the Northeastern U.S., but the
approach and the models are potentially applicable to forests throughout the
country, and even throughout the world, if sufficient information is available
about the characteristics of the most important tree species. This project is a
collaborative effort involving the Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies and the
USDA Forest Service. This research will have significant impacts on the
scientific community studying climate change by focusing attention on the
important, but often ignored, issue of how changes in tree species composition
will affect the functioning and resillience of forests. In addition, this is
clearly a policy-relevant question that is important for issues of forest
growth, biodiversity, carbon sequestration, and retention of air pollution-
derived nitrogen in forested watersheds in the Northeast. The principal
investigators from the Cary Institute and the Forest Service will make the
results of this research available and accessible to policy makers, natural
resource managers, and the general public. The results of the study, including
the technical details of the model results, will be available on web sites that
will be maintained and supported by project staff. The models developed in this
project will be useful for analysis of other important issues of global change,
including tree species change caused by introductions of non-native insect pests
and pathogens and by invasions of non-native plants. This project will also
support educational opportunities for one postdoctoral associate and two
undergraduate students.