* 0948957
* Development of GPS as a Snow Sensor
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2010,05/31/2013
* Dennis Akos, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 05/31/2013
* USD 380,051.00

0948957 Larson

This grant supports development of a technique to use GPS receiver signal to
noise ratio (SNR) antenna observations of ground reflections (multipath) from
multiple frequencies of GPS satellite transmissions (e.g., L1, L2, L2C) to
estimate snow pack depth and perhaps density proximal to the GPS antenna (within
about 50 m). Larson and colleagues have already demonstrated a tight correlation
between the upper 10 cm of soil moisture as measured in situ and GPS SNR
observations and have been funded by NSF/ATM and EAR for that work. Now, based
on observations at the Marshall Plate Boundary Observatory (PBO) GPS station in
Boulder, CO just before and just after a significant snow event, Larson and
colleagues have demonstrated an obvious change in the GPS SNR frequency pattern
at varying satellite elevation angles before and after a snow event that
compares well with model predictions based on electrodynamic theory. Forward
models of the GSP SNR frequency patterns were used to compute predicted snow
depth proximal to the antenna and then compared to in situ observations with
very good agreement. Support from this grant will allow for further evaluation
of the technique and consideration of error sources. Specifically, the PIs will
: 1) Develop an electrodynamic model of snow effects on GPS data and an
algorithm to estimate snow water equivalent (SNE); 2) Evaluate the sensitivity
to snow of the receivers and antennas currently used in the U.S. (e.g., PBO GPS
network); 3) Develop a model to flag GPS data corrupted by snow/ice effects on
top of antennas and model these effects to improve positions for volcano,
tectonic and atmospheric studies; 4) Improve the utility of other hydrologic
products derived from GPS, such as soil moisture and hydrologic loading; and 5)
Develop a low-power and low-cost GPS system to measure SWE. The project involves
collaborations between GPS geodesists, hydrologists, snow and climate
scientists, and electrical engineers. Three snow calibration sites will be
developed in Colorado at Marshall (NCAR), Niwot Ridge (LTER), and the USFS
Fraser Experimental Forest, each with in situ snow pack observational sensors
and GPS sites. The GPS deployments will involve UNAVCO Facility field
engineering assistance. Should the GPS snow sensor technique prove robust for
wide spread application of algorithms at existing continuously operated GPS
sites the broader impacts will include improved density of snow pack
observations across the continental U.S. as leveraged off existing EarthScope
PBO stations with important implications to water resources management and
climate studies. Observations would complement existing in situ snow pack
observational programs (NOAAs SNOTEL) and would provide additional ground truth
for satellite borne optical observations of snow cover.

***