* 0948378
* Collaborative Research:  Modeling and Synthesis Study of a Natural Iron Fertilization site in the Southern Drake Passage
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2013
* Meng Zhou, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Amsler
* 07/31/2013
* USD 176,452.00

The ocean plays a critical role in sequestering CO2 by exporting fixed carbon to
the deep ocean through the biological pump. There is a pressing need to
understand the systematics of carbon export in the Southern Ocean in the context
of global warming because of the sensitivity of this region to climate change,
already manifested as significant temperature increases. Numerous studies have
indicated that Fe supply is a primary control on phytoplankton biomass and
productivity in the Southern Ocean. The results from previous cruises in Feb-Mar
2004 and Jul-Aug 2006 have revealed the major natural Fe fertilization from Fe-
rich shelf waters to the Fe-limited high nutrient low chlorophyll (HNLC)
Antarctic Circumpolar Current Surface Water (ASW) in the southern Drake Passage,
producing a series of phytoplankton blooms. Remaining questions include: How is
natural Fe transported to the euphotic zone through small-meso-large scale
horizontal-vertical transport and mixing in different HNLC ACC areas? How does
plankton community structure evolve in response to a natural Fe addition, how
does Fe speciation respond to biogeochemical processes, and how is Fe recycled
to determine the longevity of phytoplankton blooms? How does the export of POC
evolve as a function of upwelling-mixing, Fe addition-recycling and bacteria-
plankton structure? This synthesis proposal will address these fundamental
questions using a unique dataset combining multiyear physical, Fe and
biogeochemical data collected between 2004 and 2006 from 2 NSF-funded Fe
fertilization experiment cruises and 3 Antarctic Marine Living Resource (AMLR)
cruises in the southern Drake Passage and southwestern Scotia Sea through
collaboration with scientists in the AMLR program and US Southern Ocean GLOBEC
projects. All investigators involved in this study are engaged in graduate and
undergraduate instruction, and mentoring of postdoctoral researchers. Each P.I.
will incorporate key elements of the proposed syntheses in our lectures, problem
sets and group projects. The project includes support to convene a 4-5 day
international workshop on natural Fe fertilization at Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution. The workshop will include scientists from United Kingdom, France
and Germany who have conducted natural Fe fertilization experiments, and Korea
and China who are planning to conduct natural Fe fertilization experiments. The
participation of graduate students and postdoctoral scholars will be especially
encouraged. The results will be published in a Deep-Sea Research II special
issue.