* 0948224
* EAR-PF: Field observations and modeling of backwater effects on bed material sequestration and fluvial kinematics in the lowermost Mississippi River
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2010,06/30/2013
* Jeffrey Nittrouer, Nittrouer, Jeffrey A
* Continuing Grant
* Lina Patino
* 06/30/2013
* USD 170,000.00

Dr. Jeffrey A. Nittrouer is awarded an NSF Earth Sciences Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a research and education plan at the University of
Illinois, Urbana-Champaign. Dr. Nittrouer will use field observation studies
from the lower Mississippi River coupled with physical modeling to provide an
understanding for sediment transport dynamics where a river nears its marine
outlet. Data to be collected include measurements for water and sediment
transport during low- and high-water discharge, which will help constrain
spatial and temporal sediment flux disparity, and the transport stress
associated with both water discharge regimes. Additionally, measurements for
channel bed sediment composition and timing of sediment flux will be used to
describe causes for measured changes in channel morphology and planform
character of the lowermost Mississippi River.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
will provide analyses for the timing and movement of sediment and associated
particulates from meandering fluvial systems to the deltaic and marine
environment. This is a particularly important area of study, because
decelerating water flow as a river nears its outlet has important influences for
the routing of sediments through source-to-sink sedimentary systems. This
information will have direct applications for recent efforts to mitigate coastal
wetland loss in southern Louisiana. Wetlands are environmentally sensitive
systems that, amongst many ecological services, naturally buffer storm surges
that threaten urban populations and
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students with interest in geoscience and
river system dynamics at the host institution will be trained to operate state-
of-the-art instruments and software programs that collect and analyze data from
the lowermost Mississippi River. Additionally, students will be educated in the
physical theory behind fluvial hydrodynamics and sediment transport. Educational
seminars will be held to discuss river and coastal wetland issues that abound in
southern Louisiana, and will be followed by a field trip that will trace the
Mississippi River, starting from the Midwest and ending at its outlet in
Louisiana.