* 0948298
* Computer Methods in Cardiovascular Device Design and Evaluation Annual Meeting: Spring 2010 and Spring 2011 in Washington, DC area
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2011
* Charles Taylor, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Kaiming Ye
* 07/31/2011
* USD 30,000.00

0948298&lt;br/&gt;Taylor&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
support two workshops jointly sponsored by NSF, NIH and FDA focused on
Computational Methods for Cardiovascular Device Design &amp; Evaluation. These
workshops will be held in 2010 and 2011 in the Washington DC area. The overall
objective of these workshops is to provide a forum for academic, industry and
government communication and collaboration related to the development of optimal
computer modeling methods in medical device development. Such methods are not
widely used in cardiovascular device design, but have considerable potential to
aid in the development of safer, more efficacious medical
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These meetings will follow on the highly
successful 2008 and 2009 conferences where, each year, over 200 participants
from academia, industry and government discussed the best-practices and unmet
needs in industry and academia related to modeling the cardiovascular system and
predicting safety and efficacy of cardiovascular devices. These meetings are
promoting the development, application and validation of computational methods
for cardiovascular device design and evaluation identifying the roles of device
companies, engineering software companies, academic institutions and government
agencies. A highly unique aspect of this meeting is that it industry and
government attendees attend and participate at a significant level.&lt;br/&gt;