* 0948258
* Untangling the Energetics and Dynamics of Reactions of Ground State Silicon Atoms with Small Hydrocarbon Radicals
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2014
* Ralf Kaiser, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 05/31/2014
* USD 432,000.00

In this award, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms Program
of the Division of Chemistry, Professor Kaiser of the University of Hawaii at
Manoa and his graduate students will untangle the energetics, dynamics, and
potential energy surfaces (PESs) involved in the formation of small organo
silicon molecules. To achieve these goals, Professor Kaiser and his colleagues
will investigate the energy-dependent chemical reaction dynamics of ground state
silicon atoms with small hydrocarbon radicals under single collision conditions
in a hydrocarbon-free, crossed molecular beam machine. This setup incorporates a
universal, rotatable angular resolved time-of-flight mass spectrometric detector
with hard and soft electron impact ionization as well as laser induced
fluorescence (LIF) detection. By conducting these crossed molecular beam
experiments and combining the results with ab initio and quasi classical
trajectory (QCT) calculations in collaboration with Professor Head-Gordon (UC
Berkeley), the chemical dynamics, reaction mechanisms, products, intermediates,
energetics, branching ratios, and enthalpies of formation of small organo
silicon molecules can be extracted. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Aside from the goal of
unraveling the chemical dynamics of hitherto poorly explored atom-radical
reactions, the proposed studies may impact other areas through an improved
understanding of the formation and role of small organo silicon molecules in the
interstellar medium (astrochemistry); in chemical vapor deposition processes
(material sciences); and in providing new insights into chemical bonding of main
group elements (physical organic chemistry).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Integration of
research and education will be achieved by outreach to high school teachers and
involving undergraduate students in hands-on activities in reaction dynamics and
astrochemistry. Students from underrepresented groups such as local Hawai'ians
will be particularly encouraged to participate. In addition, the PI will
organize an interdisciplinary session on astrochemistry at the Pacifichem 2010
in Honolulu.