* 0948204
* Acessory Minerals and Crustal Processes
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2010,02/28/2017
* E. Bruce Watson, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 02/28/2017
* USD 694,582.00

Intellectual merit. This accomplishment-based renewal (ABR) proposal requests
funding to continue a multi-faceted program of research bearing on the
properties of accessory minerals in the Earth's continental crust. The overall
goal is to enhance capabilities for determining the timing and intensity of
crustal geologic events and processes ranging from igneous activity and
metamorphism to uplift and exhumation rates. Research during the last funding
cycle (2005-2009) focused mainly on development of tools and techniques for
characterizing high-temperature processes: i.e., geothermometers for zircon,
rutile, titanite and quartz and the diffusion data needed to evaluate their
resistance to diffusive resetting. Exploratory efforts were made to investigate
the role of defects on oxygen diffusion, and to develop techniques to
characterize He diffusion in accessory minerals. Because diffusion of He
produced by radioactive decay of U and Th has numerous applications in
quantifying time-temperature histories of shallow crustal rocks, future research
will shift substantially toward applications in this area. (U-Th)/He
thermochronometry is a powerful technique for characterization of thermal
histories of geologic systems. Underpinning the technique is knowledge of the
mobility (diffusion) of He in accessory minerals (e.g., apatite, zircon,
titanite, xenotime and monazite). Measurements of He diffusion in zircon and
apatite are generally consistent with information deduced from bulk-release
studies of natural crystals containing radiogenic He. In the case of zircon,
direct profiling reveals substantial diffusive anisotropy, with faster diffusion
rates parallel preferred crystallographic orientations as generally pedicted by
molecular dynamics simulations. Future efforts will focus on: 1) identifying the
underlying cause for differences between bulk-release and direct-profiling
results for apatite; 2) extending the study to other accessory minerals; 3)
assessing possible He saturation effects on diffusion; 4) evaluating the role of
radiation damage in He diffusion; and 5) development of computer codes for
modeling anisotropic diffusion in non-spherical grains. Work will also continue
on development of accessory-mineral thermometers, including evaluation of the
effect of pressure on the Ti-in-zircon thermometer and calibration of a
crystallization thermometer for apatite.

The proposed research will provide fundamental information on the behavior of
key rare-element minerals in the Earth's crust and enable extraction of
information from them regarding crustal processes and evolution. Emphasis is on
acquisition of basic experimental data, but systems are strategically targeted
in the hope of furthering knowledge in areas of broad significance to the solid-
earth sciences. This work provides new tools for addressing petrological and
tectonic problems, and will hopefully lead to refinement of molecular dynamics
and first-principles modeling of diffusion processes in minerals.

Broader impacts. This project will contribute to development of methods to
quantify T-t histories of metamorphic and igneous rocks. Because the work
focuses upon minerals that contain radioactive elements, results will also be
directly relevant the radioactive waste isolation arena (e.g., He diffusion
measurements). Moreover, the proposed studies involve development of new
experimental methods and crystal-growth techniques that may find applications in
other fields (e.g., ceramic engineering). Lastly, this project will support one
PhD student and involvement of several undergraduates in aspects of the proposed
research.