* 0948671
* EAGER: Creation and Manipulation of Quantum States in Oxide Nanostructures with a Low-Temperature Atomic-Force Microscope
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Jeremy Levy, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 08/31/2010
* USD 75,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION&lt;br/&gt;This research project seeks to understand
the basic operating principle behind a newly discovered method for fabricating
circuits whose size approaches atomic-scale dimensions. Current computer
technology is based on silicon transistors which are getting close to their
smallest possible size. Oxide nanoelectronics offers a new way to create
transistors and other circuit elements that are required for information
technology, but many basic properties are still not well understood. One way of
developing such an understanding is to use a technique called atomic force
microscopy, in which a small needle-like probe is scanned over a surface to
measure the shape as well as alter the properties by using applied voltages to
the probe. This research project will use an extension of the capabilities of
such an instrument to allow the properties to be measured at much lower
temperatures than was previously possible. Such control will help to uncover
some of the basic mechanisms for writing and erasing nanoscale transistors and
other devices. The project will provide formative experiences for the graduate
student involved in the project. The low-temperature images are likely to create
appealing visual representations of these nanostructures, ones that will appeal
to young, impressionable students choosing their future academic
trajectories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS&lt;br/&gt;A novel method
for writing and modifying conducting nanostructures at the interface between two
insulators (LaAlO3 and SrTiO3) has been invented by the PI. This project will
extend the operating range of a vacuum atomic force microscope (AFM) so that
oxide nanostructures can be cooled to 4 K while being probed by a conducting AFM
tip. At low temperatures, thermal activation of carriers from donor site is
suppressed, revealing the underlying potential produced by the AFM writing
process. The tip will act like a local gate, enabling the nanostructure to be
probed locally and in situ, and for the potential profile to be mapping with
high spatial resolution. The extended temperature range (the instrument
currently operates only down to 130 K) will allow feedback on the device
structure in real time so that exotic quantum states can be defined at
temperatures where transport measurements are made.&lt;br/&gt;