* 0948584
* Integrity of the Plant Golgi
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2014
* Federica Brandizzi, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 03/31/2014
* USD 679,091.00

Intellectual merit. It is well established that cells of plants, fungi, and
animals contain organelles that carry out vital functions for the life of a
cell. What is yet to be learned is how the identity of organelles is established
and maintained. In this project, the plant Golgi apparatus will be used as a
model to address this fundamental question. In plants, the Golgi apparatus is
composed of highly mobile stacks of membranes that are dispersed on tubules of
another organelle, the endoplasmic reticulum. The plant Golgi receives proteins
and membranes from proximal and distal locations; it is involved in their
modification and sorting to their final destinations and in synthesizing the
cell wall that encapsulates plant cells. The flow of membrane proteins through
the Golgi as well as the dynamic exchange of peripherally associated proteins
require continuous remodeling of this organelle. Yet, the stacks withstand
dispersion during the intense traffic of proteins and membranes to and from the
Golgi. This raises the fundamental biological question: How does the Golgi
retain its integrity (i.e. architecture and composition) The integrity of the
Golgi depends on the organelle's ability to dynamically maintain its steady-
state architecture and membrane distribution during protein traffic. Using a
screen specifically developed for the plant Golgi in the Brandizzi laboratory, a
unique set of mutants was identified in which an established Golgi marker is
partially mistargeted to other organelles. This screen is exciting and important
because it sets the foundation for identifying key players of the machinery that
controls plant Golgi integrity. In this project, characterization of the Golgi
mutants will be carried out to identify the protein(s) responsible for the
maintenance of the architecture and membrane steady-state distribution at the
plant Golgi. This work will lead to answers to fundamental questions regarding
organelle biogenesis and important differences in Golgi organization and
function across eukaryotic biological systems.

Broader impacts. Plants are the primary energy source of all biospheric
development all animals survive on plants, both directly and indirectly. The
secretory pathway of plants plays a fundamental role in the conversion of fixed
carbon into energy-rich materials such as proteins, lipids, and complex sugars.
These plant-derived products are important not only for nutrition, but they have
the potential to be used as renewable fuels, lubricants, textiles, and building
materials of all kinds. The plant Golgi is a key organelle in cell wall
biosynthesis and storage protein deposition. Because unique variations exist
among systems as a result of evolutionary adaptation, it is important to study
the plant Golgi if humanity is to tap into the full potential of plants as
primary providers of biomolecules on earth. This project will also enable to
continue the Brandizzi lab's engagement in teaching and outreach activities to
communicate to students and teachers the scientific discoveries in plant science
and their impact on our society.