* 0948827
* OPUS:  Synthesis of   Three  Decades of Research on Tree Growth in Northern Forests in Relation to Global Climatic Change
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2014
* Nicole Davi, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 05/31/2014
* USD 133,309.00

This project will support a synthesis spanning more than three decades of
research, focused on tree-ring analyses of northern forests. The northern forest
ecosystems of the great land masses of North America and Eurasia are highly
sensitive indicators of the Earth's carbon cycle. Over the past decades, these
forests have yielded valuable information on variation in boreal forest growth
as well as climatic and environmental change for the past millennium. Two main
products will result from this project. First, a comprehensive, widely-
accessible monograph that will synthesize this extensive body of tree-ring
analysis from northern forests related to global change studies. The monograph
will examine the so-called 'divergence effect', which means figuring out how and
why tree growth and temperature patterns are not lined up at many northern
sites, in recent decades. Documenting the divergence effect is critical for
identifying and understanding the implications of future climate change on tree
growth. Second, a CD atlas will be produced based on compilation of long-term
tree-ring data, descriptions and reconstructions. This CD product will be made
available to researchers and students worldwide and will provide important
perspectives regarding the state of the science and provide materials for
development of school curricula. This synthesis provides insights into the
scientific decision-making process and is relevant to policy makers concerned
with global change and its impacts.