* 0948512
* Genetic and Genomic Analysis of Natural Variation in Yeast
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2015
* Barak Cohen, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 02/28/2015
* USD 960,000.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Individuals of the same species exhibit
extensive phenotypic variation. The genetic component of this variation is
caused by variants in the DNA code that differ between individuals. What are the
molecular mechanisms through which these natural variants produce their effects?
The goal of this project is to identify causal genetic variants that underlie
natural variation between individuals, and to gain a molecular understanding of
how these genetic variants affect the continuum of phenotypic
variation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on differences in the
sporulation efficiency of natural isolates of the baker's yeast, Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. Sporulation efficiency is a trait that is linked intrinsically to
the metabolic activities of yeast. Building on previous work in this system, the
principal investigator's laboratory will identify genetic variants responsible
for differences in sporulation efficiency, assess the magnitude of their
effects, and determine their interactions with each other. Through these
experiments the spectrum of important genetic variants will be better
understood. With causal variants in hand, the molecular mechanisms through which
natural genetic variants exert their effects on phenotypic variation will then
be investigated. Furthermore, genetic analyses will be combined with a
thermodynamic model of natural variation in yeast sporulation. This model will
then be employed to guide experiments to understand how natural variants affect
the key molecular interactions within the sporulation pathway. It is anticipated
that these experiments will uncover the mechanisms underlying the effects of
these natural genetic variants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the
molecular basis of complex, quantitative natural variation is a major challenge
in Genetics. Such an understanding is key to improving models of evolution.
Understanding variation in yeast metabolism in particular will have immediate
practical benefits, such as an improved ability to rationally design strains for
biofuel production. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part of the broader impacts of this research will
come from the experiments themselves. The experiments span a range of
disciplines from statistical genetics to molecular biology to thermodynamics.
The students and postdocs who execute the experiments are necessarily
interdisciplinary. They must be facile at both computational and experimental
biology. The training of these students will advance the NSF's mission to train
scientists who cut across disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal
investigator also participates in the Opportunities in Genomic Research (OGR)
program run through the Washington University Genome Sequencing Center, and in
the BioMedRap program run through the Division of Biological and Biomedical
Sciences. As part of these programs each year the laboratory hosts undergraduate
minority students. The students are trained and mentored by the principal
investigator and by members of the lab. The students present their work in lab
meetings and give oral presentations at a symposium when they leave the lab. The
programs also provide career counseling and tutoring for the GRE exams. Some of
the experiments in this project involve simple genetic crosses which provide
novice undergraduates a route to make progress during their time in the lab.
These crosses are an excellent way to teach Mendel's laws of segregation and
independent assortment, as well as involving undergraduates in research. At the
end of each year an outside consultant is brought in to assess the program, make
suggestions, and track the progress of students who have been through the
program.