* 0948762
* EAGER:   Does Na availability regulate tropical decomposers?
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Michael Kaspari, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 08/31/2012
* USD 82,725.00

Much of Earth's carbon cycle can be described briefly thus: plants scrub carbon
dioxide from the atmosphere; animals, fungi, and bacteria consume plants and
release carbon dioxide back into the atmosphere. This proposal posits that
sodium (the Na in NaCl, or table salt) plays a key, under-appreciated role in
regulating atmospheric carbon dioxide. Most plants don't need sodium, but
decomposer animals and fungi do (and suffer in low-sodium ecosystems like a
sports team deprived of Gatorade). Low-sodium ecosystems should thus tend to
store carbon. Ecosystems farther inland receive less and less ocean source
sodium in their rainfall. Decomposers of earth's vast continental interior
should thus be especially sodium deprived, less active, and less likely to
release carbon back into the atmosphere. We will test this hypothesis in two
ways. First, for three months, 5 x 5 m patches in an Ecuador forest 2500 km
inland will receive one of two treatments. Half will be regularly watered from a
nearby river. The other half will get river water charged with NaCl (about the
amount found in a year's worth of coastal rainfall). This experiment will test
if more of a forest's leaf and woody litter decomposes with added sodium.
Second, small-scale experiments will compare how ecosystem responses vary
geographically between two forests: one, our site in Ecuador, the other in
Panama, only 25 km from the ocean. A common sodium supplement-urine-will be the
experimental focus. Four treatments--synthetic urine, urine sans NaCl, NaCl, and
water--will be added to small patches of forest for three weeks. If the above
hypothesis is true, the NaCl component of urine should increase decomposition
more in the Ecuador forest. Both experiments will monitor sodium effects up the
food web on decomposer arthropods and their predators, which comprise about half
the biodiversity in a tropical forest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most of Earth's
terrestrial ecosystems are far enough from the ocean to experience sodium
limitation. The work funded by this proposal thus has the potential to
significantly increase understanding of the Earth's climate system. If the
amount and distribution of rainfall changes with global warming, as predicted by
current models, this may mean changes in sodium deposition, which in turn could
increase or decrease atmospheric carbon dioxide. The biodiversity part of this
study will collect thousands of specimens (and, almost certainly, species not
yet described) in this poorly understood part of the world. A graduate student
will be trained in a multidisciplinary endeavor linking earth science,
evolutionary biology, and ecosystem ecology. She in turn will mentor an
undergraduate from the University of Oklahoma, who will join us in the field and
experience biodiversity science first hand.