* 0948703
* Melting Processes and Crust-Mantle Interaction in the Cascade Arc: Constraints from U-Series, Nd, Os, Pb and Sr Isotopic Data
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2010,06/30/2013
* Yemane Asmerom, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2013
* USD 317,435.00

The subduction zone system on Earth is where net material transfer from the
mantle to the continental crust occurs, and where material that is created at
spreading ridges is returned to the mantle. Unlike volcanism in mid-ocean
ridges, where melting components are limited and melting mechanism are
considerably simpler, volcanism in arcs is considerably more complex: components
of melt are numerous, such as the down going slab, the mantle wedge, the
overlying mantle and continental lithospheres, fluids and sediments. As a
result, arc magmas exhibit rich diversity in elemental and isotopic composition
over short distances. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is generally agreed that fluid
addition plays an important role in melting in subduction zones, most likely by
hydrating the mantle wedge and lowering the solidus temperature. The timing of
fluid addition and the extent of fluid involvement in generation of magmas in
certain arcs, such as the Cascade subduction zone, are not clear. The Cascade
arc represents both a slow converging and warm end-member of the global arc
system. It is also one of the best characterized arcs, given almost century long
geophysical and geologic studies. A uranium-series based study in this arc is
ideally suited to answer a number of the outstanding questions. These include,
1) the relative importance of flux melting and dynamic melting in arcs in
general and the Cascades in particular, 2) the explanation for the paradox of
the estimated high pre-eruptive water content (up to 8% H2O) inferred for some
Cascade lavas and yet the lack of enrichment in key fluid indicating elements
and isotopic ratios, 3) and the amount of crust component in Cascade lavas. The
proposed study will utilize 230Th-238U, 226Ra-230Th, 231Pa-235U, Sr, Nd, Pb and
Os isotopic data on young lavas and mineral separates to address the above and
related questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although this project's aim is answering
basic scientific questions, it will support the human development and
infrastructural building efforts at the University of New Mexico. The project
will serve as a venue for training two graduate students in analytically-based
geochemistry and petrology. The lab is used not only by the PIs group but also
by a variety of other groups, including students from small undergraduate
colleges, such as Cornell College, Iowa, and University of Puget Sound,
Washington. The University of New Mexico is a minority serving institution and
the current proposal is coupled to an existing Sloan Foundation grant to the PI
to support minority PhD students. The study area is a National area of concern
for volcanic hazards, and results from this project may contribute towards
understanding of volcanic eruption cycles.