* 0948673
* Origin and Evolution of the Amerasia Basin of the Arctic
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2013
* Elizabeth Miller, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 12/31/2013
* USD 279,014.00

The geologic history of the remote, ice covered Arctic is still just beginning
to be understood. The deep Amerasia ocean basin has never been scientifically
drilled and represents one of the few remaining plate tectonic puzzles on earth.
Scientists disagree, for instance, on whether Alaska lay next to Canada or
Russia before sea floor spreading opened the Amerasia Basin. These basic
geologic questions are important because sea floor spreading was also
responsible for the development of the vast system of wide continental shelves
that border the Arctic, now considered frontier regions for natural resource
exploration. Interest in the Arctic has also accelerated because of the profound
effect of global warming and because the nations that encircle the Arctic are
charting their continental shelves and slopes to propose extensions to their
offshore economic zones (EEZs) per U.N. Convention for Law of the Sea, Arcticle
76. This project will provide funding for students and scientists to gather new
data to help us understand the plate tectonic evolution of the Amerasia Basin by
thoroughly characterizing rock samples collected by dredging submarine cliffs
with the U.S. Coast Guard Icebreaker Healy as part of the U.S./Canada EEZ study.
The project will also initiate an international collaborative study with Russian
scientists to test hypothetical matches between the geology of the Polar Ural
region to that of Alaska.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Testing ideas and establishing
geologic ties within and across the Arctic Ocean basins will utilize traditional
stratigraphic, paleontological, geologic and geochronologic approaches augmented
by the study of the U-Pb age distributions and the geochemical/physical
characteristics of detrital zircon and apatite suites in sandstones. Mostly
derived from the erosion of granitic rocks, detrital zircon and apatite suites
provide unprecedented ability to link sediments to their source regions and to
understand their subsequent burial/thermal history. Our evolving database for
sandstones from the NE Russian Arctic and Alaska, coupled with data from other
scientists from Canada and Alaska will provide the context for interpreting the
origin of continental rocks dredged from the bottom of the Amerasia Basin in
2008 and 2009 (with more sampling planned for 2010 and 2011) and will serve as a
comparison data set for samples from the Polar Ural region of Russia.