* 0948155
* EAGER:  Collaborative Research: Towards a Unified Wireless Network Involving Reconfigurable Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2011
* Ahmed Eltawil, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Zhi Tian
* 08/31/2011
* USD 75,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;This EArly-concept Grants for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project
considers a vision of a future wireless network where all mobile devices in the
network consist of one or more software-defined radios that support multiple
communication modes and access schemes and where the network actively manages
the access modes of the constituent terminals. The research seeks to realize
this vision by combining expertise in network architectures, physical layer
issues, and network layer issues and by considering cross-layer co-design. The
project aims to: (i) improve understanding of the roles and impacts of next-
generation software-defined radios on future wireless systems; (ii) produce a
device model that accurately represents the capabilities and limits of next-
generation software-defined radios; and (iii) develop new techniques for
managing bandwidth in such a unified wireless network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With
respect to intellectual merit, the research has the potential to produce a novel
resource allocation scheme that provides a set of services over a heterogeneous
wireless infrastructure considering the capabilities and limitations of
software-defined radios. The project will develop preliminary results related to
these approaches and preliminary cost and performance models for the overall
system framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With respect to broader impact, the
research has the potential to impact future wireless communications networks
with a variety of applications including emergency response, telehealth, and
entertainment. If successful, there are longer term prospects of a more robust
and a more efficient, especially with respect to spectrum, wireless network. The
project introduces students to a comprehensive and integrated view of mobile
devices and wireless networks, thus preparing them to deal with the design of
complex systems.