* 0948452
* RAPID:  Racial Attitudes and the 2009 Confirmation Hearings on Sonia Sotomayor
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2010
* Tyson King-Meadows, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 06/30/2010
* USD 81,370.00

This project investigates how the 2009 confirmation hearings on Supreme Court
nominee Sonia M. Sotomayor might affect political and racial attitudes. This
information will be collected through a pre- and post-hearing national survey of
1100 adult citizens along with an oversample of 500 blacks and 500 Hispanics.
The project specifically examines political and racial attitudes toward racial
and ethnic minority groups as well as political and racial attitudes of racial
and ethnic minority groups before and after the hearings. This study thus uses
the Sotomayor hearings to investigate dormant attitudes toward law and the
courts and whether the hearings generated particular concerns about the Court
and its decisions, federalism, civil rights and liberties, and race relations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project measures evaluations of the nominee and the
confirmation hearings, select Court decisions, members of Congress and the
President, and attitudes toward racial and ethnic groups, gender, and the Court
as well as perceptions of racial resentment. The design includes a re-interview
of panelists from the 2008 Cooperative Congressional Election Study. These
features enable an assessment of attitudes before the nomination, after the
nomination but before Senate hearings, and after the Senate hearings. Finally,
the project facilitates comparisons with findings from other
surveys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will have broad impacts by advancing
new discovery about the interactions among and malleability of political and
racial attitudes. In particular, results will illustrate how and why Supreme
Court confirmation hearings affect both attitudes about racial and ethnic groups
and attitudes of racial and ethnic groups toward the political system. The
project will yield cross-sectional and longitudinal data that will enable
scholars to compare the attitudes of whites, blacks, and Hispanics. &lt;br/&gt;