* 0948299
* Collaborative Research:  Rodent Diets and Habitat Reconstructions in South Africa: an Actualistic and Applied Multidisciplinary Study
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2010,02/29/2012
* Sandi Copeland, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/29/2012
* USD 87,381.00

With National Science Foundation support, Drs. Sponheimer, Ungar, and Passey and
an international team of colleagues will investigate the environmental context
of human evolution. The team includes researchers from the U.S., Canada,
Israel,and South Africa who will use their expertise in vertebrate paleontology,
isotopic geochemistry, wildlife ecology, and human paleobiology to study human
paleoecology through the lens of rodent dietary ecology. It has long been
recognized that the ecological diversity and small home ranges of rodents make
them particularly useful tools for reconstructing past environments. However,
studies of rodent faunas have traditionally made assumptions about the ecology
of fossil specimens rather than measuring dietary attributes directly. In
contrast, this project will directly determine rodent diets to investigate the
relationship between modern rodent dietary ecology and habitats, and then apply
this knowledge to the South African human fossil record. Diet will be studied
using dental microwear texture analysis, stable carbon isotope analysis, and
strontium isotope analysis. The first two provide direct measures of dietary
attributes (e.g., mechanical properties of foodstuffs, tree fruits/leaves versus
grasses), while the last allows determination of where animals lived on the
landscape, potentially resulting in more spatially-refined environmental
reconstructions. The project will have three phases. In the first phase, the
research team will conduct an extensive study of the relationship between modern
rodent diets and habitat features. In the second phase, the team will determine
the degree to which the diets of modern rodents from owl roosts reflect local
habitats, essentially investigating the degree to which owl predation biases the
environmental signal. The last phase will entail application of this knowledge
to fossil sites in and around the Sterkfontein Valley, South Africa that are
from ~2.5 million to ~700 thousand years old.

The intellectual merit of this project is that it will provide new evidence of
early hominin ecology and environments, and in so doing, will help address
questions about hominin adaptations and evolution. For instance, did humans
putative ancestors, big-brained early Homo, emerge in Africa only after
significant deterioration of preferred enviroments, and did such environmental
change contribute to the extinction of our smaller-brained, and presumably less
adaptable, evolutionary "cousin" Paranthropus? It will also establish a firmer
basis for using rodent dietary ecology to reconstruct paleoenvironments, which
will be of broad utility at other archaeological and paleontological sites. In
addition, it will mark the first time that multiple techniques have been used to
investigate the intersection of animal diets, abundances, and
environmental/climatic parameters over long (2 million year) timescales.
Furthermore, the analytical developments to be made as part of this project will
be of use for fields beyond archaeology including biological anthropology,
geology, geochemistry, conservation ecology and paleontology.

The broader impacts of this study are that it will foster international
collaboration, provide training for students from underrepresented groups,
enrich undergraduate teaching and graduate mentoring, and be used as a platform
for bettering public understanding of science and technology. This is especially
relevant for the University of Arkansas, a public university in an underfunded
EPSCoR State.