* 0948150
* RUI:  Targeted Annotation and Exploration of Synteny of Immunoglobulin Loci in Teleosts using RSS Motifs
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2010,02/29/2016
* Anastasia Zimmerman, College of Charleston
* Continuing Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 02/29/2016
* USD 196,924.00

Intellectual Merit:

Genome scale synteny, the assessment of the relative gene order and conservation
between species, can provide key insights into evolutionary dynamics of
chromosomes, can help elucidate patterns of genetic variability and mutation,
and can be useful for identifying potential regulatory motifs. The overall goal
of this project is to establish syntenic relationships of immunoglobulin (Ig)
loci between multiple teleost genomes. Since Ig segments appear to have emerged
early during the evolutionary history of vertebrates, conceivably during the
transition between jawless fishes (Agnatha) and jawed animals (Gnathostomata),
teleosts occupy a critical branch point in vertebrate phylogeny for
understanding the emergence of the adaptive immune system. The specific
objectives of this project are to: 1) utilize computational approaches to
identify and discern relative gene orders and conservation of Ig loci between
three fish genomes; 2) improve gene predictions and resultant gene annotations
by comparative analyses using DNA sequences derived and generated from BAC
libraries; and 3) explore genomic synteny of Ig loci in teleosts with other
vertebrates.

Broader impacts:

This work will help define the fundamental genomic architecture underlying
immunoglobulin loci in teleosts. Fishes are important model systems across the
spectrum of biological research, understanding diversity and variability of Ig
loci in a genomic context provides a framework for functional studies of gene
regulation. The College of Charleston is a public liberal arts institution with
a strong history of student engagement in scientific research. This project will
provide research opportunities for several students interested in pursuing
bioinformatics, genomics, or molecular biology as a potential career path and
will create opportunities for community outreach in science at the K-12 level.