* 0948652
* Geoinformatics: Collaborative Research: Neotoma Paleoecology Database, Pliocene-Quaternary
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2018
* Allan Ashworth, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Dena Smith
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,486,857.00

Neotoma is a multiproxy relational database that includes fossil data for the
past 5 million years (the Pliocene and Quaternary). It is a community database
that provides the underlying cyberinfrastructure for a variety of disciplinary
database projects. The Neotoma project is an international collaborative effort
among individuals from 23 institutions, including domain scientists representing
a spectrum of Pliocene-Quaternary fossil data types, as well as experts in
information technology (IT). This project builds on the initial development of
the Neotoma database, which was funded in 2008 with a 2-year grant from the NSF
Geoinformatics program. Neotoma involves domain scientists representing a wide
spectrum of fossil groups from the Pliocene and Quaternary teamed with
information technology (IT) professionals from the Center for Environmental
Informatics (CEI) at Penn State, where the database is hosted. A workshop was
held at the National Academy of Sciences in Washington DC on 31 January-2
February 2009 to plan for the future development of Neotoma. This project is the
outgrowth of the DC workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During a 2-year development
project, the database structure of Neotoma was designed and implemented with the
import of vertebrate faunal data from the FAUNMAP database and pollen data from
the Global Pollen Database. The North American Plant Macrofossil Database was
updated, and data are now ready for import. The Neotoma website was launched,
and the Neotoma explorer provides a map-based interface to the
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the next phase ( this project) several new
constituent database cooperatives from North America, Europe, Africa, and Asia
will join with Neotoma, and several new data types will be ingested, including
diatoms, ostracodes, insects, and testate amoebae. Neotoma will be exposed to
outside developers via Application Programming Interfaces (APIs) and a Software
Development Kit (SDK), whereby both desktop and webbrowser- based applications
can acquire data from Neotoma over the Internet. Data-steward tools will be
developed that will allow stewards to upload and update data remotely. This
project establishes working groups for various database activities, including
development of software tools, development of age models, integration of various
fossil types from packrat middens held in different databases, and organization
of a new peatlands constituent database. Two database-wide workshops will be
held for coordination, planning, and conceptual development.