* 0948123
* EAGER:  Understanding Social Behavior in Real-Time Strategy Games
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Jennifer Golbeck, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2012
* USD 196,199.00

This is a study of how people make decisions in dynamic, social environments,
achieving a methodological innovation by using online real-time strategy (RTS)
games as laboratories for studying human behavior. Investigation into social
interactions has been discussed in the context of virtual worlds and online
role-playing games, but not in RTS games, nor have researchers yet developed the
data-collection techniques or theoretical principles for doing research in this
important sector of human-centered computing. In addition to their entertainment
value, RTS games have emerged to become virtual platforms that simulate real-
world, real-time physics, scenarios, characters, and strategies. Particularly,
multi-player online RTS games are providing a new model of human interaction
that is in line with decision theory, game theory, planning, learning, and other
concepts from research fields such as Computer Science, Artificial Intelligence,
Economics, and Behavioral Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
study users' social strategies in RTS games in three major ways: developing a
gaming environment, a user study with experiments, and an automated learning
approach. The game will present users with a series of missions to be
accomplished, and users will receive points for successful completion. In early
stages these missions can be accomplished alone and with little effort, but as
the player progresses they will require alliances with others. The first phase
of user studies will involve a qualitative analysis of user behaviors,
identifying specific points in the game when users must make decisions where the
social relationships will be important factors. This qualitative analysis will
be followed by a quantitative analysis of the players' performance, developing
techniques for measuring the payoffs from each action. Once players begin
developing strong alliances, a set of experiments will analyze their reasoning
when making strategic decisions. This will include measurements of social tie
strength, structural social network features, the past history of interactions,
and evolutionary simulations of strategies. The final phase of research will
involve controlled experiments with users, presenting them with situations where
they have to make a decision that requires consideration of the social
structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will make software, test suites,
documentation, and teaching materials freely available on the Internet. Decision
making is an important problem in artificial intelligence, and effective
decision-making is important in all kinds of organizations and real-world
applications. This research could provide the theoretical and experimental basis
for developing practical algorithms and applications for social decision making,
to make it easier for the organizations and the users of such applications in
their decision-making process.&lt;br/&gt;