* 0948303
* EAR-PF Mapping Sharp Interfaces in Continental Rifts
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2010,08/31/2012
* Vedran Lekic, Lekic                   Vedran
* Continuing Grant
* Lina Patino
* 08/31/2012
* USD 170,000.00

Dr. Ved Lekic has been granted the NSF Earth Sciences postdoctoral fellowship to
carry out a research and education plan at Brown University. He will investigate
the causes and mechanics of continental rifting, which is the process in which
continents are torn apart and new plate boundaries form. The project will focus
on three active continental rifts that span a variety of rates, geometries and
amounts of extension, different maturity and geochemical signatures: the Rio
Grande Rift, the Salton Trough, and the Ethiopian and Kenyan segments of the
East African Rift. Analysis of seismic data (receiver function, tomographic, and
forward waveform-modeling analyses) will be used to simultaneously map broad
asthenospheric and lithospheric features as well as detect and characterize
sharp interfaces such as the crust-mantle boundary, the lithosphere-
asthenosphere boundary, and other features that may be related to melting or
faulting. Mapping and characterizing horizontal and steeply dipping interfaces
associated with active continental rifts of different age, maturity, geochemical
signature and deformation parameters will shed light on the causes, mechanics
and evolution of rifting. In the last four decades, the plate tectonic paradigm
has tremendously enhanced our understanding of how our planet works. Yet, we are
still far from understanding how tectonic plates formed in the first place and
how continents can break up among multiple plates at locations known as
continental rifts. This investigation will create images of structures within
continental rifts that can be used to learn about the processes by which
continental plates weaken and break apart and the role that Earth's deep
interior plays. As such, it may elucidate the way plate tectonics arose and how
it continued to operate. &lt;br/&gt;The educational component will be centered
on two courses: an advanced seminar co-taught by Lekic and the host mentor, and
an introductory course in geophysics co-taught by Lekic and a faculty member at
the host institution. The advanced seminar, focused on the structure, rheology
and dynamics of the continental lithosphere, will directly incorporate the
questions raised and insights provided by the research. It will also provide an
interdisciplinary venue in which professors, post-doctoral researchers, graduate
students, and advanced undergraduates from a variety of geoscience backgrounds
can learn and discuss major questions and latest findings. The undergraduate
course will allow Lekic to develop, apply and evaluate a suite of active
learning techniques and enable him to experiment with activities and approaches
that engaging the students' diverse learning styles.