* 0948985
* ULTRA-Ex:   Parks and Vacant Lands as Mechanisms of Ecological and Social Stability in the Cleveland Urban Ecosystem
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2009,02/28/2013
* B. Michael Walton, Cleveland State University
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 02/28/2013
* USD 272,075.00

Current practices of urban park management and urban landscape design are often
predicated upon the principle that enhancing ecosystem services within urban
neighborhoods promotes both social and ecological stability by instilling pride-
of-place and environmental stewardship values among neighborhood residents.
However, important questions remain concerning the ability of urban parks to
sustain meaningful ecosystem services that benefit city residents, despite
multiple, accelerating challenges to ecological integrity, e.g., overpopulated
deer, invasive plant and animal species, waste- and storm water impacts,
especially within older, economically-challenged cities. Economic hardship has
also resulted in an abundance of vacant/abandoned properties in many cities,
which urban landscape designers often view as opportunities for re-development
that incorporate natural amenities and ecosystem services into the urban core.
The objectives of this research will be to investigate social determinants of
stewardship and best management practices within park neighborhoods in response
to educational and outreach programming and retrofit technologies supplied by a
community-based watershed protection organization, and monitor the long-term
changes in ecological, hydrologic, and socioeconomic variables in response to
these interventions. Inventories and ecological/socioeconomic characterizations
of vacant and abandoned properties within Cuyahoga County, Ohio, will be
developed. This process will serve as a basis for planning the redevelopment of
one or more neighborhoods and future implementation of long-term monitoring of
ecological, hydrologic, and socioeconomic variables within those
sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will promote the integration of
scientific and design approaches to urban ecosystem studies. The project will
establish the Northeast Ohio Ecosystem Consortium (NEOECO), a multi-
institutional partnership that will bring focus and integration to the region's
considerable intellectual assets and research capacity in urban ecology,
landscape design, urban planning, and natural resource management. The
participation of leading agencies for natural resource management within NEOECO
will promote the effective transfer of scientific knowledge into decision-making
for management and revitalization of the degraded Cleveland urban ecosystem.
Community-engagement through meetings, workshops, and the Internet are principal
activities of this project. The NEOECO website will provide modes of access to
project results and data tailored to scholarly, professional, and educational
users. Educational outreach will also be accomplished by interacting with
existing programs hosted by NEOECO participants that provide urban ecological
training to students and teachers within the Cleveland Metropolitan School
District. Graduate and undergraduate participants in the project will receive
interdisciplinary training integrating elements of ecological science, resource
management, and urban landscape design.