* 0948636
* Improved Characterization of Apatite Fission-track Annealing Kinetics, and Application to Core Complex Exhumation, Southern Basin and Range
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2010,09/30/2016
* Richard Ketcham, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 09/30/2016
* USD 288,097.00

This project is designed to provide a much improved understanding and
characterization of the process of fission-track annealing in the mineral
apatite. Fission tracks form when uranium decays by spontaneous fission, and the
damage caused by the fissioning particles anneals (is repaired) at a rate
determined by the ambient temperature. Fission-track analysis has thus proven to
be a powerful tool for determining the thermal history of rock bodies, and is
widely used for tectonic studies, landscape evolution, and petroleum
exploration, among other fields. The advances created by this research will be
used to discern the nature of faulting that caused the final stages of uplift of
mountain ranges in southern and west-central Arizona.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Although apatite fission-track thermochronology is a well-established
and robust technique, our understanding of how annealing occurs, and how it is
affected by apatite composition, remains extremely vague. Experimental studies
have shown that impurities such as chlorine, iron and manganese can increase
temperatures required for annealing by several tens of degrees, but the
experimental database is currently far too sparse to determine how impurities
work individually and/or in concert to bring about these changes. This study
will vastly expand the annealing database by utilizing an efficient procedure to
determine the relative annealing properties of 30 apatites with widely varying
compositions and unit cell dimensions. These data will provide insight not only
into compositional effects, but into the annealing mechanism itself. The
resulting new model of fission-track annealing will be used to examine the
relative roles of high-angle and low-angle normal faulting in the final stages
of core-complex exhumation in the Arizona Basin and Range. Recent work has
suggested that low-angle faulting may have accelerated to near-plate-tectonic
rates. However, the data may also be explained by a transition from low-angle to
high-angle faulting. These two scenarios make different predictions about how
cooling rates vary in time and space depending on proximity to faults. The
improvements in the fission-track method will be used to test these predictions,
either confirming a dramatic transition in movement rates possibly caused by the
migration of the slab window off of western North America, or illuminating how
the nature of unroofing can change during a continuous episode of exhumation.
&lt;br/&gt;