* 0948056
* 2010 GRC Bioanalytical Sensors Conference
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2010,01/31/2011
* Weihong Tan, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 01/31/2011
* USD 20,000.00

0948056&lt;br/&gt;Baeumner&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
conference is to serve as a conduit for discussions of unpublished data in
biochemistry, biology, chemistry, engineering, medicine, and physics as they
apply to development and application of bioanalytical sensors. This aim will be
achieved through active participation of attendees in two poster sessions,
informal discussions, and 9 oral sessions, with 30 speakers and 9 discussion
leaders. The data discussed here will encompass diverse fields and will address
the following themes: 1) molecular recognition using alternatives to standard
antibodies and nucleic acid probes, 2) recent advances in optical,
electrochemical, and mechanical detection, 3) real-world applications and in
vivo sensing, 4) use of nanotechnology to advance understanding of molecular
interactions and improvement of sensor design and application, and 5)
supporting/enabling technologies. Specific topics will include (but are not
limited to) single molecule-based probes, intracellular sensing, biomaterials
with enhanced optical or electronic properties, nanoparticles, biocompatibility
and the biological/non-biological interface, miniaturization and automation, and
multiplexed detection in complex matrices. In addition, the Gordon Graduate
Research Seminar (GRS) will convene immediately preceding the GRC (19 - 20 June
2010). Organized and conducted by graduate students and postdocs, the GRS will
provide an opportunity for junior scientists to present their own work in a
formal, oral format, in front of their peers. Participation in this more
intimate program (limited to &lt;35 participants) will enhance the scientific
training of these junior investigators and provide them with contacts and
potential collaborators. A large proportion of the total proposed budget will go
to support GRC and GRS conference fees for graduate and postdoctoral
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since the field of Bioanalytical Sensors is
by its very nature interdisciplinary, it is important to provide scientists with
information on the latest research in many areas directly related to and
ancillary to biosensing technologies. The conference program addresses many
diverse topics associated with bioanalytical sensing - with presentations by
both up-and-coming researchers, as well as world renowned scientists with long
track records of successful innovation. The discussion leaders - a hallmark of
GRCs - are recognized experts in their fields and will be responsible for
initiating and maintaining a vigorous, all-inclusive discussion between the
talks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that new ideas will be generated,
leading to improved instrumentation and materials for future bioanalytical
sensor platforms.