* 0948437
* Radiation of the Vernonieae (Compositae) in montane and lowland habitats in the Americas
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2014
* Sterling Keeley, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 05/31/2014
* USD 179,023.00

A phylogenetic reconstruction of the Compositae tribe Vernonieae, with a focus
on the species rich genera Critoniopsis and Vernonanthura, will be used to trace
pathways and timings of the radiation of the tribe in the Americas. The
Compositae is the largest of all flowering plant families (23,000-30,000
species) and is distributed worldwide. However, the Vernonieae is the only tribe
in the family with genera widely radiated in South, Central, and North America
in both montane and lowland habitats. Critoniopsis and Vernonanthura have a
number of attributes that make them excellent candidates for investigating the
effects of the major climatic and geological events that have affected the
distribution of many plants and animals in the New World. The radiation spans
some of the most biologically significant geologic and climatic events in the
region including the uplift of the Andes, the drying of eastern South America,
the closure of the Isthmus of Panama (the Great American Interchange) and the
formation of the modern West Indian islands. The proposed research will clarify
the availability and timing of major dispersal routes between South and North
America. DNA sequence data from nuclear and chloroplast genomes will be used to
reconstruct the evolutionary histories of Vernonanthura and Critoniopsis. They
will be placed within the phylogenetic framework of the tribe thus extending its
systematic value. Biogeographical analyses will be conducted using DIVA and
likelihood methods in order to explore a range of explanations for the patterns
observed. These will be correlated with the phylogenetic position of species in
both genera.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The research is highly collaborative and
involves students and faculty from Brazil, Mexico, University of Hawaii at Manoa
and colleagues at the Smithsonian Institution and the Fairchild Botanical
Garden. Graduate and undergraduate students will have multiple opportunities to
participate in research and data analyses and efforts will be made to reach out
to native Hawaiian students. The Vernonieae are particularly well represented in
Brazil and a mini-symposium at the University of Sao Paulo is specifically
designed to promote collaborative activities of students who are actively
working in Compositae systematics and who will be taking the lead in the not-to-
distant future. Through the Encyclopedia of Life (EOL) project information will
be shared with the wider scientific community.