* 0948185
* Conference: Thiol-Based Redox Regulation &amp; Signaling Gordon Research Conference, May 9-14, 2010, Il Ciocco, Italy
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2011
* Leslie Poole, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 02/28/2011
* USD 7,500.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 3rd Gordon Research Conference on
Thiol-based Redox Regulation and Signaling will be held May 9-14, 2010 at Il
Ciocco in Italy. Life began in a reducing environment. With the appearance of
oxygen in the atmosphere, cells had to evolve the ability to prevent and survive
damage by this oxidizing species. At the same time cells took advantage of this
new chemistry and developed novel redox reactions, impinging on the regulation
of most fundamental aspects of life: metabolic control, signaling, aging and
death. Recent data has found that an increasing number of cellular functions and
impairments are redox regulated. Redox processes are now known to be involved in
many aspects of agricultural and biological sciences. The special chemistry of
thiol groups within proteins (in the amino acid cysteine) and small molecules
(including glutathione) is a key component in the redox control of biological
processes. Modifications of such thiol groups can act as molecular switches and
reversible thiol oxidation occurs in various phosphatases, kinases and
transcription factors. Therefore, thiol-based redox chemistry is linked to
cellular signal transduction, apoptosis, gene regulation, cell cycle control and
other processes and pathways. Thiol-containing proteins also function as major
cellular antioxidants and are critical for protecting bacteria, plants, and
animals from oxidative damage. Misregulation of thiol-based redox homeostasis
has major implications for cellular dysfunction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Conference offers a multidisciplinary venue in which plant and animal
biologists, chemists, mathematicians, biophysicists, and clinicians will convene
to discuss the mechanistic and physiological implications of thiol-based
chemistry, a key regulatory element found in all kingdoms from bacteria to
plants and animals. The intellectual environment offered by the GRC attracts the
brightest and the most interactive members of the community and fosters the
exchange of ideas in this rapidly developing field. The ideas and hypotheses
developed at this conference will continue to advance the field of thiol-based
redox regulation and will also contribute significantly to the larger scientific
community interested in understanding how post-translational protein
modifications can regulate the complex metabolic and regulatory pathways of
cells and organisms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference is in its third cycle after two very
successful meetings in the U.S. and Italy in 2006 and 2008. The chair and vice-
chair for this meeting are a physician scientist and a basic researcher,
respectively, and are representative of the biologists, physicists, chemists and
mathematicians working in various aspects of the field. As the importance of
thiol-based redox regulation is becoming more widely appreciated, this
conference is expected to accelerate progress in the field by providing a venue
for the free exchange of ideas and methodologies. Funding from the NSF will
enhance the opportunities available for conference participation by students,
postdocs and other junior investigators, including members of underrepresented
groups in the sciences. In addition to providing updates on new findings in the
field, it is expected that the conference will both enhance existing, and foster
new interactions across a range of institutions and disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;