* 0948211
* Spectroscopic Elucidation of Electronic Structure Contributions to Electron Transfer and Oxo-Atom Transfer
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2010,08/31/2014
* Edward Solomon, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2014
* USD 739,509.00

This award by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms (CSDM) Program of
the Chemistry Division to Professor Edward I. Solomon of Stanford University
supports the use of a wide range of spectroscopic methods coupled with
electronic structure calculations to understand the unique spectral features of
metalloprotein active sites involved in biological electron transfer (ET) and
oxo atom transfer (OAT). Novel active site geometric and electronic structures
can make major contributions to reactivity. New spectroscopic methods are
developed as part of the program including: variable-temperature, variable-field
magnetic circular dichroism (VTVH MCD) to assign electronic transitions and use
excited states to probe ground states, sulfur K-edge x-ray absorption
spectroscopy (XAS) to experimentally define the covalency of ligand-metal bonds,
and metal L-edge XAS to quantify the delocalization of the different metal d
orbitals in highly covalent environments. This research project defines the ET
efficiencies of specific superexchange pathways in blue copper proteins and
experimentally determines the key factors that tune their reduction potentials
over hundreds of millivolts. The graduate students involved in the project
extend recent results on protein control of the thioether-Cu bond in blue copper
to the mixed-valent binuclear CuA center and to cytochrome c (cyt c) active
sites. The iron-sulfur bond in cyt c, its contribution in ET, and its role in
the peroxidase activity of cyt c in apoptosis is also under study. Solvent
tuning of the covalency of iron-sulfur bonds in iron-sulfur proteins and the
effects of the protein, DNA, S-adenosylmethionine, and ATP binding on the
bonding are evaluated to determine how these structures contribute to the
activation of the different ET functions of these clusters. Finally, the
research group experimentally calibrates electronic structure calculations and
uses experimentally-validated calculations to understand the oxo transfer
process and proton coupled ET in the oxo-Mo transferases and in the non-innocent
dithiolene ligation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is of fundamental
importance in understanding electron transfer and oxygen atom transfer in
biology and is relevant to human health (understanding and treating disease
states, apoptosis and photodynamic therapy, and DNA repair), biotechnology
(oxidoreductases and bio-fuel cells), and bioremediation (elimination of the
greenhouse gas, N2O). New spectroscopic techniques developed as part of this
research allow for the evaluation of computational methods that have
applicability across many scientific disciplines. These methods impact the
bioinorganic community through a wide range of collaborations. Professor Solomon
promotes new and novel spectroscopic methods during his lectures, book chapters,
and edited texts. There is also an organized effort to disseminate the
laboratory's expertise through Wikipedia. Within the community, the Solomon
group hosts Bay Area high school chemistry teachers in summer research and is
involved in establishing an apprenticeship program in collaboration with a youth
empowerment agency. This group promotes the scientific participation of minority
middle school students.