* 0948615
* Collaborative Research: Geodetic Constraints on the Tectonic Processes Operating at the East Flank of the Central Andean Plateau
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2014
* James Foster, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* David Fountain
* 03/31/2014
* USD 336,526.00

A team of scientists from Ohio State University and the University of Hawaii is
constructing a dense GPS network over the entire eastern flank of the Andean
Plateau within Bolivia and northernmost Argentina in order to address a variety
of questions about orogenic wedge processes and Andean plateaus margin
kinematics. The project will to study contemporary patterns of deformation in
the Andean Plateau, and focus on its eastern flank, which is comprise of the
Eastern Cordillera, the Interandean Zone, and the Subandes. To better understand
orogenic wedge processes they research team will: (1) determine whether a strong
eastern flank velocity gradient is a signal of a slipping-locked transition zone
on the basal decollement or of out-of-sequence thrusting; (2) measure
differences in the width of the active wedge north and south of the Santa Cruz
bend and determine its relationship to the differences in rainfall (as a proxy
for erosion) on either side of the bend; (3) assess mechanisms by which active
shortening is transferred from the deeper, inboard portions of a plateau to the
shallower outboard wedges. Andean plateau kinematics will be elucidated by: (1)
determination of the kinematic framework of the east flank of the Andean
plateau; (2) measurement of the variation of active shortening along-strike; (3)
assessment of the influence of paleogeography and foreland basin stratigraphy on
crustal displacement and foreland shortening; (4) examination of the
relationship between the absence of Paleozoic sediments in the foreland basin of
the Chapare region and the Cochabamba Shear Zone; (5) exploration for evidence
of extrusion tectonics in the main physiographic transition or topographic ramp
above the northern Subandes.

Orogenic plateaus have formed throughout much of geological history, and because
they are produced by massive crustal thickening accompanied by large scale
crustal melting, their formation plays an important role in the evolution of
continental crust. The best prospect for understanding the mechanisms
responsible for plateau orogenesis is the study of active continental plateaus,
such as the plateau in the central Andes. Current theories for the development
of this high plateau suggest either a slow two-stage uplift process or a rapid
uplift scenario. This study will provide data that will contribute to the
resolution of this controversy as well as improve understanding of the active
processes along the plateau's eastern margin. This project should lead to a
deeper understanding of the way that mountain belts and topographic plateaus
deform. The research should improve understanding of the generation of
earthquakes in the highly populated regions flanking high mountains.