* 0948350
* EAR-PF: Geologic Age Constraints for Seismic Hazard Assessment of Critical National Infrastructure
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2010,06/30/2012
* Dylan Rood, Rood                    Dylan          H
* Continuing Grant
* Lina Patino
* 06/30/2012
* USD 170,000.00

Dr. Dylan Rood has been awarded an NSF Earth Sciences Postdoctoral Fellowship to
carry out a research and education plan at the University of California, Irvine.
This work will develop a transformational new tool for earthquake hazard
analysis. The goal of this investigation is to produce a dataset of exposure
ages for well-characterized geologic features (precariously balanced rocks,
PBRs) using in-situ produced cosmogenic isotopes (10Be). Successful dating of
PBRs will allow ground motions from ancient earthquakes to be constrained over
timescales for which observational data do not exist. This chronology will be
synthesized with physics-based unexceeded ground motion estimates for each PBR
and compared to existing hazard maps. The results will validate ground motion
models and significantly reduce uncertainty in earthquake hazard estimates, in
turn, providing a firm scientific basis for probabilistic seismic hazard
assessment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PBRs have potential to be applied to seismic
hazard analysis for a wide range of the nation's critical infrastructure (e.g.
buildings, bridges, dams, etc.). Specifically, improved seismic hazard analysis
would greatly assist government regulators in successfully licensing sensitive
structures (e.g. nuclear power plants). This project will also support the
career development of a young scientist through mentorship and teaching
experience. Each year the fellow will teach Natural Disasters, a general
education course at University of California, Irvine. Course topics include
geologic hazards, including earthquakes and major climate changes. This research
and teaching strategy will help prepare the fellow for a career as a scientist
and educator in the Earth sciences.