* 0948456
* Fall Workshop on Computational Geometry 2009
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2009,03/31/2010
* Gill Barequet, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 03/31/2010
* USD 10,000.00

2009 Fall Workshop on Computational Geometry

Computational geometry has rapidly emerged as a field of intense research in
computer science and many related disciplines. Since many of the computations
associated with both real and simulated physical systems are geometric in
nature, research in computational geometry has been fueled by applications in
numerous fields, such as computer graphics, geometric modeling, molecular
biology, sensor networks, engineering design, robotics, machine vision, data
mining, and statistics, to mention just a few. All of these areas are on the
forefront of current research activity in computational geometry.

The Fall Workshop in Computational Geometry will be organized at the Department
of Computer Science of Tufts University, Medford, MA, November 13-14, 2009.

The aim of the workshop is to bring together researchers from academia and
industry, to stimulate collaboration on problems of common interest arising in
all areas of geometric computing. The proximity to many universities in the
Northeast will facilitate student involvement; requested funding is targeted
particularly at making the workshop accessible to students, both graduate and
undergraduate.

Following the tradition of the previous workshops on Computational Geometry, the
format of the workshop will be informal, extending over two days, with several
breaks scheduled for discussions. There will be a few (three to four) invited
speakers, selected to speak on topics of mutual interest in computational
geometry, computer graphics, and robotics. A key focus of the workshop will be
an Open Problem Forum in order to promote a free exchange of questions and
research challenges.

The workshop will have broader impact in its education and involvement of
students and young researchers, who will be exposed to the latest developments
in the field and will be given opportunities to present talks and posters on
their own work. The workshop is designed to promote collaborations between
computational geometry specialists and other experts in mathematical sciences
and related scientific and engineering disciplines, in hopes of forming new
alliances between the field of geometric algorithms and the many application
domains in which geometric problems and issues arise.

Further information, announcements, and the workshop program will be available
on the workshop website: http://www.cs.tufts.edu/research/geometry/FWCG09/

