* 0948532
* Collaborative Research: Eruptive Potential of Silicic Magmas: Thermodynamic and Fluid Dynamics Modeling, and Implications to the Evolution of Selected Natural Systems
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2013
* Josef Dufek, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2013
* USD 102,963.00

Magma eruptions are fascinating phenomena that have captured the attention of
humanity for millennia. They also represent a significant natural hazard. This
project is concerned with fundamental questions regarding eruptive systems: Why
do some silicic magmas erupt while others stall in the subsurface? Why do some
magmas erupt effusively (i.e. as lava flows) while others do so explosively? Are
these different magmas that are predestined to different eruptive potential and
style, or are they similar magmas subject to different contingencies? Much
attention has been given to the importance of external triggers (e.g.
earthquakes) in initiating eruptions. Many lines of evidence suggest, however,
that eruption triggers are only effective to the extent that a magma body is
already primed to the point where eruption is already very likely or inevitable.
The fundamental question that this project aims to address is what is the path
for priming of a magmatic body? The project will explore the importance of the
internal evolution (i.e. crystallization, bubble formation, and magma evolution)
of silicic magmas to eruptive potential, and in particular, to explosive
potential. A combination of thermodynamic and fluid dynamics modeling will be
employed, using selected natural systems as inspiration and guides to exploring
the parameter space of the models. While the research being conducted is
academic in nature, it will help further the understanding of the eruptive
potential of magmatic systems, and may eventually help volcanologists concerned
with systems that directly affect society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of this
project, a thermodynamic model that can appropriately describe the evolution of
high-silica systems will be developed, and it will be coupled with new and
existing models of the dynamics of the chamber itself and of its walls. Modeling
tools developed under this project will be made available to the scientific
community as standalone software, web services, and browser-based web clients
that will permit users to apply these tools to their own scientific questions
and teaching needs. Natural systems to be studied include the Bishop Tuff (CA),
Peach Spring Tuff (AZ-NV-CA), and the Highland Range Volcanics (NV), taking
advantage of their unique magmatic and eruptive histories to assess some of the
first order controls on the eruptive potential of silicic magmas.