* 0948399
* Icosahedral Virion Assembly
* BIO,MCB
* 01/15/2010,12/31/2015
* Bentley Fane, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 12/31/2015
* USD 981,002.00

The assembly of proteins and nucleic acids into viruses involves numerous
molecular interactions. Often assembly is dependent on scaffolding proteins.
Analogous to scaffoldings used in building construction, these proteins assist
assembly, but are not found in the final product. After the virus is
constructed, it can be regarded as a small machine. Its purpose is to deliver
genetic material into the target cell, which is achieved by a series of
programmed structural changes in viral proteins. The broad objective of this
research is to elucidate the molecular mechanisms of scaffolding-mediated viral
morphogenesis and DNA delivery, using the Microviridae, a family of small single
stranded DNA viruses. Alterations (mutations) have been designed into the
external scaffolding protein that confer dominant lethal effects. When the
mutant (antiviral) protein is present in infected cells, it is able to interact
with other viral proteins and unaltered scaffolding proteins (wild-type) to
block viral replication in a manner similar to antiviral chemicals. If wildtype
virus is continuously propagated in the presence of increasing concentrations of
the antiviral protein, it selects for a multiple mutant virus that is not only
highly resistant to the antiviral protein but is actually stimulated by it.
Thus, the virus is able to evolve a mechanism to convert an antiviral agent into
an assembly stimulator. Biochemical and genetic experiments will be conducted to
test a model that seeks to explain this phenomenon. The results of this study
should provide insights into the mechanism of viral assembly, protein
engineering and viral evolution. After the virus recognizes its target cell, the
DNA pilot protein delivers the viral genome into the cell. In a microvirus
infection the DNA pilot protein and genome are first deposited in the outer
membrane. The protein then directs the transport of the genome to the inner
membrane, which is the site of DNA replication. The mechanism by which the
protein accomplishes this function is largely unknown. During particle assembly,
the internal scaffolding protein incorporates 12 individual copies of the DNA
pilot protein into the forming virus. However, the results of biochemical and
genetic experiments indicate that the individual DNA pilot proteins must
associate with each other to deliver the viral DNA at the onset of infection.
The domain within the DNA pilot protein that most likely mediates this self-
association has been identified as well as the domain that initially interacts
with the host cell membrane. Biochemical, genetic and structural analyses will
be conducted to elucidate the mechanism of viral DNA delivery. Deciphering this
mechanism should have direct applications to the fields of nanotechnology and
protein engineering.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The project's broader impact
goes beyond the standard education of graduate and undergraduate students within
the investigator's program. The impact reaches the students enrolled in the
courses taught by the investigator. Incorporating research into curricula is
essential at larger universities, where undergraduates who desire research
opportunities far outnumber the available positions. Part of the proposed
research will be conducted in a virology laboratory course in which students
will conduct hypothesis-driven experiments that may uncover novel mutations and
assembly mechanisms. The educational paradigm for this course has already proven
successful, yielding a class-generated scientific manuscript and elevating
scientific literacy.&lt;br/&gt;