* 0948247
* The Relationship between Climate and Ice Rheology at Dome C, East Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2015
* Erin C Pettit, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Julie Palais
* 09/30/2015
* USD 459,161.00

Pettit/0948247&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a project to study of
the relationship between fabric and climate for the ice near the EPICA Dome C
ice core site, East Antarctica. The work builds on an ongoing study at Siple
Dome, West Antarctica and takes advantage of collaborations with European
scientists and access to the Dome C borehole to make measurements of sonic
velocity. The intellectual merit of the project is that a better understanding
of how fabric preserves past climate information can improve models of the ice
flow near ice core sites and the interpreta-tion of ice core data (particularly
paleo-accumulation), and it may allow us to extract climate information directly
from fabric data. In addition, because ice deformation is sensitive to the
orientation of crystals, ice flow patterns are sensitive to the fabric. Thus,
variations in the fabric between glacial and interglacial ice can affect how ice
deforms and how fabric in the ice sheet develops. The Dome C site is
particularly important for answering these questions, because the ice core shows
evidence of eight glacial cycles, not just one as found at Siple Dome or the
Greenland sites. The research will improve the understanding of the proxy
relationship between sonic-velocity data and fabric; will help to model the
pattern of ice flow caused by the fabric variation between glacial and
interglacial time periods using these data, existing ice core chemistry and
existing and new thin section data, improved surface strain data, and borehole
deformation data; and will help to better understand the positive feedback
mechanism that enhances fabric (and corresponding rheological) variability
through a focused study of several climate transitions and the associated fabric
changes. Borehole compressional-wave sonic-velocity will be measured which will
complement the sonic-velocity data that already exist for boreholes in Greenland
and West Antarctica. These will be the first sonic-velocity measurements in East
Antarctica and the first measurements that extend for more than a single
glacial/interglacial transition. The project will ultimately contribute to
better interpretation of ice core records for both paleoclimate studies and for
ice flow history, both of which connect to the broader questions of the role of
ice in the climate system. This project will also strengthen the international
collaborations within the paleoclimate and ice sheet modeling communities. This
project will partially support a graduate student at the University of Alaska
Fairbanks who is currently working on modeling ice including anisotropy and it
will support the growth of a young scientist through a Post-Doc position. This
Post Doc will gain important experience collaborating with the EPICA scientists
in studying the climate-fabric relationship. Erin Pettit is active in field-
science education for high school students, under-graduates, teachers, and
adults. This project will help support the continued development and enhancement
of Girls on Ice a program that encourages young women to explore science and the
natural world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;