* 0948619
* Collaborative Research: Toward an Understanding of the Long-Term Deformation in the Mississippi Embayment - Phase II
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2010,10/31/2013
* Brian Waldron, University of Memphis
* Continuing grant
* David Fountain
* 10/31/2013
* USD 316,456.00

Capitalizing on the success of a pilot study conducted in 2008, which tested the
feasibility of marine seismic data acquisition along the Mississippi River,
University of Memphis and University of Texas researchers are planning two field
programs to acquire approximately 600 km of high-resolution, marine seismic
reflection and sub-bottom profile data along the Mississippi River. The two
campaigns will image with unprecedented resolution the New Madrid Seismic Zone
active fault system and a series of inferred faults suspected to be responsible
for earthquake induced liquefaction features predating the seismic activity of
the New Madrid Seismic Zone. Exploiting the advantages of marine acquisition
(time effective, low cost), the new data will identify the location and timing
of deformation within the active fault system (which generates more than 200
magnitude 1.5-4.0 earthquakes a year), and outside the New Madrid Seismic Zone,
and contribute to the understanding of how long-term deformation is partitioned
in time and space among faults within the Mississippi Embayment. This
information is critical to solve the apparent paradox raised by the contrasting
evidence of small geodetic vectors, a puzzling lack of substantial deformation,
and the high level of instrumental and historical seismicity.

One of the pillars of plate tectonics is the assumption of the rigidity of major
plates. Indeed GPS studies show that most plate interiors behave rigidly and, as
a result, the majority of earthquakes occur along narrow or diffuse belts at
plate boundaries. Located in the heart of the North American continent and 2,000
km away from the nearest plate boundary, the New Madrid Seismic Zone is one of
the most active intraplate seismic areas in the world, and one of the most
notorious deviations from plate rigidity. Paleoseismological observations show
that the area experienced a series of catastrophic earthquakes in historic and
prehistoric time and evidence is mounting that the long-term seismicity is not
limited to the presently active fault system, but that large earthquakes have
occurred in other areas within the Mississippi Embayment, for which the
responsible fault (or system of faults) are yet to be identified. This study
will provide observational constraints on theoretical models proposed to explain
the timing, magnitude and location of intraplate seismicity in the Central
United States. The results of this project will also have a crucial impact for
earthquake hazard assessments by localizing and characterizing seismogenic
faults, and improving the quality and usefulness of seismic hazard maps.