* 0948639
* EAGER:  Cultural Issues in Sharing Expertise: Characterizing and Evaluating Online Question-Answer Communities
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Lada Adamic, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2013
* USD 237,752.00

This is an exploratory study of question and answer (Q&amp;A) communities, which
constitute one of the most interesting and pervasive forms of informal knowledge
production on the Web. The wide-scale adoption of the Web and of networking in
general has led to knowledge production on a scale never seen before. However,
the computer and information science research community lacks an understanding
of many of the characteristics of Internet-based knowledge production. It has
not yet been established which characteristics are important for knowledge
production, especially how expertise is arranged within these communities in
order to provide adequate information. It is also important to discover which
structural characteristics -- such as reward structures, participation rates,
and network of interactions -- influence knowledge production or expertise
provision. Researchers especially do not understand how cultural differences
affect these issues -- from participation, to motivation, to types of
interaction, to the likelihood users will remain on the site or change their
participation role.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A large number of Q&amp;A forums exist,
creating ample opportunities for cultural comparisons within similar topics. The
present work is necessarily explorative, as even the measures by which to
compare sites are unclear in the research literature, and relatively few cross-
cultural studies of online communities exist. While the ultimate goal of this
work is to design better systems and online spaces to support people in sharing
knowledge and expertise across cultural divides, a better understanding of
current use is first required. This project therefore consists of two phases.
The first phase investigates a number of Q&amp;A communities empirically to
understand their current use and to create metrics for cross-site comparison.
The second phase examines key issues believed to be influenced by culture,
including evolution of key users, points and incentives, and consistency of
participation, and cross-cultural differences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work
could add substantially to what is understood about Internet-scale communities.
It will examine how culture affects the distribution of expertise, knowledge
provision, and expertise networks. The network metrics to be developed will help
systematize the study of online communities and should find applications in
other areas of network science. As such, this exploratory work will lead to the
development of a deeper scientific understanding of knowledge production,
especially for informal knowledge, across cultures. It could also substantially
improve citizens' everyday lives, since Q&amp;A sites are vital for providing
immediate, everyday help and information to citizens, and help foster a more
productive knowledge economy.&lt;br/&gt;