* 0948158
* EAR-PF: Tracking rocks from depth to the surface: Coupled (U-Th)/(Pb-He) dating of monazite
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Emily Peterman, Peterman                Emily          M
* Continuing Grant
* Lina Patino
* 09/30/2013
* USD 170,000.00

Dr. Emily M. Peterman has been granted the NSF Earth Sciences Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a research and education plan at Stanford University.
This research will develop and calibrate a new technique to determine particle
paths within the crust from a single key mineral that is present in many rocks.
Monazite is a uranium- and thorium-bearing phosphate that can be analyzed by
multiple methods to provide isotopic age information that bear upon both the
timing of high-temperature crystallization and subsequent lower-temperature
cooling during crustal residence. Furthermore, the trace element and isotopic
composition of monazite can be linked to growth conditions within the crust. By
combining all of this information, the newly developed approach will improve our
ability to quantitatively reconstruct the spatial and temporal nature of crust-
forming processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This comprehensive analysis of the use
of monazite as a chronometer for elucidating the formation and evolution of
continental crust will impact a broad range of geoscience disciplines, including
tectonics, geomorphology, metamorphic petrology, landscape evolution and
continental dynamics. By improving the accuracy and precision of monazite
isotopic age analysis, this research will improve our ability to constrain
geodynamic models of crustal evolution. The details of the new methodology -
including the calibration of compositionally dependent effects - may have
application to other techniques, and should benefit the geoochronologic
community at large. Research methods developed in this project will be
integrated into a field-based course to be taught by Peterman in Death Valley.
Through this course, undergraduate and graduate students will be taught how to
collect samples, analyze data, and publish a paper that constrains the timing of
deformation along a major fault that exposes some of the deepest-known exposures
of southwestern North American crust. The results from this study will also be
incorporated into an outreach demonstration that uses coupled monazite
chronometry to provide an animated module that illustrates the mechanics, timing
and rates of processes responsible for creating dynamic orogens such as the
Himalaya.