* 0948676
* Timing, Rates, Episodicity, and Sediment Provenance of Subduction Accretion: Establishing a Geochronologic Framework for Long-term Accretion in the Franciscan Subduction Complex
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2010,05/31/2013
* Marty Grove, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 05/31/2013
* USD 145,163.00

The Franciscan subduction complex of California is the world's best studied
ancient accretionary prism. The extensive, diverse data sets from the Franciscan
are critical inputs for models for a very broad range of subduction-related
processes, complimenting geophysical and geologic studies of modern subduction
zones (which are almost entirely marine) and studies of other ancient on-land
subduction complexes. Critically, however, the Franciscan and most other
subduction complexes have proven very difficult to date and this severely
impedes interpretation of many aspects of their development. The last ten years
have seen major advances in several powerful geochronologic techniques that are
highly applicable to subduction complex rocks, including U-Pb dating of detrital
zircon grains from sandstones, U-Th-He dating of detrital zircons, 40Ar/39Ar
dating of micas, and Lu-Hf dating of garnet and lawsonite. This project involves
an integrated campaign to apply these methods to already well characterized
target units across the full width of the Franciscan complex, to units accreted
progressively from Jurassic through Miocene time. This new geochronologic
framework will effectively complement a very large body of existing Franciscan
work that is compromised by poor age control. The new zircon data will also be
highly complementary with other large detrital zircon data set being generated
from the Great Valley forearc basin, Klamath Province, Cordilleran foreland
basin, etc. Synthesized, these data sets will address such issues as: (1) What
was the chronology of accretion in this classic subduction system? What were
rates of accretion and how did they vary over time? (2) How did the tectonics
and paleogeography of the greater Franciscan-Great Valley-Sierra Nevada
subduction system evolve over 165 million years of geologic time? (30 How do
rates and episodes of accretion correlate with events in the Sierra Nevada
magmatic arc, Great Valley forearc basin, Cordilleran foreland, as well as
motions of Pacific basin paleoplates? (4) What were the sediment sources for
Franciscan metasedimentary rocks and how did they evolve over
time?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Subduction is the geologic process by which one of
the Earth's major tectonic plates moves beneath an adjacent plate and eventually
descends into the Earth's mantle, over time periods of tens of millions of
years. It is one of the most important global processes creating and modifying
the Earth's surface. It generates chains of volcanoes, sedimentary basins,
mineral deposits, and modifies the structure and composition of the crust and
mantle. Subduction-generated volcanoes, earthquakes, and tsunamis are among the
most severe natural hazards on Earth. Investigations of subduction processes use
two broadly complementary approaches. Modern, active subduction zones are
targets for geophysical, drilling, geologic, geochemical, and modeling studies,
but lay almost entirely beneath the ocean surface, which severely limits direct
observation. Ancient, extinct subduction zones are targets for extensive surface
mapping, sampling, and geophysical study. Some ancient subduction zones expose a
rock record of time-varying subduction over protracted periods sometimes
exceeding 100 million years. The goal of this project is to provide a greatly
improved framework of the ages of various rock subunits within the well-studied
ancient Franciscan subduction zone in California. This improved geochronologic
framework will allow much more robust interpretations of many other existing
data sets from this subduction zone.