* 0948366
* Early Career:  Acquisition of an Inductively Coupled Plasma - Mass Spectrometer (ICP-MS) for Research in Geochemical, Environmental, and Paleoenvironmental Geoscience
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2010,11/30/2013
* Daniel Bain, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 11/30/2013
* USD 171,469.00

0948366&lt;br/&gt;Bain&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will fund a new
inductively Coupled plasma-mass spectrometer (ICP-MS) which will significantly
increase sensitivity over the existing ICP-OES and allow synergistic analyses
with the institution's TIMS machine. The new instrument will support geochemical
investigations by multiple faculty. Trace elemental concentration measurements
will be made in precipitation, dry deposition, airborne particulate matter,
trace materials in natural waters, sediment digests and in sequential
extractions. The requested collision cell technology will assist in obtaining
signals from elements with polyatomic interferences such as iron and chromium.
An autosampler will improve throughput from multiple users. The acquisition will
be used to define human activity geochemical tracers - expanding the list of
potential tracers, particularly in surface hydrologic and atmospheric systems,
and facilitate cross-comparison between gaseous stable isotope tracer techniques
and trace metal/heavy stable isotope techniques. TIMS is currently used at the
University of Pittsburgh in order to understand a variety of isotope systems of
interest (B, Fe, Cr, Cd). The new ICP-MS will assist in measuring elements from
environmental samples and be complementary. Overall research goals involve
tectonic structuring and interpreting paleorecords, especially those indicating
responses to human forcings. Metal and metalloid flux through Earth systems is
of critical societal importance and touches on public health issues. This
request supports several early career PIs. K-12 education will be enhanced
through better understanding metal contaminants in Southwestern Pennsylvania.
Environmental water sampling and reporting will be made available to
stakeholders and policy makers and the general public. The ICP-MS
instrumentation will be made available to the larger local scientific community.
The instrument will also be incorporated into courses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***