* 0948896
* ULTRA-Ex:   Connectivity Along Urban Rivers:   A Keystone Process for Urban Ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2009,02/28/2013
* Joan Ehrenfeld, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 02/28/2013
* USD 299,886.00

Urban watersheds represent complex interactions between the flow of water and
materials within a river and its shoreline and the human organizations that
manage both the land and the river itself. While watershed analyses have
demonstrated how urbanization alters water quality, water flow and the ecology
in and adjacent to rivers, as well as how urban populations value, use and
manage rivers, there has been little research examining either ecological or
organizational connectivity along urban river systems. The patterns of both
ecological and organizational connectivity within an urban watershed can be
analyzed as networks and their structures then compared to produce a more
dynamic understanding of the complex interplay of human and ecological
processes. This project will examine the small, highly urban, Rahway River
watershed in New Jersey and measure ecological connectivity through a study of
seed dispersal and transport and organizational connectivity through a study of
government agencies and non-governmental organizations. Specific hypotheses
address factors that enhance or limit social and ecological connectivity that
will be tested through interviews of citizens and decision makers and ecological
sampling along the river system. Network analyses will be conducted to
understand the types of connectivity, including interruptions or failures of
connectivity, and analyze the congruence of the ecological and organizational
networks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will contribute to both basic
natural and social science, as well as to the management of urban watersheds.
Network analysis has not been applied to integrated social and natural
scientific data in such settings. The analyses of congruence will be novel and
important contributions to understanding linked social and ecological systems.
The project will also provide a basis for land managers to strengthen
organizational connections across jurisdictions needed to enhance ecological
connectivity. Both the theoretical and applied aspects of the project will
establish a foundation for more comprehensive work on the management of small
urban watersheds in the future. &lt;br/&gt;