* 0948091
* Workshop:  21st Annual on Interconnections within High-speed Digital Systems:  Support for Student Participation. To be Held in Sante Fe, New Mexico on May 2-5, 2010.
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Valencia Koomson, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Zygmunt J. Haas
* 12/31/2010
* USD 9,000.00

This proposal requests travel support for U.S. students, including graduate
students and post-doctoral researchers, to participate in the 21st Annual
IEEE/LEOS Workshop on Interconnections within High-speed Digital Systems to be
held May 2-5, 2010 in Sante Fe, New Mexico.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With respect to
intellectual merit, this workshop is of particular significance due to the
increasing demand for very high speed interconnects to support high data rate
communication and due to the growing importance of multi-core architectures,
which require high data rate interconnects. The multidisciplinary nature of the
problem domain is reflected in the workshop which brings together researchers in
semiconductor devices, processor architecture, three-dimensional packaging, and
optical-electronic integration. In addition to talks, posters, and tutorials,
the workshop features a "workshop problem" where participants interact through
small working groups to address a challenge problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With
respect to broader impacts, the proposed support improves the education of
graduate students and post-doctoral researchers through participation in the
multidisciplinary workshop and associated interaction with leading researchers
and other students. The workshop and associated travel support are to be
advertised through active outreach to minority serving institutions and
organizations focused on women and other students from underrepresented groups.
The selection process will emphasize broadening participation.