* 0948434
* EAGER: Efficient Pricing for Dynamic Resource Allocation in Transportation Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2012
* Ramesh Johari, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Sheldon Jacobson
* 12/31/2012
* USD 200,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of
2009.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Early Concept Grants for Exploratory Research
(EAGER) project will develop dynamic resource allocation models for
transportation systems. The focus will be on answering the question as to how
should pricing schemes be developed for transportation networks to align
individual incentives with socially optimal use of the network. Despite a
tremendous amount of attention to transportation network pricing and management,
the most widely-used models for traffic equilibrium remain static. The shift to
intelligent transportation systems necessitates a new class of traffic models,
where dynamic behavior is a first order modeling requirement. This EAGER project
will develop tractable pricing schemes for efficient dynamic resource allocation
in intelligent transportation systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent innovations
in information technology have opened the door to a new frontier of potential
research in transportation systems. Information technology enables drivers to
obtain real-time updates on traffic conditions, as well as to reconfigure their
route choices on the fly. On the other hand, the same information technology
options enable a new breed of networked control for transportation systems. By
providing intelligent feedback to drivers, transportation system designers hope
to control drivers? individual decisions and encourage harmonious and efficient
overall use of the roadways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;