* 0948826
* ULTRA-Ex: Collaborative Research: How Do Feedbacks Between Governance and Biophysical Systems Affect the Resilience of Urban Socioecological Systems?
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2010,02/28/2014
* Denise Lach, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2014
* USD 104,485.00

The rapid growth of urban concentrations poses major challenges to local and
global ecosystems and tests the very limits of governance. New urban growth can
reduce and fragment nonhuman habitats, introduce exotic organisms, and severely
modify energy flow and nutrient cycles, while urban development severely affects
hydrological cycles and air quality, reducing the capacity of an ecosystem to
absorb disturbance. These challenges will require that planners, program
designers, and environmental managers keep pace with the concomitant spatial,
political, and economic transformations while reducing the adverse ecological
impact of urban developments. In the face of these challenges, new forms of
complex social, political and economic decision making systems are evolving.
This interdisciplinary research project is designed to improve understanding of
resilience in urban socioecological systems, with the over-arching question: How
do human governance and biophysical systems respond interactively to both press
and pulse disturbances in urban socio-ecological systems? The investigators will
focus on Portland, Oregon, and Vancouver, Washington, two cities in a single
metropolitan area that have developed over the last 30 years under contrasting
policy regimes at the state, regional, and local levels. The investigators will
pursue three major research questions: (1) How do differences in local and state
levels of governance and policy affect the resilience of both social and
ecological landscapes? (2) How do alternative land-use planning strategies
affect provision of ecosystem services in response to different disturbance
factors? (3) How effectively do the processes and outcomes of monitoring
ecosystem services provide a usable feedback loop in urban socioecological
systems? Their research design will consist of four focused research projects
and two project-wide unifying activities. The first research project will
examine governance effects on the spatial pattern and timing of development at
the regional scale. The second project will examine relationships among
disturbances resulting from development and urban water quality. The third
project will focus on riparian vegetation changes, and the fourth project will
focus on green infrastructure, with both examining the exchange and use of
information and interactions among social actors at the city and neighborhood
scales. The two cross-cutting activities will complement the research projects
by focusing on how urban residents perceive and manage urban ecosystem
resources. The first activity will examine civic ecology and information for
decision making. The investigators will apply a common framework to all four
research projects to study how ecological information feeds back into societal
decision making. The second activity will engage secondary school teachers and
their students in the Portland-Vancouver region in urban environmental
restoration and research projects. The project will create and support networks
of teachers, youth, and organizations conducting ecological research and will
develop and test meaningful measures of how teacher and youth involvement in
ecological projects contributes to urban resilience.

The intellectual merit of the project includes micro-level and meso-level foci
on the connections among human perceptions, citizen engagement, and ecosystem
services in developing urban resilience, which should lead to insights about how
human systems adapt to disturbance. The study area, a metropolitan region
containing cities with contrasting governance systems and starkly different
land-use policies, is well suited for analysis and comparison of complex
interactions between social and ecological systems. Portland's "sustainability
mystique" will be scrutinized and assessed both socioeconomically and
ecologically. Inclusion of external forces of population growth and climate
change while simultaneously examining internal community adaptations will help
identify unanticipated feedback loops or failures. The broader impacts of this
project will include creation of a network of learners in urban areas that cross
jurisdictional, disciplinary, institutional, and geographic boundaries. Research
findings will be put in place experimentally and institutionally by cities and
metropolitan agencies interested in building on the synergies found in
integrative approaches to management. These results should help break down past
divisions between socioeconomic and ecological thinking and help improve
understanding and application of factors controlling how human governance
affects socioecological resilience in urban areas. This award was funded as an
Urban Long-Term Research Area Exploratory (ULTRA-Ex) award as the result of a
special competition jointly supported by the National Science Foundation and the
U.S. Department of Agriculture Forest Service.