* 0948415
* CAREER:  Visual Pattern Recognition Models for Remote Sensing of Civil Infrastructure
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2010,12/31/2013
* Ioannis Brilakis, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Konstantinos Triantis
* 12/31/2013
* USD 402,279.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award
is the creation of pattern recognition models that will automate the recognition
of civil infrastructure-related elements based on the knowledge of 3D surfaces
from remote sensing, and visual features from pattern recognition. In other
words, the intellectual merit of this project lies in the creation of the
missing link between remote sensing and pattern recognition that will automate
the transformation of 3D surfaces into information rich, 3D element models with
the help of machine vision. The main contribution of this project is that,
instead of manually recognizing each element every time it is encountered, we
need only recognize its characteristics once and automatically detect it each
subsequent time. This is analogous to defining an alphabet (letters =
characteristics) so that this project will build the words (element models) and
find them in a text (3D surface), instead of having to manually find the words
in every text we encounter. The benefit comes from the ability to reuse the
known letters (characteristics) and words (element models) every time we have a
new text (3D surface).

The immediate advantage that will result from this work is the ability to
automate the element recognition step of the "as-built" model generation
process. The National Academy of Engineering recently listed "Restoring and
Improving Urban Infrastructure" as one of the Grand Challenges of Engineering in
the 21st century. Two of the greatest issues that cause this grand challenge are
the need for more automation in construction, through advances in computer
science and robotics, and the lack of viable methods to map and label existing
infrastructure. Over two thirds of the effort needed to model even simple
infrastructure is spent on manually converting surface data to a 3D model. The
result is that as-built models are not produced for the vast majority of new
construction and retrofit projects, which leads to rework and design changes
that cost up to 10% of the installed costs. Any efforts towards automating the
modeling process will increase the percentage of infrastructure projects being
modeled and, considering that construction is a $900 billion industry, each 1%
of increase can lead up to $900 million in savings.