* 0948581
* Collaborative Research: An Exhumed Field Example of Heterogeneous Lower Crustal Flow, Athabasca Granulite terrane, Canada
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2010,04/30/2014
* Kevin Mahan, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 04/30/2014
* USD 234,985.00

The role played by Earths lower crust (>25-30 km depth) in the dynamic
evolution of continents is a fundamental target in Earth sciences. In
particular, pervasive ductile flow of the lower crust has been proposed in many
tectonically active regions around the world in order to reconcile topography
and other surface geologic and climatic processes with lithospheric-scale
geodynamic and geophysical data sets. Although commonly modeled homogeneously in
two-dimensions, natural observations suggest that this process is fundamentally
heterogeneous (e.g., with lateral boundaries and internal gradients in the flow
field). In this project, we seek to document the spatial variation and physical
characteristics of this heterogeneity in an exposed example of lower crustal
flow so that this process may be more easily recognized remotely (i.e.,
seismically) in the deep crust of active tectonic regions. Two graduate students
will base their dissertations on this work, and undergraduate students will
participate as field assistants and as researchers in sample analysis and
modeling.

The Athabasca Granulite Terrane in the western Canadian Shield is arguably the
largest exposure of lower continental crust in North America. Within this
terrane, a gently dipping and locally pervasive granulite-facies deformation
fabric records sub-horizontal ductile flow at 30-40 km paleodepth. The Cora Lake
shear zone is a distinct kilometer-scale sub-vertical zone of high-grade strike-
slip deformation that is thought to be kinematically compatible and co-eval with
the adjacent sub-horizontal flow fabrics. We hypothesize that 1) the early
history of the Cora Lake shear zone is an analog for heterogeneity and strain
partitioning in some modern lower crustal flow regimes and 2) that the fabric
intensity and scale of the shallow and steep fabric domains are sufficient for
seismic observation. We will test these hypotheses with three objectives: 1)
detailed field mapping with the goal of constructing a map of lower crustal flow
and especially flow heterogeneity, 2) Pressure-Temperature-time-Deformation
modeling in order to constrain the depth and temporal evolution of heterogeneous
flow, and 3) petrophysical analysis and synthetic seismic modeling in order to
constrain the rheological evolution of the deep crust and illuminate how similar
structures may be recognized and interpreted through seismic anisotropy methods.
The ultimate goal is a model for the development of these structures in lower
crust and for the evolution of their rheological and seismic properties.

