* 0948229
* ULTRA-Ex: Collaborative Research: Reconciling Human and Natural Systems for the Equitable Provision of Ecosystem Services in the Triangle of North Carolina
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2009,03/31/2015
* George Hess, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 03/31/2015
* USD 240,349.00

Human well-being is tied inextricably to the delivery of ecosystem services,
which provide a key connection between human and natural systems. Urban
populations are simultaneously increasing demand on and reducing the capacity of
natural systems to provide valued ecosystem services, contributing to an urgent
call for local and regional policy and management solutions to be at the
forefront of scientific investigation. The boundaries of human institutions
rarely coincide with natural boundaries, however, making the management of
coupled human and natural systems a challenge. These two systems also are scaled
differently: human institutions tend to make decisions that are "fast and
local,"? while the environmental consequences of these decisions tend to be
regional and long-term. The overarching goal of this collaborative research
project is to begin to reconcile the spatial and temporal disparities between
human and natural systems, with a focus on social and environmental equity
issues that arise when markets and policy instruments control the supply and
demand of ecosystem services. This project will focus on the Triangle Region of
North Carolina, which has 45 municipal and 7 county governments with an
institutional mechanism for collaborative management. The region is experiencing
high population growth, putting increasing demands on ecosystem services and the
human institutions responsible for managing their supply and distribution. The
investigators will use a three-part framework that addresses (1) the production
of ecosystem services by ecological systems; (2) their valuation and
monetization by people; and (3) the design, implementation, and evaluation of
policies to pay for and allocate these benefits equitably. Project objectives
are to apply this framework in a case study of the ecosystem service of clean
water production in collaboration with state and local government agencies; to
further develop a network of collaborators through a series of four community
workshops focused on ecological, economic, policy, and synthesis topics; and to
develop an integrated data platform that will serve researchers, government
agencies, and ultimately the public at large. The investigators will employ
empirical and process-based modeling, field sampling, remote sensing, geographic
information systems, social surveys, and geo-demographic analyses to achieve
their objectives.

This project is expected to contribute to a richer understanding of the
production of ecosystem services as a function of spatially integrated built and
natural environments and to set the foundation for a multi-disciplinary and
policy-relevant program focused on managing coupled human and natural systems.
The initial case study on land use and water quality will embrace many of the
central challenges in urban ecology today, including issues of scale, spatial
processes, and system-level feedbacks. Over the longer term, the effort to map
the flow of ecosystem services from where they are produced to where they are
consumed will set a new standard for spatially explicit valuation. This project
will help resolve questions about feedbacks between human behavior and
institutions and ecosystem processes in the spatially structured environment of
urban systems. The information produced during the course of this project will
help land-use planners and policy makers to identify the most appropriate areas
for land-use controls aimed at protecting water quality, to more equitably
distribute the costs of producing clean water, and to create policy to support
the equitable distribution of the costs and benefits of clean water. Overall,
project results will help provide the scientific basis for emerging policy
instruments and markets for ecosystem services and to help guide land-use
planning decisions in the Triangle Region. This award was funded as an Urban
Long-Term Research Area Exploratory (ULTRA-Ex) award as the result of a special
competition jointly supported by the National Science Foundation and the U.S.
Department of Agriculture Forest Service.

