* 0948290
* Collaborative Research: Seismogenesis of the Middle America Trench at the Nicoya Peninsula over multiple seismic cycles
* GEO,OCE
* 01/15/2010,12/31/2011
* James Spotila, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 12/31/2011
* USD 109,524.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work would use onshore geologic
evidence from the Nicoya Peninsula to address basic questions related to
subduction along a 100-km-long part of the Middle America Trench. The work
includes the following components: (1) Paleoseismology: This part of the project
will investigate pre-historic earthquake size and recurrence using the
stratigraphy and paleoecology of an estuary. (2) Paleogeodesy: As part of the
paleoseismic investigation, the study would investigate relative sea level
change on the Nicoya Peninsula to assess patterns of vertical ground motion
during intervals between earthquakes. (3) Morphotectonics and long-term uplift:
The study will test the relationship of long-term deformation to earthquake
generation. All of these techniques will be combined to define the pre-historic
rupture behavior along the subduction zone.&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;This project includes the training of a Ph.D. student.
Undergraduate students will participate in the field program. There is a large
component of international collaboration with colleagues in Costa Rica. A
workshop for students from the US and Costa Rica will be organized, and a field
school for the students will be held at the research site. The study is
important for understanding seismic hazards in Costa Rica. &lt;br/&gt;