* 0948548
* III/EAGER: TwitterStand: Separating the Wheat from the Chaff in Breaking News
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Hanan Samet, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2012
* USD 216,000.00

Twitter is an electronic medium that allows a large user populace to communicate
with each other simultaneously. Inherent to Twitter is an asymmetrical
relationship between friends and followers thereby provides an interesting
social network-like structure among the users of Twitter. Twitter messages,
called tweets, are restricted to 140 characters and thus are usually very
focused. Twitter is becoming the medium of choice for keeping abreast of rapidly
breaking news. This project explores the use of Twitter to build a news
processing system from Twitter tweets. The result is analogous to a distributed
news wire service. The difference is that the identities of the
contributors/reporters are not known in advance and there may be many of them.
The tweets are not sent according to a schedule. The tweets occur as news is
happening and are noisy while usually arriving at a high throughput rate.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this exploratory research project is to find
effective methods for making Twitter a useful news gathering mechanism.
Challenges addressed in this project include: removing the noise; determining
tweet clusters of interest bearing in mind that the methods must be online; and
determining the relevant location associated with the tweets.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broad impact of this research is to make it easier to
disseminate late breaking news and enhancing the distributed news gathering and
reporting process. Web site (http://www.cs.umd.edu/~hjs/hjscat.html) reports
results of this and related research.