* 0948526
* An Integrated Analysis of Seismicity, Infrasound, and High-Resolution SO2 Measurements to Determine the Source of Low-Frequency Seismicity at Villarrica Volcano, Chile
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2014
* Simon Carn, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 01/31/2014
* USD 222,163.00

Volcanoes produce a rich variety of seismic signals that are unlike those
generated during typical earthquakes. While great improvements in the ability to
forecast volcanic eruptions have come from recognizing precursory seismic
signals, knowledge of the specific mechanisms responsible for the volcanic
signals is only generally understood. For example, low-frequency seismic tremor
is linked to fluid movement, but many models can explain seismic tremor at any
one volcano. By integrating high-resolution seismic, acoustic, and gas emission
data, this study will determine the relationship between gas flux and the
characteristics of seismic tremor at Villarrica volcano.

Villarrica has had persistent gas emission and an active lava lake with
continuous, mild, explosive activity since 1984. Because of the continuous low-
level activity, direct measurements of emissions of gas, seismicity, and low-
frequency sound (infrasound) can safely be made from the summit crater. This
study will use simultaneous measurements of seismicity, infrasound and gas
emissions. The researchers will deploy arrays of broadband stations to locate
and track the depth of low-frequency and volcano-tectonic seismicity, along with
distributed infrasonic microphones to characterize the explosive outgassing
activity. During 2-3 week field campaigns, they will also collect high-time
resolution SO2 emission data, and thermal and visual video of the outgassing
activity. All these data will be interpreted jointly to characterize and
quantify different styles of outgassing. A 15-month deployment of seismometers
and microphones will assure that a significant portion of the outgassing styles
is well sampled. The classification scheme for outgassing style they develop
during the shorter field campaigns will allow them to calculate a proxy data set
for gas emission during the full duration of the deployment so that they may
address questions about long-term cycles of activity and the relationship
between both deeper local volcanic earthquakes and distant earthquakes on the
volcanic system.

The transformative potential of this project lies in the integration of these
data. The seismic analysis will be based on the strong foundation of established
techniques. Infrasound analysis is now seen as critical for monitoring open-vent
systems, yet some aspects of infrasound data are not well understood. A novel UV
camera, recently developed with support from the National Science Foundation,
can image SO2 emission at a rate comparable to eruptive processes. By
establishing empirical links between the data, this study will test theoretical
models for the generation of seismicity and sound from gas emission and generate
important new knowledge on eruptive processes.