* 0948092
* Collaborative Research: Testing for Rapid Pulses of Crustal-scale Heat and Mass Transfer by Fluids in Metamorphic "Hot Spots", New Hampshire, USA
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2014
* Jay Ague, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 07/31/2014
* USD 216,598.00

Intellectual Merit.  This project addresses the role of H-O-C fluids in heat
transfer associated with formation of a Paleozoic belt of metamorphic 'hot
spots' exposed in a north-south transect across New Hampshire (NH). At each of
these localities, steep gradients in metamorphic temperature and rock
geochemistry are centered on syn-metamorphic quartz±graphite vein networks.
Chamberlain and Rumble (1988) proposed the hypothesis that these features
represent zones where large quantities of hot fluids ascended through fracture
networks during Acadian regional metamorphism. On the other hand, numerical
modeling studies have shown that typical regional metamorphic devolatilization
is unlikely to transport sufficient heat to strongly perturb regional geotherms.
It would appear that hot spots can only be produced if the fluid fluxes are
enormous and the timescales of flow are extremely short, but it is unknown if
such fluxes and timescales are realistic. A multidisciplinary approach is
proposed to test this hypothesis. Field work will focus on well-exposed hot spot
localities near Bristol and Nelson, NH. The hypothesis must pass five crucial
tests. (1) Fluid fluxes must have been large. Time-integrated fluid fluxes
through veins will be estimated by quantifying chemical and isotopic (O, H) mass
transfer in the vein networks. (2) Fluid flow must have been in a direction of
decreasing temperature. The nature and extent of chemical and isotopic
metasomatism will determine the direction of fluid flow, and elucidate fluid
sources and pathways. (3)  Timescales of flow must have been short (&lt;10^6
yrs). The absolute timing of hot spot formation will be determined using Sm/Nd
dating of garnet in metamorphic rocks, and U/Pb dating of monazite and zircons
in metamorphic rocks and any magmatic dikes in the field areas. Furthermore,
chemical diffusion profiles in calcite, apatite, and garnet will be used to
constrain timescales of peak heating. (4) The timing of peak thermal conditions
must have been nearly synchronous across isograds (test via Sm/Nd and U/Pb
dating). (5) Metamorphic pressures must have been roughly constant across
isograds at the present level of exposure. Thermobarometry will be done to
determine peak conditions, regional T/P gradients, and P-T-t paths. Knowledge of
the time-integrated fluid fluxes and timescales of flow will allow estimation of
the actual fluid fluxes through the hot spots as well as gradients in the fluxes
across the field areas. This information, together with the P-T-t history,
age(s) of fluid flow, and field relations, will provide the initial and boundary
conditions needed for modeling of fluid flow (2-dimensional) and its effect on
regional thermal structure. If the hypothesis fails then other alternatives will
be investigated, including magmatism and upwelling of lower crustal gneiss
domes. The Ague lab will take primary responsibility for thermobarometry, mass
transfer analysis, and diffusion and flow modeling; the Baxter lab for Sm/Nd
garnet dating; and the Chamberlain lab for stable isotope and U/Pb
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts.  Large fluid fluxes poentially
transport mass as well as heat. Therefore, if correct, the hypothesis of fluid-
driven heating would bear on problems of societal relevance including ore metal
transport and the transfer of greenhouse gases out of metamorphic belts. Human
resources will be developed because Ph.D. graduate student and undergraduate
involvement is critical. PIs and students will take part in field work and, in
Years 2 and 3, coordinate "group meetings" at international conferences. All of
the PIs have advised women students and are committed to diversity, including
the involvement of underrepresented minority groups in science. Ague spearheaded
development of the new Hall of Minerals, Earth, and Space (HoMES) at the Yale
Peabody Museum, allowing integration of new research results into Earth science
displays viewed by over 150,000 visitors annually. A large fraction of these
visitors are schoolchildren, many of whom live in the urban centers of New
Haven, Bridgeport, and other Connecticut cities. Moreover, Ague has separate NSF
funding to develop educational programs based on the new Hall for area
schoolteachers. Baxter will incorporate the field area into his annual "RoBOT:
Rocks Beneath Our Toes" outreach program as a part of his Fall mineralogy class.
The program engages Boston area high school students and BU undergraduates.