* 0948781
* ULTRA-Ex: Human-Nature Interactions in an Urbanized Island Setting: Hilo and Kailua-Kona, Hawai'i as Model Socio-Ecological Systems
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2009,03/31/2013
* Marian Chertow, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 03/31/2013
* USD 145,416.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The pervasive and growing influence of
humans on ecosystem functioning and the concurrent decrease in the extent of
"natural" areas have prompted a reconceptualization of the long-term study of
ecosystems to include a human dimension. Human systems interact with "natural"
systems directly through the extraction and disposal of material, water, and
energy resources and indirectly through changes in land use and land cover.
These interactions are concentrated and magnified in urban areas. Human-
dominated socioecological systems often are characterized by complex patterns of
resource flows and landscape alteration, processes that can be difficult to
track, quantify, and link to ecological impacts as a result of the multiple
entry and exit points through which resources may pass, the rapid pace of growth
in many urban areas, and the general difficulty in obtaining representative
data. In this light, the "big island" of Hawai'i provides a model setting to
test theories about human impacts on the earth system and about resource
constraints on urban growth. Resource management issues are of critical concern
for the island of Hawai'i, which holds only a ten-day reserve of food supplies
and maintains the highest electricity rates in the country. By focusing on the
island's two major urban areas, Hilo and Kailua-Kona, this interdisciplinary
research project will provide a comparative analysis of the structure and
function of two socioecological systems related through resource exchanges,
geographic proximity, and historical and contemporary cultural configurations.
Although similar in population and area, these areas have markedly different
socioeconomic and biophysical characteristics. In recent years, Hilo has
struggled with the demise of the sugarcane industry and the transition from a
plantation economy to a more diversified base, while Kailua-Kona has experienced
explosive growth fueled by its attractiveness as an international tourist and
second-home destination. Based on the island of Hawai'i's clear physical
boundaries, limited number of entry points, relatively small geographic area,
biological wealth and fragility, and relative isolation, the Hilo and Kailua-
Kona provide a comprehensible living laboratory for the two principal objectives
of this project, which are (1) to analyze the material, water, and energy
throughput of these two urban areas quantitatively over the past 200 years; and
(2) to analyze past, present, and potential human-induced landscape change in
these areas geospatially. Material and energy flow analysis, a tool drawn from
industrial ecology, will be used to track the input, output, conversion, and
accumulation of materials, energy, and selected substances through each urban
system. Land-use and land-cover dynamics will be analyzed by coupling remote
satellite imagery, statistical demographic data, and biophysical data for both
cities. Information and data for these objectives will be collected from
historical archives, statistical databases, and a number of stakeholders,
including county agencies, local businesses, and community members.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An understanding of resource flows and landscape
modification has the potential to transform the ways in which society interacts
with the "natural" world by explicitly measuring the ways in which the
activities of human society affect ecosystems and the ways in which ecosystem
changes produce feedback in the human system. Essential to this process is the
linkage of scientific findings with local communities and their particular
sustainability challenges. With two locally embedded partners devoted to science
education in Hawai'i, this project will be a platform for developing awareness
of the issues faced on the island of Hawai'i by providing cross-disciplinary and
multi-cultural educational initiatives for a diverse group of local and national
students, teachers, and decision makers. In addition to informing policies that
encourage ecological and socioeconomic prosperity, this project will also
contribute to the advancement of socioecological and land-change science
theories by applying a novel, comparative approach to the quantitative analysis
of human-nature interactions. This award was funded as an Urban Long-Term
Research Area Exploratory (ULTRA-Ex) award as the result of a special
competition jointly supported by the National Science Foundation and the U.S.
Department of Agriculture Forest Service.