* 0948601
* EAGER:  Spatial Awareness Through Sapient Interfaces
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Xiaolong (Luke) Zhang, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2012
* USD 149,705.00

Spatial awareness is the key to successful orientation and wayfinding. While
navigation through familiar terrain allows us the luxury of reaching our
destination without guidance, unfamiliar or only partially familiar environments
require the use of external spatial information, which is most often presented
verbally or in the form of maps. If we were to ask a knowledgeable local person
for directions the information imparted to us might point out some landmarks
along the way or inform us about a structuring present in the street names
(e.g., that they are alphabetically ordered). People have long exploited the
capability to recognize salient objects, and to use those objects to understand
a space and guide their actions. But mobile GPS-based navigation systems
typically overlook our abilities in spatial knowledge construction and
application. The growing popularity of such devices has resulted in an
increasing dependence on individual location-action pairs (e.g., turn left here)
to guide us step by step; this has the drawback of not affording an overall
understanding of the spatial environment, which in emergency situations, for
example, may prove harmful. With spatial information now available in a much
wider array of formats, with better currency and increased fidelity, it is time
to rethink how to provide spatial information for orientation and wayfinding
from the perspective of creating spatial awareness, via what the PI refers to as
sapient interfaces. In this project the PI will explore first steps toward this
goal, by drawing on theories from different fields that contribute to our
understanding of the cognition of spaces. The central research question to be
addressed is: How can spatial awareness be supported by a mapping system that
focuses on the cognitively ergonomic organization and presentation of spatial
information? The PI will seek a systematic understanding of the factors
contributing to the development of spatial awareness (e.g., object saliency),
and to identify principles and derive design guidelines for mobile navigation
mapping systems that focus on the cognitively ergonomic organization and
presentation of spatial information. A critical part of the research will be the
cross-validation of formal approaches to spatial analysis; project outcomes will
include a theoretical foundation of spatial awareness that is grounded in formal
spatial analysis measures.

Broader Impacts: The growing dependence on GPS-based navigation systems has
negative impacts on our ability to think spatially, because current devices
provide information in a manner that fails to build an understanding of spatial
relations. This project will rethink the way in which spatial information is
provided by such systems, so as to foster rather than impede spatial thinking
and to thereby avoid spatial illiteracy in coming generations.