* 0948345
* EAR-PF: Dynamics and melting of the upper mantle: Relating the length scales of compositional heterogeneity in the crust and mantle
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2012
* Todd Bianco, Bianco                  Todd           A
* Continuing Grant
* Lina Patino
* 08/31/2012
* USD 170,000.00

Dr. Todd A. Bianco has been granted an NSF Earth Sciences Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a research and education plan at Brown University. Using
computer simulations of mantle dynamics, rock melting and melt transport, this
project will test how different size distributions in mantle heterogeneity
affect crust composition. Further, the project will address how realistic
processes of melt migration amplify or dampen the signature of mantle
composition and mantle dynamics in crust composition. The computer simulations
will solve conservation of mass, momentum, and energy in a three dimensional
space with properties that capture the rheologic, temperature, and density
variations in the upper mantle. In addition, the simulation will include
discrete domains of compositional heterogeneity of varying sizes. Predictions
from computational simulations will be compared to observations of crust
composition at a variety of tectonic settings such as a mid-ocean ridge, and
anomalously thick seafloor. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mantle convection controls
much of the evolution of earth, and therefore is an essential piece to
understanding observations of the current state of the earth. The size and
distribution of compositional heterogeneity in the mantle gives a picture of the
state of mantle convection over time. Therefore, by quantifying the relationship
between observed compositional variation in the crust with inferred variation in
the mantle, this project will, in a broader sense, improve our understanding of
how the earth has evolved. In addition the PI will provide undergraduate
research opportunities at Brown University, the host institution for the
project, as well as research experience to local teachers through Brown
University's NSF-funded GK-12 program.