* 0948820
* EAGER:  Machines that Learn and Teach Seamlessly
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2011
* Avelino Gonzalez, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2011
* USD 100,000.00

This proposed work seeks to develop a computational approach that can be used to
learn a skill from humans and, through the same medium, turn around and teach
other less proficient humans what it learned. The learning and teaching will be
done through agents that contain the knowledge relevant to the desired skills.
Such an agent can be referred to as a learning and teaching agent (LATA). The
work plans to accomplish this through two sequential approaches: 1)
observational learning (by the agent only), and 2) force feedback learning and
teaching. Observational learning will be used to build a minimally proficient
LATA agent by observing a human perform the desired task or display the desired
skill on a simulator. This agent will be called the baseline agent. This
baseline agent will then be enhanced through force feedback learning, where a
human will coach the system by providing corrective counter force in real time
when the LATA agent errs in its performance of the task. The skills to be
learned/taught will require the use of a haptic device such as a joystick or
steering wheel as the primary interface. It will learn the actions that the
trainer employs to execute the task competently, and use the same haptic device
to coach and/or evaluate a less proficient human trainee in learning the same
skill. The planned approach centers on using neuroevolutionary techniques.
Neuroevolution has been successfully used to address highly complex problems
such as pole balancing, abnormal behavior in drivers, and to evolve bots in
video games that gradually improve their performance. The proposed work will
modify the basic concept of neuroevolutionary techniques as necessary, and apply
the resulting system to observational learning as well as force feedback
refinement. The testbed domain will be a crane that off-loads boxes or
containers from a ship and places them in some other conveyance such as a
railroad car or truck. A computer simulation will be used for teaching the LATA
agents how to do this. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Instructors are increasingly
difficult to find, especially for specialty areas that require special skills.
From a practical standpoint, this research would give organizations involved in
training new tools to teach their constituents. Specific beneficiaries of this
technology would include organizations that train students to perform tasks
requiring complex motor skills such as driving a car, flying an airplane or
operating a crane. The resulting agents could also be used to train operators of
tele-operated robots, cranes, unmanned aerial vehicles and other such devices.
Surgery training is another potential application of this approach given the
appropriate haptic devices. Another interesting application could be for
training disabled people basic motor skills.&lt;br/&gt;