* 0948543
* Collaborative Research: A Closer Look at the May 18th, 1980 Pumice Plain Deposits: Implications for Assessing Eruptive Conditions and Pyroclastic Density Current Dynamics
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2013
* Josef Dufek, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 12/31/2013
* USD 128,398.00

Pyroclastic density currents, PDCs, are ground-hugging mixtures of hot gases and
pyroclastic material that propagate at high velocities down the flanks of
volcanoes. While PDCs are some the most hazardous volcanic phenomenon, they are
challenging to study because the voluminous amounts of ash produced during an
eruption hinders visual observation of the interior flow dynamics. Consequently
much of the understanding of PDC dynamics comes from analysis of the deposits
they produce. The May 18, 1980 eruption at Mount St. Helens has had a
significant impact on the world's awareness and understanding of explosive
eruptions, and study of the eruptive products produced during this eruption has
aided our interpretation of deposits from many other eruptions. Earlier studies
of the PDCs produced during this eruption were correlated with changes in
eruptive intensity and behavior. Since then, however, deeply incised drainages
have provided new, extensive exposures that contain important information about
the currents that produced them, allowing for a more complete study of these
deposits to take place. This project represents a multidisciplinary approach to
better understand PDC dynamics at one of the best-documented eruptions. It is
planned to combine the estimates of mass flux, detailed measurements of recently
exposed strata, including ground penetrating radar studies, and multiphase
numerical modeling techniques to better constrain the dynamics of the PDCs
produced on May 18th. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In particular, this proposal focuses
on three questions regarding the transport of PDCs. 1) How is flow intensity and
concentration related to the transport capacity of lithic clasts, and how does
this lead to current segregation and density stratification with distance from
source? One of the striking observations of many PDC deposits is the very large
(&gt; 1 m) pumice and lithic clasts that are embedded within the finer-grained
matrix. The advent of new multiphase numerical techniques allows for a better
accounting of particle trajectories from the vent to their eventual deposition.
This information will be combined with a careful analysis of the grain size
distribution and architecture of recently exposed deposits to better explain the
conditions necessary to transport these large lithics. 2) How much clast
comminution occurs during PDC transport, and how does this influence subsequent
dynamics? When volcanic particles collide or slide past each other they tend to
break up, or comminute. The cumulative effect of this process is rounding of
large particles and the production of a higher percentage of fine ash in the
current. Early models suggest that this higher fine ash proportion can generate
emergent dynamics in these flows, resulting in greater runout distances.
Detailed correlation between the units and source conditions make Mount St.
Helens an excellent candidate for detailed roundness studies, which in turn will
yield information about the small-scale momentum transfer in these flows. 3) How
does the self-channelization of PDCs influence transport distance? It is
hypothesized that self-channelization, aided by the ease of the erosion of
recently deposited unconsolidated pyroclasts, played a role in some of the
largest Mount St. Helens PDCs. Improved maps of newly exposed gully cross-
sections, ground-penetrating radar, and multiphase simulations will provide
further information on St. Helens PDC self-channelization and flow feedback. In
summary, the combined modeling-field study of Mount St. Helens will improve the
general understanding of transport and deposition in PDCs. The results of this
work will advance our knowledge and ability to assess the hazards related to
PDCs in similarly explosive eruptions elsewhere, including relative runout
distance and quantification of fine ash produced during lateral transport, which
has significant relevance aviation hazard assessment and potential climactic
effects.