* 0948190
* EAGER: Mathematical Models for Large-Scale Service Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Ward Whitt, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Barton
* 07/31/2011
* USD 250,001.00

This grant provides funding for the development of mathematical models and
analysis methods for large-scale service systems, such as customer contact
centers and hospitals, which have many "servers" working in parallel (e.g.,
agents or nurses). These models will be applied to develop algorithms to
determine optimal staffing levels and to perform real-time delay estimation to
use in staffing and making delay announcements. These algorithms will be
evaluated by making comparisons to computer simulations. The models will be
many-server queueing systems, which capture essential features of realistic
service systems such as randomness in the arrival and service times, but not the
full operational complexity because they have only a single large pool of
homogeneous servers and a single class of homogeneous customers. Special
emphasis will be given to realistic features that can have a big impact on
performance but make these models difficult to analyze, including time-varying
arrival rates, customer abandonment and non-exponential probability
distributions. To address these complications, asymptotic methods will be
exploited, leading to fluid and diffusion approximations.

If successful, the results of this research will ultimately lead to improvements
in the design and management of service systems, leading to more efficient
operations. The long-term goal is to establish a sound scientific basis for
resource allocation (e.g., staffing) in service systems, which balances the cost
of the congestion experienced by customers and the cost of providing the
resources. The goal is to develop new design principles, control policies and
mathematical methods for improving system performance. If successful, the
research will demonstrate the advantage of the asymptotic approach as a way to
effectively reduce the complexity of large-scale stochastic systems. The aim is
to show that it is possible to transform the challenge of large scale into an
advantage. The proposed work will thus contribute to the computational tools and
methodologies of operations research and applied probability as well as service
enterprise systems.

