* 0948027
* Dissemination of Nanotechnologies for Energy Production and Environment Protection in Rural Areas of Wyoming
* EHR,DGE
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2016
* Maohong Fan, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 06/30/2016
* USD 2,483,810.00

Dissemination of Nanotechnologies for Energy Production and Environmental
Protection in Rural Areas of Wyoming

Maohong Fan

Technical Description Project goals are to provide opportunities for GK-12
Fellows to assume responsibilities as researchers, grade 10-12 (G10-12)
educators and students and to infuse STEM education with energy and
environmental nanotechnology (ee-nanotechnology); and to foster the
collaborations of University of Wyoming (UW) with its partners to enhance STEM
education. Project theme is to disseminate ee-nanotechnology. The related STEM
disciplines are chemical, environmental and mechanical engineering; physics,
chemistry, mathematics. The approaches include expanding the transferable
expertise of GK-12 Fellows in ee-nanotechnology, providing ee-nanotechnology
knowledge for K-12 teachers and students, increasing students? STEM career
interests, strengthening UW?s collaborations with its partners, utilizing cyber
infrastructure in GK-12 programs, and sustaining the project. The innovative
approach is to use cyber infrastructure for spread of ee-nanotechnology. The
activities to be conducted include involvement of Fellows, teachers and students
with ee-nanotechnology projects, seminars, various collaborations; Fellows?
service learning from G10-12 teachers and students; participation of teachers in
UW?s classes and research works; joint-development of STEM curricula by
teachers, Fellows and mentors; integration of the project into UW graduate
program; and expansion of cyber infrastructure for GK-12 programs.

Broader Impact The project will enhance GK12 Fellows? understanding of ee-
nanotechnology while improving their communication, team building and leadership
skills. G10-12 teachers will improve their STEM content knowledge and
instructional strategies. G10-12 students will become more interested in STEM
careers. UW will benefit from institutionalizing K12 STEM partnerships in its
graduate programs.

