* 0948549
* Lithium Isotopic Investigations of Crustal Evolution
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2010,02/29/2016
* Roberta Rudnick, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 02/29/2016
* USD 446,182.00

Intellectual Merit. Several lines of evidence point to an important role for
chemical weathering in producing the bulk continental crust: [1] its composition
is "andesitic", although the crust today, and likely since the Archean, grew by
addition of basalt, [2] it is depleted in certain fluid-mobile elements relative
to mantle-derived magmas (e.g., Sr, as seen in the crust's low Sr/Nd), 3) it has
an oxygen isotopic composition heavier than that of the mantle (d18O ~9 vs. 6,
respectively, due to lighter oxygen in water vs. rock), and 4) its has a lithium
isotopic composition lighter than that of the mantle (d7Li ~1 vs. 4,
respectively, due to heavier Li in water vs. rock). However, the mass of crust
removed through chemical weathering is poorly
constrained.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is proposed here to quantify the influence
of weathering on the crust's composition through two parallel PhD projects that
focus on Li isotopes and major and trace element geochemistry: [1]
quantification of the weathering flux from basaltic continental crust, focusing
on the Columbia River Basalts (CRB) in the Pacific NW, and [2] construction of a
mass balance model for the bulk continental crust using lithium concentration
([Li]) and d7Li to determine the mass lost to the crust via weathering. The
weathering flux from the continents and the attendant transformation of basalt
to more Si-enriched regolith will be evaluated through a coupled study of in
situ weathering and the riverine flux from the CRB. The strong rain shadow
effect of the Cascade Mountains causes large variations in the weathering
intensities of CRB basalts east and west of this range. Extensive laterites and
bauxites formed on CRB from the wet, western side of the Cascades. In contrast,
soil development and/or preservation is variable to the east due to differential
exposure ages as a result of the massive flooding that occurred during the last
ice age. Analyses of selected weathering profiles coupled with analyses of the
fluvial flux in catchments that drain only CRB will be used to quantify the
chemical flux and associated reactions attending basalt weathering. These data
will be used to model the influence of weathering on continental crust
composition. The non-basaltic composition of the continental crust was likely
the consequence of the combined effects of delamination of mafic lower crust and
removal of soluble components by weathering, but their relative contributions
are poorly constrained. A mass balance model constructed to solve for the time-
integrated chemical flux of weathering components from the continental crust
using Li and its isotopes and accompanying sensitivity tests show that the
calculated mass lost is highly sensitive to Li concentration in the bulk
continental crust and juvenile crustal additions. These parameters will be
estimated via analyses of deep crustal rocks as well as Archean Na-rich granites
(trondhjemites, tonalites, granodiorites - TTG = putative slab melts additions
to the continental crust). A parallel study of Li in shales through time will
explore their utility as indicators of continental weathering intensity over
geologic time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. This project will support
two PhD projects that are just underway. Several undergraduates will be involved
in the research with the expectation that at least one senior thesis will result
from this project. The project will support laboratory facilities used as a
resource by numerous national and international visitors.