* 0948160
* Sixth International Wolbachia Conference: An interactive, interdisciplinary conference addressing the frontiers of bacterial symbiosis in invertebrates,Monterey,CA June 9-14,2010
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2011
* Martha Hunter, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 04/30/2011
* USD 20,000.00

Intellectual merit. Wolbachia are bacteria that live within cells of
invertebrates, are transmitted from mother to offspring, and share a variety of
relationships with their arthropod and nematode hosts. As a "reproductive
manipulator," Wolbachia interferes with host reproduction by methods that
enhance its transmission. Other Wolbachia are mutualists or pathogens that are
targets for the control of insect-vectored human disease. These symbionts
fundamentally change the ecology and evolutionary trajectory of their hosts.
Here the investigator will use project funds to support the travel and
participation of students and postdoctoral associates at the Sixth International
Wolbachia Conference, to be held at Asilomar Conference Center, Monterey, CA,
June 9-14, 2010. The conference is moderate in size (75-125), international, and
multidisciplinary, including genomicists, cell biologists, ecologists,
evolutionary biologists and systematists. At Wolbachia conferences, ideas are
exchanged, collaborations are initiated or maintained, students find
postdoctoral opportunities, and postdoctoral associates establish the
professional network they need to attain a permanent position.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. Although the biennial conference has been
held five times already, none have been held within the continental United
States. This conference will attract American students and postdoctoral
associates for whom previous meetings have been inaccessible. Students and
postdoctoral associates, including women and underrepresented groups, will be
recruited to attend the meeting via flyers at meetings, listservs and word of
mouth. Further, the conference will include dissemination of research results
and educational impacts beyond the scientific community. Summer students in a
minority access program for undergraduates (MARC) will attend a day of talks,
and interact with conference participants. Further, with the travel funds
provided by this project, a teacher with experience implementing a high school
science curriculum module featuring Wolbachia will be invited to speak and
participate in the meeting. Dissemination of the meeting results to other
scientists will be enhanced by the publication of presentation abstracts in an
open-access online journal.