* 0948429
* III/EAGER: Towards Workflows as First-Class Citizens in Cyberinfrastructure: Designing Shared Repositories
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Yolanda Gil, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2011
* USD 200,000.00

Scientific computing has entered a new era of scale and sharing with the arrival
of cyberinfrastructure for computational experimentation. A key emerging concept
is scientific workflows, which provide a declarative representation of
scientific applications as complex compositions of software components and the
dataflow among them. Workflow systems manage their execution in distributed
resources, track provenance of analysis products, and enable rapid
reproducibility of results. In current cyberinfrastructure, there are well-
understood mechanisms for sharing data, instruments, and computing resources.
This is not the case for sharing workflows, though there is an emerging movement
for sharing analysis processes in the scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores computational mechanisms
for sharing workflows as a key missing element of cyberinfrastructure for
scientific research, with three major research foci: (1) Elicitation of new
requirements that workflow sharing poses over current techniques to share
software tools and libraries; (2) Understanding how shared workflow catalogs
should be designed, as the existing data catalogs are a successful model, and
software components require different representations and access functions; and
(3) Studying what sharing paradigms might be appropriate for scientific
communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Expected results from this work include: use
cases for workflow sharing and reuse that motivate this research area, a
comparison between software reuse and workflow reuse requirements, a
specification of a workflow catalog defining expected functions and services,
and an investigation of social issues that arise in building this new kind of
shared resource in scientific communities. Results are available at the project
Web site (http://workflow-sharing.isi.edu).&lt;br/&gt;