* 0948487
* Collaborative Research: Space-Based Measurements of Crustal Deformation along the Entire Dead Sea Fault System (Eastern Mediterranean)
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2017
* Francisco Gomez, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* David Fountain
* 03/31/2017
* USD 290,337.00

This study assembles the first, comprehensive view of near-field strain along
the entire Dead Sea fault system using Global Positioning System (GPS)
measurements. The fault system, a prominent element of the eastern Mediterranean
geodynamic framework, bounds the Arabian and Sinai plates and links proto-
oceanic spreading in the Red Sea (Gulf of Aqaba) with the Arabian-Eurasian
collision (southern Turkey). Spanning more than 800 km, the left-lateral Dead
Sea fault system ranks among the large continental transform systems of the
world. With mean recurrence intervals between 500 to 1,100 years for large
earthquakes on different sections and a paucity of large (magnitude greater than
7) earthquakes during the past two centuries, the fault system is an excellent
locale to understand the relationship between earthquake recurrence and crustal
deformation along a slow moving (less than 10 mm/yr) transform fault. By the
fourth year of this project, most GPS sites (survey and new continuous) will
have 1-sigma uncertainties less than 0.5 mm/yr. The resulting GPS velocity field
will provide a basis for kinematic and geodynamic modeling of the Dead Sea fault
system that will elucidate fundamental aspects of transform tectonics, as well
as broader issues pertaining to eastern Mediterranean tectonics (e.g., internal
deformation of the Sinai and Arabian plates, nature of the Dead Sea fault-East
Anatolian Fault-Cyprus arc triple junction, age and geological evolution of the
Dead Sea fault). Key issues addressed by the research include: 1) variation of
slip rates along the transform and the implications about existing plate
tectonic models for the region; 2) comparison between present-day slip rates
with geological estimates with implications for the timing of initiation of the
main parts of the Dead Sea fault system and its relationship to the Arabia-
Eurasia collision and Red Sea rifting; 3) slip transfer and strain partitioning
at fault bends and step-overs (e.g., the Lebanese restraining bend and the Dead
Sea Basin); 4) the influence of lithospheric rheology on strain partitioning
along a transform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Dead Sea fault system ranks among
the major continental transform fault systems in the world. In addition to
elucidating geodynamic aspects of the eastern Mediterranean region, focused
studies on the fault system can yield insight into tectonic and geodynamic
processes operating along continental transforms, in general. From a structural
perspective, the Dead Sea fault system is relatively simple when compared with
other transform fault systems. The structural simplicity permits relatively
straightforward modeling of the earthquake cycle and crustal deformation
processes, which can yield fundamental insight pertinent to more complicated
fault systems, such as the San Andreas fault system. To this end, sufficient
historical and palaeoseismic records of large earthquakes exist to facilitate
such studies along most of the Dead Sea fault system. This study provides the
critical constraints on present-day crustal deformation using high-precision GPS
measurements. Additionally, results from this project will be directly
applicable for an urgently needed improvement in the understanding of the
earthquake hazard in a region that is potentially overdue for a large
earthquake. Regional earthquake hazard is a concern for nearby megacities
including Damascus, Beirut, Amman, Aleppo, and Jerusalem.