* 0948609
* Noble Gas Behavior During Upper Mantle Deformation
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2010,12/31/2012
* Mark Kurz, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 12/31/2012
* USD 370,541.00

Noble Gas Behavior During Upper Mantle
Deformation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit.  This proposal seeks funds
to test the hypothesis that deformation is an important control on noble gas
contents in mantle minerals. This hypothesis is based on a systematic study
highly sheared rocks (mylonites) from St. Paul's Rocks (equatorial Atlantic
ocean) and from the ocean floor. Preliminary study shows that He content varies
with degree of deformation, with the highest contents in the most deformed
ultramylonites. Coupled vacuum crushing and melting experiments show that most
of the helium and neon within the mylonites is contained in the mineral matrices
rather than fluid or melt inclusions: only 5 to 18% of the total helium is
released by crushing. He/Ne ratios in St. Paul's Rocks vary widely (~ 20x) with
deformation and mineralogy, with the highest He/Ne ratios (and helium
concentration) found in the finest grained ultramylonite peridotite. It is
suggested that very high neon and helium contents in deformed rocks is related
to diffusive trapping within defects at mantle pressures. However, the present
data set is limited to a very small number of samples, and the influences of
mineralogy and alteration need to be assessed. It is proposed to test the gas-
deformation hypothesis with further measurements at St. Paul's Rocks and to
explore the influence of mineralogy on the isotopes and elemental abundances of
helium, neon and argon. Helium concentrations are so high in the St. Paul's
Rocks samples that new laser fusion experiments are proposed to directly
determine the helium residence sites with in situ measurements. In addition, a
systematic sampling across several shear zones at two ophiolites: Josephine
(Oregon, USA) and Oman is proposed. The shear zones in these two ophiolites are
ideal because deformation characteristics are well documented and field
exposures are sufficient to allow sampling of complete transects, from
undeformed to deformed peridotite.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts.  Noble
gas isotope measurements in rocks and minerals are of broad interest to the
earth science community. Studies of noble gases in mantle derived rocks are
important to models of the earth's deep interior because unradiogenic noble gas
isotopic compositions, found in some oceanic islands, provide some of the few
observations that support the existence of deep undegassed reservoirs in the
earth. This research crosses the traditional disciplinary boundaries between
isotope geochemistry and mineral physics, which may yield important advances in
our understanding of both fields. Validation of the deformation hypothesis would
require reevaluation of models for noble gas behavior during mantle melting as
well as gas migration along faults in the crust. This will support a graduate
student in the MIT/WHOI Joint Program in Oceanography and a Postdoctoral
Investigator. The work on St. Paul's Rocks will also involve collaboration with
two Brazilian geoscientists (S. Sichel and T. Campos), and will foste
international exchanges between students and scientists from Brazil and WHOI.