* 0948796
* Role of GPR30 in Estrogen-Mediated Effects on Cholinergic Function and Cognition
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2014
* Robert Gibbs, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Cushing
* 04/30/2014
* USD 399,989.00

Animal studies show that estrogens can significantly enhance learning and
memory; however, the mechanisms that underlie these effects are very unclear.
Studies suggest that neurons that project to the hippocampus and frontal cortex,
and that use acetylcholine as their neurotransmitter, play an important role in
these effects. The purpose of this project is to study whether a novel estrogen
receptor protein, GPR30, plays an important role in mediating effects on the
function of the cholinergic neurons as well as on learning and memory. Studies
will be performed in rats that have had their ovaries removed. Histochemistry,
behavioral pharmacology, and in vivo microdialysis will be used to evaluate the
effects of drugs that act on the GPR30 receptor. It is predicted that selective
activation of the GPR30 receptor will significantly enhance the function of the
cholinergic neurons of interest, as well as cognitive performance. In addition,
it is predicted that drugs which block activation of the GPR30 receptors, or
that destroy the cholinergic neurons of interest, will block the effects of
estradiol as well as effects associated specifically with GPR30 activation. This
would demonstrate that GPR30, which is expressed by the cholinergic neurons,
plays an important role in mediating the effects of estradiol. Cell culture
studies also will be used to evaluate effects on signaling pathways within the
cholinergic neurons. These studies will provide much new and valuable
mechanistic information about the role of GPR30 in mediating estrogen effects on
the cholinergic neurons and on cognitive performance. This information will add
significantly to our understanding of how loss of ovarian function as well as
estrogen replacement influences cognition. Doctoral and undergraduate students
will benefit by receiving training in methods of behavioral pharmacology,
histochemistry, and in vivo microdialysis.