* 0948113
* VOSS: Collaborative Research: Team Science: Sociotechnical Dimensions of Distributed Work
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Paul Edwards, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Crowston
* 08/31/2013
* USD 50,588.00

This project studies how effective interdisciplinary research collaborations
emerge in modern science. Increasingly, solutions to scientific and engineering
problems require multidisciplinary distributed teams, but little is known about
their emergence, coalescence, structural form and success. This research
develops and tests the value of a typology of such teams. Conditions that may
foster formation of enduring and productive teams will also be considered
including the role of leaders and the importance of new social software and web-
based collaboration tools. Changing models of science and the appropriateness of
scientific institutions and infrastructures to support these new models will be
identified. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will contribute to research on
collaboration, institutions, the role of infrastructure, and the science of
science. New cyberinfrastructure has enabled transformative changes in
collaborative science and engineering, but little is known about the new forms
that collaborations are taking and the role of new social and Web 2.0
technologies in their creation and development. This study will identify new
forms of scientific and engineering collaborations that are emerging, how they
be can be identified and catalyzed early, and how they can best be supported and
nurtured. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Investigating the emergence of new
collaborations, new collaborative forms, and new types of scientific work
enabled by changes in cyberinfrastructure is a crucial step in learning how to
identify, catalyze and support the nascent teams that will be central to future
advances in science and engineering. This will be helpful to funding agencies,
and other research institutions. In addition, cyberinfrastructure can enhance
the participation of under-represented groups and minority institutions in
scientific and engineering collaborations. &lt;br/&gt;