* 0948235
* The Design and Use of Paleoindian Unifaces of the Gainey Phase in the Lower Great Lakes Region
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2010,05/31/2013
* Mark Seeman, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2013
* USD 81,893.00

Dr. Mark F. Seeman of Kent State University and with the support of the National
Science Foundation will conduct an archaeological investigation of the
relationships that link tool design and tool use within early Paleoindian
societies. The specific focus will be on the stone tool assemblage from the
Nobles Pond site (33ST357), Stark Co., Ohio. Nobles Pond pertains to the Gainey
phase of the Midwest and is one of the largest Early Paleoindian sites in
eastern North America ca. 11,200-10,800 B.P. Gainey phase Paleoindians were the
earliest known human populations in the lower Great Lakes area. They were
resilient, "high-technology foragers" in that they employed portable, but
complexly designed tools with long use-lives and with strong potentialities for
salvage and recycling. They also were among the most mobile populations on
earth. To the extent that the Paleoindians that occupied Nobles Pond lie at one
extreme of the residential strategies characterizing human groups, they provide
a useful context for studying technological organization. Here the
design/utility relationship of the toolkit should be under conditions of intense
selection as colonizing foragers occupy new and dynamic landscapes. In order to
investigate this question in controlled fashion, the focus will be on formal
unifacial tools, specifically hafted end scrapers.

The Nobles Pond excavation has yielded over 1,800 hafted end scrapers, the
largest known Paleoindian site sample. In this study, representative tools will
be selected from two different kinds of site contexts and will be compared with
modern facsimiles used under experimental conditions, combining insights of both
the archaeologist and the physicist. The study addresses three main questions.
1) How much of the formal variation in observable morphology can be explained by
the use, breakage, depletion, recycling, and salvage of a single class of
designed tools? 2) How well do particular patterns of wear on Nobles Pond tools
correlate with particular states of depletion or other use-life conditions? 3)
How well do particular patterns of wear correlate with depletion or other use-
life conditions on similar, but experimentally produced and utilized tools?

The broad-scale advantages to this study lie in the ability to bring the results
of analyses of form, wear, and experimentation together in a single research
program applied to a large sample. The targeted design/use relationship is
important to archaeology and is a key question in the examination of all
technological systems, ultimately bearing on such larger constructs as adaptive
optimization, depth of planning, and risk minimization. It also should be
recognized that the Nobles Pond excavation was a community effort, with over
2,000 adult volunteers participating in the excavation. This analytical project
will allow the continuation of a regional connection to what has become an
important archaeological touchstone through the continued involvement of local
volunteers in a scientific laboratory program at a university in their own
community. This project further marks the first collaboration between
archaeology and physics at Kent State University, and it is one that can be
built on to investigate the process of wear at multiple scales in the future.
Hafted end scrapers are the most numerous formal tools in Early Paleoindian
contexts, and their study can provide strong insights into the survival
strategies of the many foraging societies that occupied the majority of our
collective past.