* 0948536
* RUI: Field-testing the Multiple Diffusion Domain 40Ar/39Ar K-feldspar Thermochronometer at Tilted Normal Fault Blocks in the U.S. Basin and Range
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2012
* Martin Wong, Colgate University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 12/31/2012
* USD 72,499.00

Many tectonic processes within the Earth impart thermal effects on surrounding
rocks. As a result, thermochronology, which allows the thermal history of a
sample to be reconstructed, can provide unique insights into the timing, rates,
and spatial patterns of many geologic processes. Applications of
thermochronology include investigating landscape evolution, mountain building,
continental extension and rifting, and the thermal histories of sedimentary
basins, which are important to petroleum exploration. As such, thermochronology
is an essential tool to investigate a wide variety of processes within the Earth
Sciences. However, most thermochronologic systems only provide the time of
cooling through a single closure temperature and thus only provide a point
constraint along a temperature/time path, which can result in inaccurate
interpretations. An ideal thermochronologic system would instead retain the
continuous thermal history of a sample through a large range of temperatures.
The 40Ar/39Ar K-feldspar system has been interpreted to record the continuous
thermal history of a sample from ~350 to 150Â°C, thus making it a potentially
powerful thermochronologic tool. However, a number of studies have questioned
whether this system records geologically meaningful thermal histories. The goal
of this study is to field test the thermal histories derived from 40Ar/39Ar
K-feldspar data in a well constrained geologic context in order to evaluate the
geologic significance of the thermal histories derived by this
approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will be conducted at two fault blocks
that have been tilted and exhumed by large normal faults; the Gold Butte block,
NV and the Grayback fault block, AZ. These blocks expose crustal cross sections
that range from near surface conditions to &gt;10 km depth. These blocks have a
known pre-extensional thermal structure based on prior studies as well as a
distinct thermal history that evolved from slow to rapid cooling as extension
began. Samples will be collected from a wide range of paleo-depths at each fault
block and multiple diffusion domain (MDD) modeling of 40Ar/39Ar K-feldspar data
will be conducted on each sample. The resultant thermal histories will be
evaluated against the prior thermochronologic data, the known thermal structure
and thermal/tectonic history of each block. If MDD derived thermal histories
match the expected behavior with regard to both the form and absolute
temperatures, this work will provide important case studies that document the
geologic significance of 40Ar/39Ar K-feldspar thermal histories and their
calibration to other thermochronometers. Samples whose results depart from the
expected behavior will be evaluated to assess why problematic results were
obtained (problematic microtextures, compositions, grain sizes, diffusion
behavior, etc). These results will be used to evaluate approaches currently used
to assess the validity of MDD thermal histories, such as the correlation between
the age spectrum and the R/R0 plot. These results may also provide insight into
sample characteristics that yield the most reliable thermal histories, thus
providing a guide for future studies. As a whole, these results will provide new
insight into the geologic validity of MDD 40Ar/39Ar K-feldspar thermal
histories, why some samples yield problematic results, and the methods currently
used to identify inaccurate results.