* 0948787
* Collaborative Research: Balancing selection and MHC variation in an endangered bird
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2010,08/31/2014
* Jeff Johnson, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 08/31/2014
* USD 265,910.00

A major question in conservation biology is why some populations with low levels
of genetic variation remain relatively stable while others decline in size.
Stable populations may not have lost genetic variation related to disease
resistance, such as the suite of resistance genes known as the Major
Histocompatibility Complex (MHC). Theory suggests that natural selection is more
likely to maintain functionally important MHC variation in populations that have
experienced declines in size. This study will make direct estimates of natural
selection on the MHC and other immunity genes using data from both historic and
contemporary populations of the greater prairie-chicken, which is one of the
most threatened species of bird in North America. This project will also examine
the association between variation at MHC genes and parasites, immunity and
survival in two small populations that are undergoing augmentation with
translocations (Wisconsin) and captive breeding (Texas) to increase genetic
variation.

The results of this study will valuable for biologists studying the effects of
population size on disease and parasite resistance, and it will provide
management guidelines for captive breeding and translocating animals, practices
that are likely to increase with continuing loss of prairie habitat. Graduate
students and a post-doctoral researcher will be trained in immunogenetics, and
the project should lead to valuable new genetic markers for studying immunity-
related genes in other species. The PIs will work with environmental education
centers in Milwaukee and Dallas-Fort Worth on citizen science and teacher
education projects that focus on the health of wildlife. The results will be
broadly disseminated to state and federal wildlife agencies, environmental
groups and the general public.