* 0948484
* ULTRA-Ex: Connecting the Social and Ecological Sciences with Planners, Managers, and the Public
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2010,01/31/2014
* Lynne Westphal, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 01/31/2014
* USD 299,920.00

Cities that function well ecologically are critical to meeting pressing needs
like mitigating and adapting to climate change and providing high-quality places
to live for a growing and diversifying populace. This research project will help
increase the ecological functioning of cities by addressing a fundamental
question: In a complex urban/metropolitan system, what are the synergies and
tradeoffs between conserving biodiversity and providing ecosystem services to
people? The investigators will focus on the Green Infrastructure Vision of the
Chicago Wilderness alliance, a conservation consortium of more than 240
organizations. The Green Infrastructure Vision, designed to implement the
Chicago Wilderness Biodiversity Recovery Plan, is already influencing long-range
land planning throughout the Chicago metropolitan region. The Green
Infrastructure Vision identifies 1.5 million acres of recommended resource
protection areas -- lands that need careful planning and management in order to
protect the 360,000 acres of already protected lands and waters in the Chicago
Wilderness network. Two postdoctoral researchers will work with the ULTRA-Ex
research team (who come from a diversity of research institutions and
governmental agencies) to accomplish two major objectives. Their first objective
is to conduct a critical examination of the connections between the
biodiversity-recovery goals of the region-wide Green Infrastructure Vision and
the delivery of critical ecosystem services to human communities throughout the
Chicago region. The researchers will examine links between social and ecological
systems in the context of biodiversity management, green-infrastructure
conceptualization and implementation, and the delivery of ecosystem services
from cultural to biogeochemical. Their second major objective is to develop a
multi-faceted, interactive, web-based Chicago hub of urban environmental
researchers. This hub will include an interactive platform for managing data,
communicating research findings to planners and the public, and collaborating
and interacting with scientists and practitioners. It will also be an umbrella
and focal point for urban ecosystem research and policy, and it will partner
with regional education and outreach programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research project will develop new information about biodiversity and ecosystem
functioning, green-infrastructure planning, asset-based analysis, and resilience
theory. A novel facet of the project is the application of scientific tools to
investigate the relationship between the protection of biodiversity and the
delivery of a range of ecosystem services in a complex metropolitan landscape.
The project will provide scientifically objective information to strengthen
planning and conservation practices in the City of Chicago and the entire
Chicago metropolitan region. Needs faced in the Chicago region are faced in
other urban areas. Project results therefore will have utility for understanding
the dynamics of complex socioecological systems of other regions of the U.S. and
the world. The research project will strengthen the infrastructure of science by
integrating research groups consisting of ecologists, urban planners, and social
scientists in several universities, a federal agency, and the city of Chicago
administration. The project also will strengthen interdisciplinary education in
the social and natural sciences through a Chicago-wide interdisciplinary
graduate course taught by faculty, researchers, and planners from several
institutions. This award was funded as an Urban Long-Term Research Area
Exploratory (ULTRA-Ex) award as the result of a special competition jointly
supported by the National Science Foundation and the U.S. Department of
Agriculture Forest Service.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;