* 0948938
* Developement of Tandem, Double-focusing, Electron Impact, Gas Source Mass Spectrometer for Measurement of Isotopologues in Geochemistry
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Edward Young, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 06/30/2015
* USD 500,000.00

This instrument development project will design and build a tandem, double-
focusing, high-resolution, high-sensitivity, electron impact, gas source, mass
spectrometer. The purpose of the instrument is to analyze rare, doubly-
substituted isotopologues of gases occurring in volcanic plumes, geothermal hot
springs, hydrocarbon reservoirs, deep crustal microbial communities, gas
hydrates, soils, and Earth's atmosphere. The list of gases to be investigated
with the proposed instrument includes N2 (15N15N), O2 (17O18O, 18O18O), CH4,
N2O, SO2, and OCS but is not limited to them exclusively. The investigation of
clumped isotope isotopologue distributions in naturally occurring samples
confers the advantage of deriving information on temperature of synthesis of gas
species from the measurement of a single phase. It is possible that kinetic
isotope fractionation effects accompanying synthesis reactions may provide data
on the prevalence of specific reaction mechanisms. An extensive program of
experimental calibration will be required to assess both the geothermometric
potential and kinetic isotope effects of clumped isotopologues with the new
instrument. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The expected outcome of use of the proposed
instrument is to acquire a deeper understanding of present-day atmosphere-
hydrosphere-lithosphere interactions. The improved knowledge of the modern world
will then be used to develop calibrated interpretations of ancient atmospheric
proxies in the geologic record. The ultimate goal is to understand the chemical
evolution of Earth's atmosphere with as great a time resolution as permitted by
available samples such as polar ice cores or rock strata. The use of a new mass
spectrometer of unprecedented capability is likely to give rise to applications
that cannot be predicted. In the context of broader impact on human society, the
study of trace greenhouse gases such as CH4 and N2O will contribute to
evaluating global warming and climate change.