* 0948485
* EAGER: Ion Absorbing Microfiltration Membranes: A New Approach to Water Treatment and Desalination
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* William Goddard, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Rosemarie D. Wesson
* 08/31/2011
* USD 130,000.00

0948485&lt;br/&gt;Goddard&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective
of this EArly-concept Grants for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project is to
develop low-pressure (0.2-3.0 bar) ion absorbing microfiltration membranes that
can reversibly bind and release dissolved anions/cations by intermittently
backwashing the membrane hollow fibers with acidic/basic solutions. This new
filtration technology would replace current water treatment/desalination
technologies utilizing reverse osmosis (RO), which is energy-intensive due to
the large pressure (40-70 bar) needed to force water to flow against the natural
osmotic pressure of saline water while overcoming the hydraulic resistance of an
RO membrane. In addition, ion absorbing microfiltration membranes would permit
the selective removal of specific ions with high water recovery and much reduced
waste volumes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve this objective, we propose to
exploit recent advances in nanomaterial synthesis, characterization and modeling
to: 1. Design and synthesize low-cost hyperbranched macromolecules with high
molar mass (10-100 nm) that can be used as high capacity, selective and
recyclable ligands for cations and anions in aqueous solutions; 2. Develop a new
generation of low-pressure filtration membranes for water treatment and
desalination by embedding and/or covalently attaching these ion-absorbing
hyperbranched macromolecules onto hollow polymeric fibers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This exploratory research project will require 12 months
for its completion. It will consist of proof-of-concept experiments to
synthesize ion-absorbing hollow-fibers (IAHF) that can bind and release cations
(Na+, Ca2+and Mg2+) and anions (Cl- and SO4 2-) by washing the fibers with
acidic/basic solutions. These IAHF will serve as the building blocks for the
low-pressure ion absorbing microfiltration membranes. We will initially use (i)
low-cost hyperbranched macromolecules and (ii) poly(vinylidene) fluoride (PVDF)
as building blocks for the IAHF. The proposed research activities will be
structured around two tasks: 1. Task 1: Synthesis and Characterization of Ion-
Selective Hyperbranched (ISH) Macromolecules 2. Task 2: Synthesis and
Characterization of Hollow-Fibers with Embedded ISH Macromolecules
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We anticipate the successful completion of this project to
provide the proof-of-concept data needed to design and fabricate low-pressure
membranes for water treatment and desalination. The development and
commercialization of such membranes would have a transformative impact on water
treatment and desalination. This project will also provide training
opportunities to a post-doctoral research fellow.