* 0948996
* Primary Electron Transfer Processes in Photosynthetic Bacterial Reaction Centers
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2010,02/29/2016
* Dewey Holten, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 02/29/2016
* USD 894,000.00

Intellectual Merit: The objective of this research is to achieve a unified
molecular-level understanding of how the energy of sunlight is captured and
stored via the primary electron transfer reactions in the bacterial
photosynthetic reaction center (RC). The RC from photosynthetic bacteria is a
protein-pigment complex housing two separate but quasi-symmetric branches of
cofactors (bacteriochlorophyll, derivatives of it, and quinones). In principle,
either branch of pigment cofactors should be able to transport electrons. Yet in
the native "wild-type" bacterial RC only the "L-branch" pigments are utilized
for primary photo-induced charge separation, while the alternative, "M-branch?,
cofactors are completely inactive. During the course of the last ten years of
research, electron transfer along the chain of M-branch cofactors was achieved
albeit in much less than the 100% yield attained by the native L-branch.
Trapping the first charge-separated state that forms on the L-branch was also
achieved. This state lives less than a trillionth of a second and has only a
small transient population during the normal course of native L-branch electron
transfer. These advances have opened the door to a comprehensive molecular-level
understanding of the origins of the unidirectional L-branch charge separation in
the native RC and analogous understanding of electron transfer along the
normally inactive M-branch of RC cofactors. Studies that seek these twin goals
are the basis of this project. The goals will be pursued via state-of-the art
time-resolved spectroscopic investigations spanning the sub-picosecond time
scale (less than a trillionth of a second) to seconds. Sophisticated data
analysis and computer modeling will be undertaken to compare results from
various mutants with each other and the native RC. Specific interactions between
the pigments and surrounding protein residues will be targeted for investigation
to determine whether and how such interactions fine-tune cofactor properties and
thus may serve to "switch" between initial L-side versus M-side electron
transfer. The studies will also probe the contribution of electronic couplings
between the pigments (as distinguished from issues of energetics) in controlling
directionality. The combined findings will help to elucidate the mechanistic
underpinnings of electron transfer in the bacterial RC as a unified whole.

Broader Impact The studies pursued in this project are relevant to understanding
electron transfer in the two photosystems of plants and charge migration in
membrane-bound proteins in general. Understanding the molecular-level mechanisms
of photo-induced charge separation in the photosynthetic RC has fundamental and
far-reaching direct impacts on synthetic systems for solar-energy
harvesting/conversion (including avenues being explored by the Co-PIs), thereby
addressing a national need for next-generation renewable energy sources. This
project will continue to have a demonstrated positive impact on the
participation of undergraduates and underrepresented groups in research and
science, and in the broad multidisciplinary training of students. The
integration of research ideas into teaching and educational development and
dissemination to the broader community will continue to be a focus. Such
projects include the following: (1) A web-based tutorial will be further
developed that can be tailored for undergraduate or high school students on the
topic "Why is grass green and blood red?" (2) Two undergraduate physical-
chemistry laboratory experiments will be extensively upgraded to exploit the
spectroscopy of chlorophyll and related chromophores, and the energy/electron
transfer processes critical to photosynthesis, to teach molecular electronic
spectroscopy and kinetics from application-oriented perspectives. In one such
direct application, students will design, build, and characterize a simple solar
cell. (3) A broad, science-based talk on general and fundamental aspects of
photosynthesis with links to interests in gardening, global climate change, and
solar energy will be developed as a program for the St. Louis Master Gardener
Speaker's Bureau at the Missouri Botanical Garden. Additionally, local and
national popular print and web-based publication venues will continue to be
exploited through contacts with science writers in order to disseminate the
goals, relevance, and applications of photosynthesis research to a broad
audience.

This project is receiving co-funding from the Chemistry of Life Processes
program in the Chemistry Division