* 0948988
* ULTRA-Ex: Double Exposures: Socioecological Vulnerabilities in the Miami-Dade Urban Region
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2009,03/31/2015
* Evelyn Gaiser, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 03/31/2015
* USD 299,169.00

The Miami-Dade urban region is characterized by a unique and paradoxical set of
conditions and forces. It is a global commerce center, where assets are
vulnerable to catastrophic coastal disasters. It is an affluent city with among
the highest rates of poverty in the nation. It is a de-vegetated city situated
between and dependent upon unique and protected natural environments. It is a
city that receives significant rainfall but whose freshwater supply is
critically vulnerable to climatic change. What unites these strengths and
vulnerabilities is their dependence on the interaction between local and global
forces. The objectives of this research project are to investigate how global
biophysical and socioeconomic forces interact with local processes in shaping
the socioecological structure and dynamics of the Miami-Dade urban region. The
investigators will use a double-exposure framework that stresses the multiple
interactions between economic globalization and climate change as the heuristic
focus of the research. This project will bring together an interdisciplinary
team of academic and applied scientists, educators, citizen organizations, and
state and local governments to explore how existing social and ecological
vulnerabilities may be exacerbated by the double threats of climate change and
economic globalization and how the urban region might become more resilient. The
project's ultimate goal is to examine how processes of urban transformation can
lead to a more resilient socioecological landscape. The research plan is guided
by principles of collaborative and engaged research, because the investigators
plan to fully integrate the goals, energy, and diverse backgrounds of multiple
academic disciplines and institutions; federal, state, and local agencies; non-
governmental organizations; educators; and students. The research will be
conducted by three themed working groups that focus on Coastal Vulnerabilities,
Urban Land Stewardship, and Freshwater Sustainability. Each group will describe
the spatial distribution of populations and resources; derive a conceptual model
of the controls on population/resource vulnerability to climate change and
globalization; and identify spatial and statistical relationships among
resources and vulnerabilities, thereby providing a template for future empirical
validation. Working group products will include peer-reviewed articles; white
papers for policy makers and community partners; educational products such as
course modules and dissertation research; and various technical products,
including GIS databases, algorithms, and interactive maps. In addition to
mentoring the three graduate students committed to the program, the researchers
will offer a graduate course on "socioecological analysis of urban systems" to
provide students with practical experience in finding, analyzing, and presenting
urban ecological data and to engage them in the activities of the three working
groups. A set of teaching modules for K-12 educators based on this research also
will be developed.

This project will integrate key concepts from the ecological study of
disturbance and landscape heterogeneity with urban political ecology and the
study of social vulnerability to biophysical and socioeconomic perturbations.
This project will extend the concept of double exposure with respect to both
global climate change and economic globalization by linking the effects of these
global forces to local ecological and social dynamics. The investigators
anticipate that these cross-scale interactions will be key to understanding the
resilience and dynamics of urban socioecosystems. The project will facilitate
integration of the social and natural sciences within the university and
professional and intellectual engagement between the university and stakeholders
in the local community and government. The integration of research and education
will produce a cohort of graduate students and primary and secondary educators
with experience in collaborative, interdisciplinary research and an
understanding of cities as complex socioecological systems, both of which will
be critical to the development of a self-sustaining research program in the
study of urban systems. This award was funded as an Urban Long-Term Research
Area Exploratory (ULTRA-Ex) award as the result of a special competition jointly
supported by the National Science Foundation and the U.S. Department of
Agriculture Forest Service.