* 0948334
* ULTRA-Ex:  Ecological Hazards in Southwestern Metropolises:  The Case of Mosquito Disease Vectors
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2009,02/28/2013
* Elizabeth Willott, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 02/28/2013
* USD 299,891.00

This project will apply both social and physical sciences to examine mosquito
disease vectors in southwestern cities. Uniting entomology, land cover analysis,
climate/insect modeling, and institutional ethnography, this project will
examine the relationship between institutions and insects in the burgeoning
greater-Arizona metropolises stretching from Phoenix and Casa Grande to Marana,
Tucson, and Green Valley, an area encompassing a total human population of 5.3
million. The project will synthesize data from direct sampling of mosquito
populations, high resolution urban-scale modeling, as well as surveys and
mappings of public and professional knowledge. The core method involves the
comparison of spatially explicit models (maps) of mosquito distribution in
southwestern cities, which are overlain with maps of political and economic
information, as well as with data layers reflecting the ecological knowledge of
diverse publics, including managers, citizens, and developers. The results will
advance knowledge by determining the gaps and overlaps of current human
knowledge, management, and political territory with projected environmental
changes and insect distributions. This will enable tests of basic theories that
predict the match and mismatch of state and public knowledge in the complex
ecological-mosquito system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These results and the technique
itself have direct bearing on understanding and dealing with a range of urban
management challenges, which have increasingly come to include complex
ecological elements, like diseases carried by animals and insects, invasions of
novel species of plants, risky fire regimes resulting from rapid growth and
populations of urban wildlife. While problems are diverse, they are united by a
common quality that makes them especially difficult to manage. Ecological
hazards are unevenly distributed, spatially mobile, and temporally
unpredictable. Under conditions of accelerating climate change and uneven urban
development, these issues will become even more complex. Since the capacities of
urban managers and citizens may be poorly matched to the emerging
characteristics of these new ecological problems, it is essential to determine
how we can improve our understanding and management of urban environmental
problems by attending to the shifting distributions of hazards and the gaps
between them and the spaces of knowledge and authority designed to cope with
them. By coordinating agency members with the public in the final phase of the
project using mapped products, we will improve the 'outreach' of agencies to the
public and the 'in-reach' of diverse public ecological knowledges to decision-
makers, thereby improving insect management and public responses to serious and
ongoing health hazards.