* 0948494
* Collaborative Research: Tectonic Significance of ca. 1.6 Ga Deformation in SW Laurentia and New Insights on a Protracted Mazatzal Orogeny
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2014
* Ernest Duebendorfer, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 06/30/2014
* USD 119,036.00

The period between 1.78 and 1.63 billion years ago (Ga) was a time of important
southward growth of the North American continent. The rate of growth within this
150-million-year period far exceeds Phanerozoic (542 million years ago to the
present) crustal growth rates. As a result of recent work in southern Wyoming
and northern Colorado, in a region known as SW Laurentia, the PIs have
identified a deformational, magmatic, and thermal event at 1.62-1.58 Ga, which
is surprising because the region was thought to be tectonically quiescent. The
researchers will combine detailed kinematic histories of shear zones in northern
and central Colorado, with precise, texturally-linked dates on deformation, and
well-dated metamorphic pressure-temperature paths to evaluate two end-member
hypotheses where the enigmatic tectonic 1.6 Ga event may represent either (1)
intracratonic deformation of the newly accreted continental crust with stresses
transmitted far inboard of the active plate margin or (2) deformation associated
with delayed subduction of a long-lived remnant ocean basin. The 1.6 Ga
tectonism may reflect the closing of this basin and the final accretion at the
southern edge of the North American continent. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
recognition of 1.62 to 1.58 Ga deformation, magmatism, and metamorphism as much
as 1200 km away from the continent-ocean plate boundary has important
implications on several levels. First, the event may have Phanerozoic analogues
in the Laramide (80 million years ago) orogeny or the modern Tibetan Plateau. If
correct, this hypothesis would suggest rapid stabilization of, and efficient
stress transfer within, newly accreted crust of this age. The present midcrustal
level of exposure of rocks affected by the 1.6 Ga event affords an opportunity
to investigate the crustal stress transfer in the strongest part of the crust.
There are also implications for modern earthquake hazards well away from active
plate boundaries. Alternatively, if the event reflects closure of a small ocean
basin, then the crustal growth process was not a simple north to south
progression and indeed was not completed in some of the northernmost regions
until after 1.6 Ga. This might also explain some of the anomalous features on
recent deep seismic surveys of the region. In either case, results from this
study are likely to result in substantial revision of tectonic models for
Paleoproterozoic crustal growth, assembly, and stabilization in SW Laurentia.