* 0948535
* In-situ High-pressure Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) Measurement
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2013
* Peter Buseck, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 03/31/2013
* USD 300,206.00

The interior of Earth controls many features and hazards at its surface. These
include mountain ranges and ocean basins as well as dynamic effects like
volcanoes and earthquakes. It is thus important to understand the behavior of
minerals within Earth's interior. However, the available experimental techniques
required to produce the elevated pressures and temperatures that occur deep
within Earth are limited (e.g., extremely large steel presses, diamond-anvil
cells combined with laser heating) that are costly and difficult to use. More
importantly, they allow only limited examination of the materials at high-
pressure and -temperature conditions. Instead, the products must be removed from
the equipment in order to examine them using advanced methods such as electron
diffraction and high-resolution imaging using a transmission electron microscope
(TEM) that allows the examination of details of structure and reaction. In fact,
some materials that form under extreme conditions are unquenchable, meaning they
change structure and thus behavior when examined at room pressure and
temperature. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is designed to solve this
problem by developing and refining a way of looking at materials at high
pressures and temperatures in place within a TEM, where we can examine them down
to the atomic level. It is planned to make use of the remarkable properties of
carbon nanotubes (CNTs), which we will use as the containers of the minerals
that we wish to study at elevated pressures and temperatures. It was shown
recently that CNTs will contract when bombarded with an energetic electron beam.
They can thus serve as microscopic high-pressure cells that can be studied
within a TEM. Therefore, all the superior capabilities of such microscopy can be
fully transplanted to in-situ high-pressure research. The preliminary research
to be supported will be devoted to developing methods of placing materials of
interest into the tiny CNTs. The team will start with materials such as single
elements and simple oxides and salts in order to properly test and calibrate the
technique. They will then extend the work to examining more complex minerals
that are thought to be abundant in Earth's interior and that influence or
control behavior within the deep crust and mantle of the planet. Wüstite, an
iron oxide that is only stable at high temperature and is abundant in the deep
Earth in the form of magnesiowüstite, forms the long-term focus of this study
since it may disproportionate at extreme conditions and have profound effects on
the history of our planet. Overall, the results will provide fundamental new
knowledge about a high-pressure experimental technique that is new to the earth
sciences as well as about the nature of geologically and geophysically important
minerals under extreme conditions.