* 0948036
* EAGER: Turning on Ferromagnetism with an Electric Field
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2010
* Darrell Schlom, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2010
* USD 50,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION&lt;br/&gt;Over the last eight years as part of an NSF-
NIRT the PI and his collaborators have shown that reactive molecular-beam
epitaxy (MBE) can be used to build up oxides atom-by-atom with precise control
of the distance between the atoms. The combination of predictive theory with
this ability to customize the structure atom spacing in ferroelectric materials
at the atomic-layer level has enabled the theory-driven creation of materials
with exceptional properties. Particularly enticing in this regard is the
material europium titanate. Theory has predicted that this obscure and not very
useful insulator can be transformed to a ferromagnetic material by stretching it
just the right amount and applying a small voltage. Consequently when the
voltage is removed, ferromagnetism should disappear. Such an effect has never
been observed in any material and could be quite useful for future devices. So
far, the PI has synthesized unstrained europium titanate films by MBE and
confirmed that they have the expected (conventional) properties. This research
project is to synthesize europium titanate films by MBE in which the atom
spacing is stretched by the desired amount. After confirming that the targeted
stretch has been achieved, the PI and his collaborators will see if the
resulting material has the predicted behavior. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
DETAILS&lt;br/&gt;The technical objective of this project is to grow biaxially
strained EuTiO3 films to see if modest electric fields can be used to turn on
ferromagnetism in appropriately strained EuTiO3, as has been predicted. Never
has it been possible to turn on magnetism in a material by applying an electric
field to it. Such an important milestone would be a key advance to the field of
multiferroics, both scientifically and technologically. The broader impact of
this project is that EuTiO3 is a model system, one embodiment of a particularly
strong coupling mechanism proposed by first principles theorists. If true, its
verification would be an important confirmation for theory and motivate its use
to identify even better (e.g., higher temperature) multiferroics utilizing the
same mechanism. Moreover, voltages are far easier to route than magnetic fields
and so the ability to turn on magnetism with a voltage (not via the flow of huge
current densities as has been the case up to now via magnetic induction, but by
applying a voltage to an appropriate insulator), would impact many devices and
save energy. Electronics has flourished because of the ability to route voltages
with ease and on extremely small scales. If magnetism could be similarly
controlled and routed, it will impact memory devices, spin valves and many other
spintronics devices, and make numerous hybrid devices possible.&lt;br/&gt;