* 0948019
* New, GK-12:  Infusing System Design and Sensor Technology in Education (INSIGHT)
* EDU,DGE
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2016
* Daniel Andresen, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 03/31/2016
* USD 2,803,980.00

New, GK-12: Infusing System Design and Sensor Technology in Education
(INSIGHT)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project integrates sensor technology with
computing and information science in a standards-based science, technology, and
engineering curricula. Project activities team GK-12 STEM Fellows with science,
technology, and physical education teachers. Activities include both summer and
academic year training in rural Kansas schools. In the summer, project staff
provides fellows and teachers with training in hands-on, sensor-driven science,
engineering, and technology development and appropriate pedagogical strategies.
During the academic year, fellows support participating teachers in the
classroom two times a week with content-specific sensor technology. The
intellectual merit lies in the focus on the technology and engineering aspects
of STEM education and on the use of sensors, computing, and information
technology as the enabling element to facilitate hands-on technology and
engineering education in areas related to telemedicine and precision
agriculture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts include the establishment of
sensor, computing, and information technology as a foundational high school
skill by accelerating the integration of sensor technology content into Kansas
high school science and technology classes.&lt;br/&gt;The curriculum is aligned
with state curriculum standards. The project is innovative because it will
enhance the usefulness, practicality, and relevance of sensor technology
education by linking research for fellows to high school science and technology
curriculum, and provide communication and research opportunities in sensor
technology for doctoral students in engineering. This project encourages
participation in engineering and technology from an even wider, more diverse
group of students from rural Kansas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;