* 0948161
* Evolution on a Chip:   Microfluidic-Based Evolution of RNA Enzymes
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2014
* Gerald Joyce, The Scripps Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 03/31/2014
* USD 576,219.00

Processes of Darwinian evolution are fundamental to understanding biological
form and function, but are difficult to appreciate on the human timescale. Over
the past two decades, methods have been developed for evolving biological
macromolecules under controlled laboratory conditions. The most powerful of
these methods operate in a continuous manner, allowing one to maintain
"cultures" of functional molecules, analogous to the way one cultures bacterial
or eukaryotic cells. During the previous period of NSF support, new methods were
devised for carrying out "evolution on a chip", employing microfluidic
technology to bring about the continuous evolution of RNA enzymes in a highly
precise and automated manner. The current project is expanding upon those
efforts by implementing novel approaches for evolution within "cellular"
compartments. Evolution is being made to occur within hundreds of millions of
water-in-oil droplets of uniform size, generated by a high-throughput
microfluidic device. This system will be used to study genetic drift through the
accumulation of neutral mutations, to investigate competition between two
different "species" of coevolving enzymes, and to examine the maximum frequency
of mutation that can be tolerated by an evolving population. A special case
involves RNA enzymes that catalyze their own replication and can evolve in a
self-sustained manner. These enzymes are being used to construct compartmented
synthetic genetic systems, for which replication will be made contingent upon
the sensing of particular molecules within the local environment. The broader
impact of this research derives from its ability to make Darwinian evolution a
tangible process that one can witness in real time. The recent demonstration of
evolution on a chip has had an impact on students by showing them how one can
"run" molecular evolution experiments just as one runs a computer program. The
work on self-sustained Darwinian evolution, especially when carried out within
individual compartments, will bring these studies to the edge of synthesizing
life in the laboratory. This research offers a reductionist but complete view of
Darwinian evolution, and helps to demystify Darwinian evolution by presenting it
as a biochemical process. Microfluidic-based evolution in particular allows
students and investigators to see how Darwinian evolution can solve complex
biochemical problems, while providing a detailed account of the genotypic and
phenotypic changes that occur throughout the process of evolutionary adaptation.
This project is jointly supported by the Molecular Genetics and the Molecular
Biochemistry Programs in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and
Chemistry of Life Processes in the Division of Chemistry.