* 0948380
* Collaborative Research on the Marchantiophyta, Anthocerophyta and Bryophyta of the Cape Horn Archipelago: Floristics and Implications for Conservation
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2015
* William Buck, New York Botanical Garden
* Continuing Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 04/30/2015
* USD 403,274.00

Collaborative Research on the Marchantiophyta, Anthocerophyta and Bryophyta of
the Cape Horn Archipelago: Floristics and Implications for
Conservation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Cape Horn Archipelago in southernmost
Chile is poorly known biologically because of its inaccessibility. Mosses,
liverworts and hornworts (i.e., bryophytes), although small plants, comprise the
majority of plant biodiversity in this remote region. This project proposes to
inventory the bryophytes of the area and prepare a manual for their
identification. Exploration will be carried out through the use of a rented ship
to take the organizers, W. R. Buck and J. J. Engel, and their collaborators from
island to island to collect. The data will also be used to collaborate on
conservation of the region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many of the bryophytes of the
Cape Horn Archipelago are otherwise only found in distant regions, especially
New Zealand and northern North America. This study will allow better
understanding of the distribution of these plants and how they have come to grow
where they are. A local project, ?Ecotourism with a Hand-Lens,? teaches students
and tour-operators to include bryophytes in tourism, thereby using these plants
to assist the local economy. The information on diversity and distribution of
bryophytes will be useful in determining which areas deserve protection and
which can be developed. The project collaborates closely with outreach programs
at the Field Museum and will contribute to improving science instruction and
student learning at a major urban school system.&lt;br/&gt;