* 0948307
* Student & Minority Faculty Travel Grant Program to Attend International Conference on Network Protocols (ICNP) 2009
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2010
* Henning Schulzrinne, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2010
* USD 10,000.00

The 17th IEEE International Conference on Network Protocols (ICNP) and
associated events, including a workshop on network protocol security, will be
held October 13-16, 2009, in Princeton, New Jersey, USA. ICNP has traditionally
been a single-track 3-day meeting of around 30 paper presentations. The
conference has typically attracted an attendance of about 120-125 international
participants. ICNP ranks high in citation impact. The high impact is a
consequence of the consistently high-quality research presented at the
conference.

This travel grant supports graduate students attending institutions in the
United States as well as junior faculty belonging to or serving under-
represented groups of computer science researchers. The travel grant program has
two components: (1) Outreach to a wider graduate student population; and (2)
Outreach to minority faculty or faculty serving minority students (e.g., EPSCOR
institutions). A total of about ten awards to graduate students and faculty
members will be supported. This grant also supports a Ph.D. forum this year. The
PhD forum provides an environment for doctoral students to present and discuss
their dissertation research with their peers and experienced researchers from
academia and industry. The objective of the award is to widen the audience
attending ICNP and, as a result, raise the level of interactions between
attendees, and the potential for new collaboration, new investigations, and
higher quality research.

Broader Impacts. Conference attendance is a crucial part of the life of a
researcher. By creating new opportunities for students and faculty-especially
those from under represented groups-to attend a high-quality conference, this
project will benefit the research community in several ways. The students and
faculty themselves benefit from the opportunity to meet and interact with many
other researchers in a favorable setting, and from seeing research presented
that may be related to what they are working on, or may inspire them to try a
new direction. The research community benefits from the improvement of the
students in the pipeline, and the introduction of new researcher perspectives.
All attendees benefit from increased diversity of participants attending the
conference, through discussions and other interactions.