* 0948541
* RUI: Over-Printing of Crystallographic Preferred Orientation Patterns in Quartz Aggregates: A Program of Experimental Deformation of Natural Mylonite
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2013
* Gayle Gleason, SUNY College at Cortland
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 12/31/2013
* USD 143,662.00

Crystallographic preferred orientation patterns have been used to interpret
strain history in deformed rocks for many years. Recently that interpretation
has expanded to include rocks with very complex deformation histories presumably
resulting in the overprinting of the patterns. In addition, crystallographic
preferred orientation patterns may create such a strong alignment of the crystal
axes that the mineral grains are more difficult to deform in subsequent
deformation events. Research being carried out in this project seeks to shed
light on the effects of more than one deformation event on the resulting
crystallographic preferred orientation. The project has three objectives: 1) To
determine the effect of pre-existing fabric on the strength of crustal rocks; 2)
To quantify the shear strain needed to reset fabrics; and 3) To investigate the
effect of grain boundary migration during recrystallization on crystallographic
preferred orientation patterns. Naturally deformed rocks with documented
crystallographic preferred orientation s and microstructures are experimentally
deformed under well-constrained conditions and strain paths. The experiments
employ a solid media, piston-cylinder deformation apparatus to deform quartz
mylonite under conditions promoting dislocation creep. Suites of experiments are
conducted with the samples in various orientations with respect to the original
fabric. The resulting microstructures are analyzed with petrographic and
transmission electron microscopy and the crystallographic preferred orientation
s are analyzed by electron backscatter diffraction
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How the crust behaves mechanically when stress is
applied to it depends on the physical properties of the rock, and has
implications for assessing seismic hazards in tectonically active regions.
Crystallographic preferred orientations can modify the rock such that its
physical properties are anisotropic, that is, the properties have different
values in different directions. Anisotropy of seismic wave velocity can affect
the interpretation of seismic data of a region, and thus affect the evaluation
of seismic hazards. The evolution of crystallographic preferred orientation
patterns is important for faults with long histories of movement (i.e., the San
Andreas fault). Also, as deeper rocks are brought to the surface, the conditions
of deformation change- namely the rocks are cooler (i.e., the Alpine fault in
New Zealand). In the mineral quartz, this cooling should lead to the operation
of different slip systems, and possible strengthening of the crust, again
affecting the seismic properties of the crust.