* 0948606
* Analytical and Mechanistic Studies in Electrochemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Dennis Evans, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 06/30/2012
* USD 321,255.00

In this research supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program,
Professor Dennis Evans and his group will examine intermolecular interactions
and intra-molecular structural reorganization of molecules as they undergo
oxidation and reduction. Weak product association effects on voltammetric
signals will be examined in benzidine and biphenylene based systems using
digital simulation methods and product dimerization constants obtained from
independent spectroscopic experiments. This work may lead to unprecedented fast
electrochemical detection of weak product associations in chemical species that
are not amenable to spectroscopic analysis because of their unstable nature.
Exploration will continue on potential inversion, the phenomenon where the
insertion or removal of the second electron in a two electron process occurs
more easily than does removal of the first electron. This work will focus on a
series of dianisidine and bi-aryl compounds which undergo varying degrees of
internal structural reorganization upon the first electron transfer event. This
study should reveal the extent of structural change that is necessary for
potential inversion. Electrochemical results will be compared with homogenous
disproportionation equilibrium constants obtained via electron paramagnetic
resonance (EPR). Independent determination of the inner (internal)
reorganization energies of electroactive molecules will be done using
photoelectron spectroscopy (PES). This study will include some species which
exhibit potential inversion. The Evans group will collaborate with Professor
Lai-Sheng Wang of Washington State University and the Pacific Northwest National
Laboratory to determine inner reorganization energies of anion species using PES
and electrospray ionization. Reactions that involve concerted electron and
proton transfer (CEPT) will be of special interest. Requirements for the CEPT
mechanism including kinetic barriers and the acid-base properties of reactants
and products will be investigated. Experimental studies will be complimented
with density functional theory calculations (DFT/COSMO) of pKa-values, which
take into account solvent dielectric screening effects.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will develop fundamental understanding of
multi-electron-transfer reactions. Modern electrochemical methodology will be
employed. Outcomes will be highly relevant to a wide range of areas. Processes
that affect biological systems, energy production, and synthesis of high value
chemicals are a few examples. &lt;br/&gt;