* 0948288
* Understanding the coupled response of vegetation and fire to climatic variation since the Last Glacial Maximum
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2012
* Jennifer Marlon, Marlon                  Jennifer       R
* Continuing Grant
* Lina Patino
* 08/31/2012
* USD 170,000.00

Dr. Jennifer Marlon is awarded an NSF Earth Sciences Postdoctoral Fellowship to
carry out a research and education plan at the University of Wisconsin -
Madison. Dr. Marlon will use paleoenvironmental data and a dynamic global
vegetation-fire model to study past climate change impacts on fire-vegetation
interactions. She will first conduct meta-analyses of charcoal and pollen data
from lake sediments to reconstruct centennial- to millennial-scale patterns of
fire and vegetation change at regional to continental scales. A cutting-edge,
fire-enabled dynamic global vegetation model will then be used to simulate
paleofire activity under climate conditions very different from today (i.e.,
6000 and 21,000 years ago). Results from the charcoal and pollen analyses will
be used to assess model performance through data-model comparisons. Finally,
results from the synthesis and data-model comparison will be used to design and
implement sensitivity experiments with the coupled vegetation-fire model. The
aim of the experiments will be to advance our understanding of how climate and
vegetation control fire regimes, and of the range of responses in vegetation and
fire to potential future climate changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The likely
impacts of global warming on vegetation and wildfires at broad spatial scales
are largely unknown. Yet, we know that projected climate changes will have major
consequences for ecosystem dynamics, including disturbance regimes, and that
feedbacks from changing fire regimes in particular will affect global
biogeochemical cycles, as well as atmospheric chemistry and physics. Such
consequences, in turn, threaten ecosystem services, such as the provisioning of
clean air and water, and thus human health and livelihoods. Paleofire records
indicate that fire regimes are highly sensitive to climate changes, particularly
when the changes are abrupt, and regardless of the direction of change. This
research will improve our understanding of natural variability in fire regimes
and thus improve our ability to model future changes in fire. Results will also
provide ecologists and natural resource managers with critical context for
current fire-regime changes in North America. Outreach and education activities
associated with this research include the development of standardized and
integrated datasets of past fire and vegetation changes that will be made
available to the broader community on a public website. Dr. Marlon will also
develop course material on fire, paleoecology and paleoclimatology for
undergraduates and graduates at the host institution.