* 0948170
* Collaborative Research: Reconstructions of the Gulf of California-Salton Trough Plate Boundary Since 14 Ma: A Digital Synthesis of Recent Advances and Outstanding Problems
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2013
* Rebecca Dorsey, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 03/31/2013
* USD 48,344.00

The PIs will construct a series of digital GIS-based paleotectonic and
paleogeographic maps that will track development of the Gulf of California -
Salton Trough plate boundary in 2-million-year increments from 14 Ma to the
present. One set of maps will be made for the period from 6 Ma to the present -
a time for which the rate of relative plate motion and the total amount of
plate-boundary offset are widely agreed upon. Two sets of maps will be developed
for the period from 14 to 6 Ma to highlight two contrasting end-member models
for the timing of rift initiation, marine incursion, total offset across the
Gulf, and kinematics of plate boundary development: (1) modified strain-
partitioning model, with marine incursion into the southern Gulf at ~8 Ma and
into the northern Gulf at ~6 Ma; and (2) non-partitioned, integrated regional
strain with marine incursion as early as ca. 12 Ma. Using this approach, the PIs
will fully explore the numerous implications and predictions of the two end-
member models and suggest new data that will be needed to address this major
unresolved controversy in future studies. The reconstructions will highlight
both recent advances in understanding as well as unresolved controversies. They
hope that the map reconstructions will also challenge the research community to
develop rigorous testable hypotheses for future work that will explore the
underlying processes of continental rifting, birth of an ocean basin, and the
possible role of strike-slip and/or transtensional strain in modulating those
processes. This kind of synthesis of the Gulf of California-Salton Sea was
recommended by the MARGINS review panels/program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts of the synthesis represent an important service to a broader Earth
science community. It will enhance both research and education and will be
available for instructors in Earth and environmental sciences and to the general
public for potential ecotourism sites in the region. Graduate students will gain
experience with collaborative scientific research, improve their GIS skills, and
increase their knowledge of the focus site in general.