* 0948222
* New Catalytic Reactions for Enhanced Synthetic Efficiency
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2013
* Barry Trost, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 04/30/2013
* USD 465,000.00

This project revolves around the enhancement in synthetic efficiency by using
alkynes as key building blocks. Most notably, the enhanced chemoselectivity of
an alkyne as well as its ability to be chemoselectively transformed into
reactive functional groups will be pursued, which should minimize the use of
protecting groups, a major contributor to synthetic inefficiency. Furthermore,
it explores the invention of addition reactions where anything else is needed
only catalytically, most notably reactions based on ruthenium catalysis.
Transformations that previously were unknown or quite difficult not only may
become feasible but may be performed with high atom economy. A rare principle,
the use of two separate transition metal catalyzed reactions occurring in the
presence of each other either concurrently or consecutively, will also be
examined. In addition, the formation and reactivity of ruthenium enolates will
be studied for chemo, regio-, diastereo-, and enantioselective reactions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the Chemical Synthesis Program is
supporting the research of Professor Barry M. Trost of the Department of
Chemistry at Stanford University. Professor Trost's program will contribute to
making the synthesis of complex bioactive molecules more environmentally benign
by design. By so doing, it will help transform one of the most environmentally
poor sectors of the chemical industry, the specialty chemical industry which
includes both the pharmaceutical and agrichemical industries, into a much more
environmentally sound one.