* 0948750
* DIFFERENTIATING FLASH FLOOD-BORNE SEDIMENTS IN A SMALL AGRICULTURAL HEADWATER SYSTEM USING ISOTOPIC TRACERS
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2013
* Thanos Papanicolaou, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 03/31/2013
* USD 48,850.00

Flash flood events are geomorphically critical because they affect stream
morphology and floodplain sediment redistribution, as well as lead to the
formation of ephemeral gullies, which become key conduits of soils derived from
the uplands and floodplain. The June 19th, 2009 flash flood event in the
University of Iowa Clear Creek NSF testbed offers a unique opportunity to derive
sediment rating data points that, to our best knowledge, do not exist in the
literature. In addition, the pre-existing infrastructure in the NSF test bed
allowed us to capture soils/ sediments of different origin, i.e., sediments that
originate from hills, ditches, riparian zone, stream banks and bed. These
unexpected measurements along with the availability of detailed hydrological
measurements from radar and preexisting LiDAR data will help us quantify a
sediment budget for the event.&lt;br/&gt;We propose: 1) to develop a sediment
budget for a headwater system of Clear Creek, IA during the June 19th flash
flood event; 2) to quantify the proportions of recently eroded surface soils and
channel-derived sediment in the suspended load using established sediment
tracing techniques that involve naturally occurring radionuclides (7Be and
excess Lead-210, 210Pbxs) and stable isotopes (Carbon-13, 13C, and Nitrogen-15,
15N); and 3) to compare the budget with simulations of coupled upland erosion
and 1D/ 2D sediment transport models to test their predictive ability for
simulating flash flood events.&lt;br/&gt;For this study, we are seeking support
to conduct isotopic tracer analysis for the samples collected prior to and
during the flash flood event to provide a more detailed budget and for modeling
of the event. Although an inventory of geochemical tracers is available for
Clear Creek through past research, these tracers cannot identify the origin of
mobilized sediments solely associated to the flood event of June 19th, 2009. A
powerful and established tracer for identifying recently mobilized sediment is
the naturally occurring radionuclide, Beryllium-7 (7Be). 7Be is produced
continuously in the atmosphere but delivered to the landscape surface in high
concentrations mainly during precipitation events. Moreover, 7Be has a
relatively short half-life of only 53 days, meaning that it will not remain long
in the soil before decaying. Thus, there is a strong relationship between a
single erosion event and high signatures of 7Be in the eroded surface soils.
Past research has shown the unique ability of 7Be to differentiate uplands from
stream banks and bed sediments.&lt;br/&gt;The samples to be analyzed have
already been collected, but time is critical because of the short 53-day half-
life of 7Be. Radionuclide analysis of the samples must begin immediately and be
completed within 4 half-lives in order to capture detectable activities of 7Be
for differentiating upland and stream bank/bed sources to the sediment load of
the June 19th event.&lt;br/&gt;As with any catastrophic flood, frequently asked
questions include how much material (e.g., water and sediment) was moved during
the event. For this study, we will supersede this primary question by addressing
not only how much material (in this case, sediment) was mobilized during the
June 19th flash flood, but also from where the transported material was
derived.&lt;br/&gt; This research is transformative because it will provide
sediment flux vs. flow data for