* 0948627
* RAPID: Seed caches as a fire survival mechanism in Arctostaphylos (Ericaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2010
* V. Thomas Parker, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 07/31/2010
* USD 24,978.00

The seeds of several plant species in California chaparral require fires to
germinate. In the genus Arctostaphylos (Ericaceae), a group of woody shrubs and
small trees found in chaparral, seeds are initially dispersed locally. As seeds
are slowly incorporated into the soil, they create dormant, persistent soil seed
banks where they remain until conditions are right for germination following
fire. Critically, seeds must reach a sufficient depth to survive the heat of
fire but still be shallow enough to emerge after germinating. After seedlings
establish following fire, survivors generally take several to nearly 10 years
before they begin producing seeds. Fires during Summer 2008 have revealed an
intriguing pattern suggesting that rodents cache Arctostaphylos seeds by burying
collections of seeds below 5 cm enabling higher rates of survival during fires.
This project focuses on documenting survival rates of seedlings emerging from
seed banks as individuals versus from caches following the 2008 fires in several
California field sites that differ in plant species composition and past fire
intensity. Sampling must occur quickly before seedlings experience the usual
late-summer drought and die-off. Secondary dispersal of seeds by mammals as
suggested here has rarely been investigated thus results will have implications
for relevant theory and for other ecosystems.

Two-thirds of the taxa of Arctostaphylos are of limited distribution, and many
are listed or being considered for listing (state and federal) as threatened or
endangered. These species often occur in habitats that may be encroached upon
with development. Results of this project will have conservation implications
because managing these plant species may require effective management of
associated animal communities. Undergraduates and a research technician will be
mentored and trained in this project, and several public outreach efforts are
planned.