* 0948473
* Fault Speedometers, Slip Localization, and Slip Complexity on Exhumed Faults
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2013
* James Evans, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 03/31/2013
* USD 94,474.00

Rapid slip events on faults resulting in earthquakes pose serious hazards to
millions of people globally. The PI and students will investigate the physics of
faulting by studying highly polished, very narrow faults that may be the product
of fast slip during ancient earthquakes. The goals of this project are to
examine highly polished fault surfaces along the Wasatch Fault, Utah, to
determine the mechanisms that created the narrow faults and to determine if
these faults formed at high temperatures. If we can determine that high
temperatures were the result of high-speed frictional processes, we can use the
evidence from the rocks to establish the conditions and processes by which
faults develop. The team will undertake both field and laboratory investigations
of preserved fault surfaces. The data will help constrain theoretical models of
faults that explain how earthquakes nucleate and propagate. These models make
predictions about the temperatures of fault rocks, the nature of faulted rock,
and the size of the faulted zone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of
independent fault speedometers has great significance for interpreting the
natural seismic fault. Establishing the rate of slip, mechanisms of
localization, detailed topography at higher resolution, and kinematics of
ancient faults from textures and compositions of fault-related rocks is
remarkably difficult, and yet these data are important for constraining models
of earthquake nucleation and rupture. One possible indicator of rapid slip is a
narrow, highly polished and iridescent slip surface. The Wasatch fault zone in
Utah exhumed many extremely narrow, highly polished slip surfaces that are
coated with nano- to micrometer scale hematite or quartz. The team will examine
the fault surfaces and the thin iridescent materials within them using optical
and electron microscopy, compositional analyses, X-Ray diffraction, whole-rock
geochemistry and surface measurement methods. They will use detailed micro-scale
chemical analyses to evaluate the presence and/or nature of mineral
transformations, hydrothermal or non-aqueous alteration processes, and the
processes of slip localization. The results of this study will be combined to
evaluate the likelihood that these surfaces were produced seismically. The
analyses proposed here will document similarities and differences between
experimental and natural fault surfaces, and in concert with recent work on the
mm-scale lower limit of slip on earthquake-producing faults, will yield insights
into the processes that initiate and propagate faults. They hope to use the
results to characterize the distribution of asperities at the mm and smaller
scale, the mechanisms of slip localization, and their relationships to so-called
critical slip distances that may be required for the initiation of earthquakes.