* 0948216
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: Design, Fabrication, and Performance Evaluation of a Marine Aerosol Generator for Shipboard Deployment
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2009,02/28/2011
* David Kieber, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 02/28/2011
* USD 7,070.00

Production of marine aerosols by bursting bubbles at the ocean surface is a
major process in the Earth's climate system, with important implications for the
physiochemical evolution of the troposphere and feedbacks on upper ocean
biogeochemistry. Reliable characterization of marine aerosols is a critical
prerequisite for evaluating the nature and magnitude of subsequent
physiochemical evolution and feedbacks. However, fresh marine aerosols are
rapidly modified via interaction with light and reactive gases and are injected
into an atmosphere containing mechanically produced aerosols and associated
reaction products from multiple sources and secondary aerosols from nucleation
and growth pathways. Consequently, it is extremely difficult to unequivocally
deconvolute the physiochemical properties and global significance of nascent
marine aerosols based on measurements of ambient
aerosols.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several years ago with NSF support, researchers
at the SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry and the University of
Virginia fabricated, tested, and successfully deployed a novel high-capacity
aerosol generator at Bermuda to determine the production, characteristics, and
photochemical evolution of nascent marine aerosols over the full relevant size
distribution (0.013 to &gt;15 ìm diameter at 80% RH). The logical next step is
to deploy a hardened version of the generator on a ship at sea to evaluate the
influence of marine organic matter composition and concentration on
corresponding physiochemical characteristics and evolution of marine aerosol and
the resulting feedbacks on the surface ocean. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
project, the same research team will be joined by colleagues at the Scripps
Institution of Oceanography to deploy the generator on a ship. The research
objectives are: (1) To construct and lab-test a hardened version of the marine
aerosol generator, (2) to deploy and operate the generator on a ship at sea, and
(3) To evaluate the representativeness of resulting number size distributions.
The original generator will be modified to make it suitable for deployment at
sea. It will be deployed in a shelter on the fantail of a medium- to large-size
ship of opportunity in the North Atlantic during late spring or early summer
2010. Aerosols will be generated over a range of bubble rates and falling water
flow rates from the nozzle. Size-resolved number production fluxes will be
quantified over the full size distribution (0.13 to &gt;15 ìm diameter at 80%
RH).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Results will provide a well-
characterized capability for evaluating the influences of the surface ocean on
the size-resolved composition and flux of primary marine aerosols, the
speciation and magnitude of reactive trace gas production via photochemical
transformation of marine-derived particulate organic matter, and the related
influences of these pathways in the multiphase chemical and physical evolution
of the marine air, surface ocean biogeochemistry, and Earth's climate.
Consequently, the project will contribute directly to national and international
programs investigating the chemical and physical evolution of marine aerosols
and their related climatic implications as well as studies on understanding the
role of the atmosphere on the upper ocean's biogeochemical dynamics. In
particular this technology promises to be relevant to the international and
national Surface Ocean Lower Atmosphere Study (SOLAS). The project will also
contribute to the education of a student and post doctoral fellow.