* 0948987
* Development of a Fourier-Transform Infrared  Microscopy Laboratory for Research in Earth and Materials Sciences
* GEO,EAR
* 11/01/2010,10/31/2011
* Jay Thomas, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 10/31/2011
* USD 140,254.00

0948987 Thomas

This award will fund a Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectrometer and an IR
microscope for measuring volatiles in natural materials and in materials
synthesized in known temperature and pressure regimes. The proposed acquisition
will allow analyzing trace amounts of water in synthesized minerals and glasses
created under controlled pressure and temperature conditions. Experimental
systems will allow the investigators to vary pressure, temperature and chemical
composition in order to assess water solubility in minerals and glasses. The
FTIR system will allow direct water measurement in normally anhydrous components
and will be be used to constrain mechanisms and refine models for natural
materials. The measurements are fundamental to understanding effects on physical
properties occurring when even small amounts of water become incorporated during
mineral formation. Crystallographic siting and specific absorbing component
spatial orientation within the crystal lattice will be assessed using the new
FTIR system. Other analytical techniques (linear particle accelerator with H+
profiling, a Raman microprobe, and supercomputing facility) will help validate
water concentrations and characterize mineral distribution. Measurements and
modeling obtained in controlled experiments will ultimately be used to interpret
and quantify FTIR spectra from natural materials. The instrument will be used to
model processes which are difficult to understand without laboratory simulations
(fluid flow, mantle convection, water-assisted deformation, melting, plutonism,
volcanism, and ore deposition). The PIs have supported research projects for
eight undergraduates over the past two years. Students present research at
meetings and in research papers. Two graduate students will be directly
supported in their research with this acquisition. The PI will assume overall
responsibility for daily operation, maintenance, user scheduling, and training.
Ample space is already available in recently-renovated laboratory.

***