* 0948057
* Workshop Proposal: Effective Negotiation Skills
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Janis Terpenny, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard N. Smith
* 12/31/2012
* USD 29,049.00

Abstract for Proposal number 0948057 "Effective Negotiation
Skills":&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this workshop on Effective Negotiation
Skills is to begin the development of a community within the American Society of
Mechanical Engineers that supports and mentors researchers from underrepresented
groups. The workshop is designed to provide faculty members and graduate
students with professional development activities and to give them the
opportunity to make connections with an international network of supportive
researchers in their field. This workshop will be the inaugural event of the
committee on the Broadening Participation committee of the ASME. The goal of the
Broadening Participation committee is to develop, implement and oversee new and
existing activities aimed at broadening the participation of women and
underrepresented minorities in the activities of Design Engineering Division of
the American Society of Mechanical Engineers. Participants will spend ½ of the
workshop focused on developing negotiation skills led by Academic Professionals
who are offering this negotiation skills workshop to groups across the country.
They are well known for their long term involvement with the COACh workshops for
women faculty sponsored by the AIChE and supported by NSF and NIH. The other ½
of the workshop will be led by the organizing committee with a focus on
networking activities intended to foster a variety of long-term relationships
including: 1) research collaborations, 2) mentoring, and 3) an affinity group
built around common interests/concerns associated with the challenges for
underrepresented groups in the ASME DED community. This is a very good proposal
for the underrepresented groups in the engineering community. They will develop
crucial skills and will become better connected within the engineering design
community earlier in their career. The amount of support for this proposal is a
reduced amount of $ 29,049.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Omnia El-Hakim,
Ph.D.-Program Director &lt;br/&gt;For Diversity and Outreach&lt;br/&gt;National
Science Foundation&lt;br/&gt;Directorate for Engineering&lt;br/&gt;4201 Wilson
Blvd., Suite 505N&lt;br/&gt;Arlington, VA 22230&lt;br/&gt; Tel: (703) 292-
2149&lt;br/&gt;Fax: (703) 292- 9013&lt;br/&gt;E-Mail: oelhakim@nsf.gov