* 0948905
* Early Concept Grant for Exploratory Research ( EAGER ) Dynamic Traffic Equilibrium Problems:  Distributed Algorithms and Error Analysis
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Uday Shanbhag, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Edwin Romeijn
* 08/31/2012
* USD 200,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Increasing levels of congestion in urban traffic networks
have significant economic and environmental impact. Supported by dramatic
increases in sensing and communication ability, there is a renewed emphasis on
developing intelligent transportation systems. This grant concentrates on
developing exact and approximate algorithms for the dynamic traffic assignment
problems, for purposes of online deployment and offline design. Our objective is
to study the corresponding variational inequality problems and their stochastic
generalizations via decomposition methods and distributed schemes. We propose to
develop two classes of schemes, namely, projection-based schemes and splitting-
based schemes, with an emphasis on developing convergence theory and providing
error estimates. We also propose to consider the design of mechanisms that
minimize the price of anarchy via the solution of large-scale mathematical
programs with equilibrium constraints, with an emphasis on (1) obtaining bounds
via nonconvex duality and (2) the development of scalable decomposition
schemes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this work lies in the
construction of limited coordination low-complexity distributed for solving the
dynamic traffic equilibrium problem. The proposed schemes are expected to be
either provably convergent or have well-defined error bounds. More generally,
the work will add to the realm of approximate schemes developed for convex
optimization problems and will have applicability for obtaining approximate
equilibria in a host of settings. From an application standpoint, the work is
motivated by the need to create more efficient transportation systems.
Specifically, these schemes can be deployed in online settings, and are capable
of functioning under limited information and coordination requirements. We
expect that our scalable offline design algorithms will aid in the very design
of such systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;