* 0948386
* Collaborative Research: Australia Down Under: Quantification of Rates and Amount of Continental Subduction During Neogene Arc-continent Collision on Timor
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2010,05/31/2014
* Ronald Harris, Brigham Young University
* Continuing Grant
* David Fountain
* 05/31/2014
* USD 152,988.00

The objective of this project is to test whether arc-continent collision events
modify overall convergence rates, with the island of Timor as test-case. The
mountainous island of Timor exposes a tectono-stratigraphic section of a typical
arc-continent collision, with elements from the overriding Asian oceanic/arc
plate, a wedge of high pressure/low temperature metamorphic rocks and an
underlying deformed Australian continental passive margin sedimentary sequence.
An accurate geologic map of the Island, which describes the distribution of rock
types and structures, will be produced that will form the basis for balanced
structural cross-sections, which, in turn, will be used to quantify how much the
sedimentary rocks once deposited on the margin have been telescoped during
collision. The magnitude of shortening should correlate with the amount of
continental crust that has been subducted. Paleomagnetic analysis is used to
determine paleolatitude, rotation, and age of strata. High- to low-temperature
thermochronologic data will document the magnitude, variability, and timing of
exhumation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Shortly after the recognition of plate
tectonics, the Wilson cycle was introduced in order to describe the creation and
demise of ocean basins. The original four stages ? continental rifting, seafloor
spreading and formation of ocean basins, closure of ocean basins by subduction
of oceanic lithosphere, and continent-continent collision - still form a
fundamental basis for our understanding of tectonic processes. Arc-continent
collision marks the ultimate demise of an intra-oceanic subduction zone and is a
common phenomenon during ocean closure. It is usually assumed that significant
underthrusting of continental material under an oceanic island arc is inhibited
by buoyancy but the magnitude of continental subduction remains unconstrained.
This project will provide an estimate for the magnitude of continental crust
that has been subducted, results that would have important implications for
mantle chemistry and dynamics. The project involves a significant collaboration
with researchers from Norway, Swiss, Australia, and Indonesia as well as
training of U.S. and international students.