* 0948620
* Geodynamic Modeling of Long-term Fault Interactions During the Evolution of the Pacific-North American Plate Boundary Zone
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2013
* Mian Liu, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 12/31/2013
* USD 135,026.00

The San Andreas Fault is the tectonic boundary between the Pacific and the North
American plates, yet only a portion of the relative plate motion is absorbed by
slip on the San Andreas Fault proper. The rest, up to 25 per cent, is
accommodated by a complex system of faults over a broad plate boundary zone, by
the Eastern California shear zone. Such diffuse deformation in the plate
boundary zone is responsible for the widely scattered earthquakes in California
and Nevada, but it is not clear how the Eastern California shear zone and other
faults in the San Andreas Fault system formed, and what controls the strain
partitioning among these faults. This research project will attempt to address
the following questions: 1) what caused the inception and development of the
Eastern California shear zone? 2) how has the development of the Eastern
California shear zone, the Garlock Fault, and the San Jacinto Fault in the past
few million years affected the crustal dynamics in the San Andreas Fault plate
boundary zone? The study employs numerical modeling of long-term mechanical
coupling and fault interactions in which the research team will develop a finite
element model for three-dimensional, regional-scale lithospheric deformation.
The viscoelastoplastic formulation in this model allows simulation of strain
localization in the crust outside the faults, hence the inception of new
faults.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plate boundaries are major fault zones, across
which the relative plate motion produces concentrated crustal deformation,
volcanoes, and earthquakes. However, the Pacific- North American plate boundary
is a major exception. Here the plate boundary, the San Andreas fault absorbs
only part of the relative plate motion and the rest is accommodated by slip on
many faults in a complex system that extents into central Nevada. The proposed
research seeks to understand why these fault initiated and what controls strain
partitioning among these faults. The results of this study will help us to
better understand the geodynamic implications of the observed crustal motion,
hence provide insights into earthquakes in California and Nevada.