* 0949313
* Purchase of an X-Ray Core Scanner for Research in Paleoclimatology and Global Change
* GEO,EAR
* 11/01/2010,10/31/2011
* John Rhodes, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 10/31/2011
* USD 388,976.00

0949313&lt;br/&gt;Rhodes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides funding over
12 months to acquire an X-ray core scanner. The institution will provide partial
funding. The instrument will provide high-resolution, non-destructive elemental
abundances in core and rock samples. The XRF core scanner will be added to the
X-Ray Analytical Facility. Existing X-ray spectrometers and diffractometers will
be used to calibrate and intercompare with the new instrument. The PI will have
overall responsibility while a full-time University-funded technician will be
responsible for day-to-day operations. A user fee based on core size will be
used for cost recovery. The instrument will support the PIs' efforts to assess
paleoenvironmental changes at scales ranging from sub-annual to millennial.
Climate histories recorded in cores will allow the PIs to better understand
environmental change. The electron microprobe/scanning electron microscope
facility will be used to further study scanned cores allowing a more efficient
and robust overall sample processing scheme. Ultimately, more reliable
calibrations and quantitative procedures will be developed. The instrument will
be incorporated into an existing regional facility which serves UMAss and other
institutions (Amherst College, Hampshire College, Mount Holyoke College, and
Smith College). The scanner will be available to student and faculty
researchers. It will also be incorporated into courses in sedimentary
geochemistry, sedimentology and X-ray analytical tecniques. The Svalbard REU
project will immediately benefit with inherent societal climate change
implications. STEM outreach will target teachers with environmental change
assessment approaches which will benefit K-12 students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***