* 0949719
* Linking microbial community composition to the ecological dominance of plants
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2014
* Jennifer Rudgers, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 05/31/2014
* USD 279,354.00

Plant species abundance is an essential component of ecosystem biodiversity and
function, but understanding what factors regulate rarity and commonness has been
elusive. Numerous studies have compared traits that might distinguish between
rare and common species (e.g. seed size) and tested factors potentially
contributing to rarity (e.g. competition), but these efforts have not
substantially explained observed variation in plant abundances. The proposed
research will test the novel hypothesis that soil microorganisms, often
overlooked by community ecologists, may explain rarity in plants through soil
community feedbacks. In the feedback process, a plant species alters the
composition of the soil microbial community, and the altered soil community then
affects plant performance relative to other plants in the community. Negative
feedback should drive plants toward rarity, whereas positive feedback should
promote plant dominance. If feedback regulates plant rarity, then rare and
common plant species should either support different soil microbial communities
or respond differently to the same community. This prediction has not been
tested. A field survey will be conducted to determine whether co-occurring rare
and common grass species develop consistently different microbial communities in
nature. The potential function of these microorganisms will also be compared by
measuring activities for enzymes involved in carbon, nitrogen and phosphorous
cycles. Then, using a reciprocal soil transfer experiment in the greenhouse
(i.e. rare plants will be grown on common plants' soil and vice-versa), the
second part of this study will test if rare plants experience more negative
feedbacks than common ones. A fractionation experiment in which plants interact
with different components of the microbial community (e.g. all microbes or
bacteria only or fungi only) will help understand which microbes are more
actively driving soil community feedbacks.

The data generated have high potential to transform current understanding of the
factors governing plant species abundance. Results will be disseminated to
policy-makers and land managers through existing collaborations with the Nature
Conservancy, US Forest Service, National Parks, and private seed companies. The
research will integrate teaching and research by building partnerships with K-12
educators, by funding a female post-doc, and by training graduate and
undergraduate students from diverse backgrounds.