* 0949637
* Climate control of terrestrial ecosystem CO2 sequestration
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2013
* Chuixiang Yi, CUNY Queens College
* Continuing Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 06/30/2013
* USD 145,282.00

Climate control of terrestrial ecosystem CO2 sequestration

Relationships between climate and the net exchange of carbon dioxide (CO2)
between the atmosphere and biosphere on yearly to decadal scales are poorly
known. This is a critical knowledge gap for models used to estimate long-term
climate change impacts on both the biosphere and the rate of change of CO2 in
the atmosphere. A pilot study, based on large databases from more than 100
observational sites over 6 continents with a total of 583 site-years of
observations, suggests that the net flow of carbon into or out of ecosystems is
highly correlated with: (1) mean annual temperature at mid- and high-latitudes,
(2) water stress at mid- and low-latitudes, and (3) both temperature and water
stress around the mid-latitudinal belt. On average, the influence of water
stress on terrestrial ecosystem CO2 uptake exceeds the influence of temperature
at mean annual temperatures above 16 C. This project will explore the ecological
and physical mechanisms behind these initial results and develop a clearer
understanding of the relative importance of temperature and water availability
on carbon sequestration. This research is essential to understanding how future
climate change is likely to alter the exchange of CO2 between the biosphere and
the atmosphere. The consensus of science represented by the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) is that over the 21st century warming will be
greatest at high northern latitudes, while projected decreases in precipitation
are likely over much of the terrestrial subtropical zone. Results of this
project will provide an empirical model based on real-world data of how the most
likely future climate change scenarios would affect the potential capacity of
terrestrial CO2 uptake in high latitudes and low latitudes. The analysis and
synthesis of information proposed here is based on a large dataset provided by
more than 100 research groups around the world. Collaboration, communication,
and co-authorship will be established among a large number of scientists who
collect these data. Two lectures will be developed for a non-major course that
serves >250 students, and will incorporate basic concepts of physiological
ecology and climatology based on this research. The lectures will bring current
research into a classroom with perhaps the most ethnically diverse student body
in the nation.