* 0949722
* Histone Eviction and Mediator Function in Transcriptional Activation in Yeast
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2015
* Randall Morse, Health Research Incorporated/New York State Department of Health
* Continuing Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 04/30/2015
* USD 591,219.00

Intellectual merit: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long term goal of this project is
to gain new understanding into mechanisms of transcriptional control in
eukaryotes. Regulation of gene transcription is central to growth, development,
and response to environment in all cells; thus, understanding transcriptional
control is a central goal in genetics. The specific goals of this project are to
gain new insight into chromatin remodeling during gene activation, and into the
role of the Mediator complex in gene regulation. DNA in higher organisms,
including humans, is packaged into nucleosomes by wrapping around an octamer of
histone proteins. This creates a potential impediment to protein-DNA
interactions needed for transcription of DNA into RNA, and so at many genes
these nucleosomes must be remodeled to allow transcription to occur. This
project will focus on chromatin remodeling at the CHA1 gene in the yeast
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Genetic and biochemical approaches will be used to
examine the mechanism by which remodeling leads to histone eviction at CHA1 and
at additional inducible promoters. Studies will also be conducted to investigate
the role of the Mediator complex in transcriptional regulation in yeast.
Mediator is a large, multi-subunit complex, comprising tail, middle, and head
modules that bridges activators, whose binding is the initial step in gene
activation, and the general transcription machinery. Mediator is highly
conserved across the eukaryotic kingdom, and serves as a conduit for many
regulatory signals, but the mechanism by which it controls gene expression is
not well understood. Research will be carried out to determine whether one
specific part of the Mediator complex, called the tail module, has specific
functions aside from its requirement for recruitment of the middle and head
modules, and to determine the role of the tail module of Mediator in CHA1
activation, in genome-wide recruitment of Mediator, and in transcriptional
repression. Overall, this project will provide new information on fundamental
aspects of transcriptional activation which at present is poorly understood.
Transcriptional mechanisms are well conserved across eukaryotes. Hence, the
information gained from this work will be broadly
applicable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will include training of a graduate student and postdoctoral fellow. In
addition, undergraduates will be recruited to participate in this project as
summer interns, to be funded by REU supplements. The project will also result in
generation of large data sets from microarray studies, and these will be made
publicly available, both by providing raw data files to a public repository
(GEO), and by making more user-friendly, processed data files available for
download from the principal investigator's web site.