* 0949111
* Person perception, reputations, and shared information in the social network context
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2010,01/31/2014
* Eliot Smith, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Sally Dickerson
* 01/31/2014
* USD 402,701.00

The research supported by this grant innovates beyond traditional approaches to
studying impression formation. Impression formation, which has been a core topic
in social psychology for a long time, has generally been treated as a purely
cognitive process within one perceiver. This research instead examines
impressions in the context of the social network, as emerging when many people
interact and share information with others. People's impressions of others are
fundamental tools for social life. They influence whether we trust someone's
opinion, or choose to befriend, date, or cooperate with someone. While existing
research has clarified many of the cognitive processes involved in forming
impressions, other important aspects remain unexamined, especially the ways
perceivers incorporate information about another person passed along by others
rather than relying solely on firsthand observations. A fuller picture of
impression formation must involve not only cognitive processes within the
individual perceiver, but also dyadic interaction processes through which
perceivers actively elicit information from others, and processes of information
flow in social networks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research proposed uses
computational modeling and experimental approaches to address four key
questions: (1) How do impressions differ when perceivers can actively choose
what and how much information they receive about a person, rather than being
limited to a fixed, pre-specified body of information (as in most existing
research)? (2) Are perceivers aware of others' general reputations, and how do
those reputations affect the perceiver's own impression? (3) Are perceivers
aware of potential biases in socially transmitted information and can they
correct for such bias? (4) How does asymmetric familiarity influence
interpersonal interaction, when person A knows a lot about B (learned from third
parties) but B does not know A at all? The research findings resulting from this
will have implications for prejudice and stereotyping, which are also
constructed and spread through social networks, and will address questions that
are important to people's daily lives. In addition to the scientific advances
that will result from this work, the project also aims to promote teaching,
training, and learning among undergraduate and graduate students.