* 0949227
* The acquisition of a specialized sulfur isotope mass-spectrometer, construction of a custom designed, semi-automated sample preparation-fluorination system, and support for early..
* GEO,EAR
* 11/01/2010,10/31/2013
* David Johnston, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 10/31/2013
* USD 377,462.00

The inclusion of 33S and 36S measurements (in addition to the more traditionally
measured 32S and 34S) greatly expanded our picture of early Earth environments.
These measurements further allowed for the development of new isotopic
fingerprints of specific atmospheric chemistries and biological processes.
However, the advancement of this field has suffered from slow and time-intensive
sample throughput, and as such, the applicability of these measurements to a
wider range of Earth science related questions remains unresolved. In order to
overcome these limitations, new technologies are required.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support modifications on a Thermo
Scientific MAT 253 gas source mass-spectrometer, the construction and
implementation of a semi-automated sample preparation-fluorination system, and
salary for technical support. This system will provide higher throughput
capability in addition to being semi-automated, allowing for less person-hours
per sample. Modifications to the mass spectrometer will also allow for lower
backgrounds and better precisions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Together, these changes
will allow for the generation of larger, more precise data sets, which will in
turn enable us to ask a suite of exciting new scientific questions. Among these,
areas of active research include: deciphering the contribution of different
microbial processes to an overall marine isotope record and using the minor
sulfur isotopes as tracers in experimental (e.g., inorganic, microbial, and
animal) and natural (e.g., heavy metal contaminated sites, microbial mats)
systems.&lt;br/&gt;