* 0949191
* Early Career: Acquisition of a gas source mass spectrometer, technical support, and outreach for research in paleoclimate
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2011,02/28/2014
* Aradhna Tripati, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 02/28/2014
* USD 390,000.00

0949191&lt;br/&gt;Tripati&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides funding to
acquire a gas-source, isotope-ratio mass spectrometer for the analysis of
multiply substituted carbon dioxide isotopologues, which form the basis of the
new carbonate ?clumped isotope? thermometer. Studies by the early career PI and
collaborators during her postdoctoral research demonstrated that the
instrumentation awarded here offers unparalleled opportunities for addressing a
range of questions in paleoclimatology. For example, accurate constraints on
past temperature are critical for documenting climate change and resolving its
causes. Paleoclimate records also have the potential to inform us about the
amplitude and regional pattern of climate change and about the processes
responsible for such change. In addition to being essential to understanding the
climate evolution of the Earth over a range of timescales, accurate records of
temperature are relevant to outstanding questions in paleoceanography
(constraining the density structure of the ocean in the past), biogeochemistry
(the nature silicate weathering feedbacks), carbonate sedimentology (the burial
and cementation history of reef carbonates), geobiology (the role of climate
change in driving major speciation and extinction events in the Paleozoic), and
tectonics (the elevation history of the Tibetan Plateau). The instrumentation
will support the development of a state-of-the art lab at UCLA encouraging
collaborative research projects with outside scientists, including state
universities and non-Ph.D. granting institutions. The instrument will be
integrated into research activities in the classroom, and utilized intensively
by students in thesis research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***