* 0949984
* Mechanisms of Species-Area Relationships in Ozark Glades
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2010,02/29/2016
* Tiffany Knight, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 02/29/2016
* USD 748,046.00

The observation that larger areas typically support more species is the basis
for the species-area relationship, one of the oldest and best known
relationships in ecology. Although this relationship holds true across a wide
range of areas, and for many groups of species, it often predicts that small
habitats should have more species than are actually present. The lower diversity
found in small habitats may be a consequence of there being fewer rare species
in those habitats than would be expected based on relatively simple species area
relationships. A long-term, large-scale experiment will be established to test
mechanisms underlying an increased extinction risk of rare species in smaller
habitats in experimentally restored Ozark Glade communities. Plant communities
in these rocky-outcrop ecosystems will be monitored following experimental
restoration, and the demography of several rare species will be followed
closely. Additional experiments will test the importance of biotic interactions,
such as predation and mutualism, and habitat geometry to the persistence of rare
species.

Results from this study will have important implications for understanding, and
trying to mitigate, biodiversity loss from small habitats, especially loss of
rare species. This study will focus on a unique ecosystem type with many endemic
species, and will engage practicing restoration ecologists as well as the
general public on nearby public lands. Many undergraduate students and local
high school interns will participate in the research as part of an informal
science education program. Further, the long-term and large-scale nature of this
experiment will create scientific infrastructure that will support research on
related topics by undergraduate and graduate students, as well as researchers
from other institutions.