* 0949416
* Geoinformatics: Leveraging the Paleobiology Database for Research, Education, Mentorship, and Interoperability
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2010,12/31/2016
* Shanan Peters, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Skog
* 12/31/2016
* USD 765,604.00

The Paleobiology Database has been its field's main driver of
macroevolutionary&lt;br/&gt;research over the last decade. It has yielded major
insights into local- to global-scale changes in biodiversity, the consequences
of mass extinctions, the ecological impacts of environmental change, and the
geological processes that structure the fossil record. This kind of research is
the only concrete basis for predicting the long-term effects of current global
change on nature. At the same time, the PaleoDB has served as an important
teaching tool for university programs and a primary gateway into the literature
for the paleobiological community. Over the past decade its 222 contributors
have assembled 30,121references to publications, 808,807 taxonomic occurrence
records, and 262,909 opinions on the classification of 120,842 taxa. Its website
features an array of data entry, query,download, and analysis tools. It is
integrated with GBIF and CHRONOS and offers several web services. It is governed
by a 16-member Advisory Board that includes both contributors and
representatives from allied
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PaleoDB's
activities have resulted in 101 official publications written by 51 different
senior authors, and it is cited as a reference on more than 3000 Wikipedia
pages. It was singled out as an essential resource in the report of the 2006
Future Research Directions in Paleontology workshop and has since received
limited funding from three major paleontological societies for its educational
activities. Mirroring on three websites and baseline administrative and
technical support has continued through a volunteer effort, but substantive
development of new infrastructure is needed. Goals of this project include
enhancement of web services for use of large-scale portals such as the
Encyclopedia of Life; exchange of data with cognate databases such as the Fossil
Record File and TreeBASE; integration with PaleoPortal and individual museum
collection databases; and creation of new tools and data tables involving
phylogenetics, stratigraphy, geochronology, and geochemistry. These enhancements
will, for example, make it possible for geologists to access dynamically
integrated information on stratigraphic sections, or for biologists to quickly
and reliably calibrate molecular&lt;br/&gt;clocks.