* 0949176
* Early Career: Upgrade of Electron Microscopy Facility to Increase Geoscience Functionality at San Francisco State University
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2010,05/31/2014
* Mary Leech, San Francisco State University
* Continuing Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 05/31/2014
* USD 447,339.00

0949176 Leech

This grant supports acquisition of equipment to upgrade the electron microscopy
facility at San Francisco State University and funding for partial support of a
research technician for three years. Specific equipment to be acquired includes:
1) sputter and carbon coaters; 2) grinder and vibratory polishers; 3) a thin
sectioning system; 4) rock saw; 5) SEM sample cell cleaning system; 6) asher
chamber and turbo pump; and 7) Zeiss SEM sample cell airlock. Sample preparation
equipment will support in-house thin sectioning and preparation of samples for
textural and semi-quantitative elemental analysis using a recently NSF/MRI
supported field emission gun equipped scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM). The
FE-SEM is also outfitted with an electron backscattered diffraction system
(EBSD) that allows for quantitative determination of crystallographic preferred
orientation in strained samples. EBSD requires extremely careful sample
preparation using colloidal silica in a vibratory polishers to achieve extremely
level sample surfaces. Technical support will ensure daily oversight for the
facility and the institution has committed to future full time support following
expiration of this award. The upgraded FE-SEM facility will support PI and
student research that requires micro spatial textural and compositional analysis
including studies of mid-crustal deformation mechanisms in the Himalayan orogen,
geothermobarometry of metamorphic phases, studies of synthetic zeolite minerals
for applications to sensor and dielectric technologies, studies of soil mineral
interactions with various species of heavy metals, and experimental
investigations of rock erodability. SFSU is an inner-city, minority-serving, and
predominantly undergraduate institution. The lead PI Mary Leech is an early
career untenured, Native American faculty member. The PIs participate in the SF-
ROCKS program at SFSU State that reaches out to minority urban youth and
involves them in university-level research projects.

***