* 0949412
* III: Workshop support for meeting on algorithms for modern massive data sets, MMDS 2010
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2010
* Gunnar Carlsson, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Vasant G. Honavar
* 09/30/2010
* USD 20,000.00

The proposal is a request for funds to support the biennial
MMDS&lt;br/&gt;meetings on Algorithms for Modern Massive Data Sets. The
goals&lt;br/&gt;of these meetings are: (1) to explore novel techniques
for&lt;br/&gt;modeling and analyzing massive, high-dimensional,
and&lt;br/&gt;nonlinearly-structured scientific and internet data sets;
and&lt;br/&gt;(2) to bring together computer scientists,
statisticians,&lt;br/&gt;mathematicians, and data analysis practitioners to
promote&lt;br/&gt;cross-fertilization of ideas. The meetings will occur in
the&lt;br/&gt;wake of two related meetings in 2006 and 2008 that
addressed&lt;br/&gt;similar topics. Both MMDS 2006 and MMDS 2008 were an
enormous&lt;br/&gt;interdisciplinary success, and they clearly highlighted
the&lt;br/&gt;need for a regular meeting forum to bring together junior
and&lt;br/&gt;senior researchers from a range of backgrounds to address
the&lt;br/&gt;challenging foundational problems that will be faced in
upcoming&lt;br/&gt;years as increasingly large and complex data sets are
generated&lt;br/&gt;in a wide range of application domains. The proposed
meetings&lt;br/&gt;will capitalize on these past successes and extend the
MMDS&lt;br/&gt;series into a more regular series of meetings to
address&lt;br/&gt;algorithmic, statistical, and computational aspects of
modern&lt;br/&gt;massive data set analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The topics
covered by MMDS address fundamental algorithmic&lt;br/&gt;questions underlying
much of the recent work in large-scale data&lt;br/&gt;analysis. In addition,
topics of interest at MMDS include data&lt;br/&gt;problems ranging from better
search and ranking at internet&lt;br/&gt;sites to improved methods for
extracting structure in genetics&lt;br/&gt;applications to analyzing biomedical
images for improved disease&lt;br/&gt;detection. Progress on these fronts will
be fueled by junior&lt;br/&gt;researchers as well as researchers from a wide
range of&lt;br/&gt;application areas. Thus, every effort was be made to
include&lt;br/&gt;junior researchers, including women and minorities, at
past&lt;br/&gt;meetings and to disseminate the information presented at
the&lt;br/&gt;meetings to people who were not able to attend. This will
be&lt;br/&gt;continued at future meetings. For more information, please
see&lt;br/&gt;the meeting webpage: http://mmds.stanford.edu/