* 0949500
* Collaborative research: Exploring the generality of light, nutrient and predator constraints on food chain efficiency
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2015
* Michael Vanni, Miami University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 08/31/2015
* USD 503,881.00

This research will examine how the efficiency of energy flow through food webs
is affected by sunlight, nutrients, and predators. Sunlight and nutrients affect
the chemical composition of algae, including the amounts and ratios of carbon,
nitrogen and phosphorus as well as essential fatty acids (EFAs). In addition,
light and nutrients can determine which algal species are present, and their
digestibility for herbivores. Variation in carbon:nutrient ratios, EFAs, and
digestion resistance of algae can determine the production of herbivores, but
little is known about how these effects propagate to animals at the top of the
food chain, e.g., fish and other carnivores. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators will conduct three large-scale experiments to investigate effects
of light, nutrients, carnivore species, food web structure, and nutrient ratios
on food chain efficiency. They will also develop next-generation,
stoichiometrically-explicit computer models which will provide mechanistic
understanding of the experimental results, and expand the scope of the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide critical information
for decision-makers involved in water quality protection and fisheries
management. For example, fisheries yields depend on food chain efficiency,
specifically the proportion of algae production that is converted into fish or
shellfish species harvested by humans; eutrophication results from the
inefficient use of plant production by herbivores after excessive nutrient
enrichment; carbon storage in deep waters and sediments (which reduces
greenhouse gases in the atmosphere) is related to energy that is not consumed in
pelagic food chains; and the concentrations of contaminants at each trophic
level is affected by energy flow through food chains. In addition, many global-
scale environmental problems, such as eutrophication and climate change, alter
the supplies of light and nutrients, and can mediate food chain efficiency. In
addition the project will provide numerous opportunities for undergraduate and
graduate students, who will be actively engaged in all aspects of the research.