* 0949780
* Collaborative Research:  Parasite or partner?  Causes and consequences of conditional outcomes in a cleaning symbiosis
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2010,11/30/2011
* Bryan Brown, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 11/30/2011
* USD 152,694.00

For decades, ecologists have focused on antagonistic interactions such as
competition and predation in studies of ecosystems and food webs. But in recent
years it has become apparent that cooperative interactions among species, i.e.,
mutualisms, can be equally important to ecosystem structure and function. One
widespread mutualism is that between pollinators and plants, which is of major
economic importance to agricultural systems. However, other types of mutualisms
are prevalent in nature, but poorly understood. This project will study a model
system involving a cleaning mutualism, a species interaction in which one
organism feeds by cleaning another. The mutualism involves crayfish and small
annelid worms, which live on the gills of crayfish. The worms clean the crayfish
gills by feeding on organisms that attach to the gills; this benefits both the
worms and the crayfish. However, if the worms become too abundant relative to
their food, they can switch to act as parasites, feeding directly on the
crayfish's gills. This shift from mutualism to parasitism is not unique to the
crayfish-worm system. It has been hypothesized that such shifts may be
widespread in nature in response to certain environmental changes. This project
will test that general hypothesis using both field and laboratory experiments to
study the crayfish-worm model system. The project will examine the importance of
species behaviors and other traits in maintaining the interaction at mutually
beneficial levels, and explore how the mutualism is shaped by environmental
context. The project will also explore the broader consequences of a shift from
mutualism to parasitism to the rest of the food web and stream ecosystem.

This project has substantial broader impacts; it is a collaboration among
faculty at three universities, one of which is a predominantly undergraduate
institution. Many undergraduate students will be training in aquatic ecology,
and will participate in team-structured, multi-year research projects. A number
of graduate students will also be supported by this project, and will lead
outreach efforts through partnerships with local watershed associations and
university extension programs.