* 0949259
* Acquisition of Instrumentation for Organic Molecular Geochemistry Research and Training at the University of Texas-Austin
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2011
* Christine Hawkes, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 04/30/2011
* USD 98,576.00

0949259&lt;br/&gt;Shanahan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award funds acquisition of
a high-performance liquid chromatography mass spectrometer (HPLC-MS) with a
fraction collector to identify, quantify and isolate organic compounds for
geologic matrices. The proposed acquisition will complement gas chromatographic
(GC) and GC-isotope ratio mass spectrometry (GC-IRMS) instrumentation already in
use. It will allow analyzing low volatility, non-GC-amenable compounds. The
fraction collector will allow the PIs to purify and isolate compounds which can
then be subjected to carbon isotope analysis. The instrumentation will be used
for reconstructing past terrestrial, lacustrine and marine temperatures from
sediment archives using ether-bound archaeal and bacterial lipids; isolating and
purifying target "biomarker" compounds for stable isotope analysis using natural
abundance or labeling to better understand biogeochemical cycling; and assessing
organic material provenance and age in a varied depositional settings using
compound-specific radiocarbon dating which will provide new constraints on the
carbon cycle and the age of past sediment deposits. The underlying theme to
research proposed is using compound-specific biomarkers to constrain and
interpret geological data. Using HPLC-MS will provide analytical range to "new"
groups of biomarkers not able to be measured by GC or other more standard
techniques. Purification and isolation procedures will be developed using the
fraction collector which will greatly reduce analytical labor. The instrument
will be shared by several PIs and across the Department. The instrument will
expand capabilities in several disciplines. Current programs are established for
attracting undergraduates and disadvantaged students. Two lab-based courses will
also directly benefit. The PI will retain overall supervision of the instrument.
A mass spectrometry facility manager will be responsible for day-to-day
scheduling. Annual maintenance and consumables costs will covered by per sample
fees. Pilot studies and method(s) development will be scheduled on a case-by-
case basis. The PI has two years of full-time technician support.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***