* 0949754
* Understanding Perceptual Compensation in Sound Change
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2014
* Alan Yu, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 05/31/2014
* USD 221,104.00

Linguists have long hypothesized that sound change--changes in a language over
time that alter pronunciation--occurs when a listener misinterprets a speaker
and incorporates the misperception into his/her own grammar. However, little is
known about the mechanism through which such adjustments occur and mounting
evidence is in fact suggesting that listeners are adept at compensating for
variation in speech perception and production. From this, it should follow that
sound change would occur minimally, contrary to fact. This research investigates
the circumstances under which perceptual compensation (PC) fails to correct for
variation in speech and how such failures lead to sound change. The research
team will develop a formal representation of PC (and by extension sound change)
to corroborate the experimental findings using Bayesian inference, a statistical
tool commonly employed in cognitive science research. This model predicts that
the effects of PC may be minimized or even overcome when certain parameters in
the model are adjusted; that is, the relative magnitude of compensation is
mediated by the properties of a language and the speaker's prior experience with
it. To test this theory of PC and its connection to sound change, the research
team will conduct a number of laboratory experiments testing the limit and
variability of PC effects. The experimental paradigm involves testing listeners'
compensatory responses by varying (1) the frequency of the sounds involved, (2)
the context in which the speech signal occurs, and (3) the nature of the speech
signal itself.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research will broaden
the empirical database on which theories of phonology, sound change, and speech
production and perception are grounded and will advance novel venues for
theoretical investigations. This research will fill a gap in work on sound
change and in linguistics in general by providing detailed and in-depth
experimental and theoretical investigations on speakers' evaluative responses to
various linguistic inputs from a cross-linguistic perspective. A better
understanding of sound change will offer a unique window into the nature of
language change, language acquisition, and human communication and may provide
insight into first/second language acquisition, language-teaching, and the
development of speech technology.