* 0949076
* Acquisition of Gas-mixing and TZM Furnaces and Associated Equipment: Experimental Petrology at Fayetteville State University
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2011,12/31/2012
* Steven Singletary, Fayetteville State University
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 12/31/2012
* USD 0.00

This award will equip an experimental petrology laboratory at Fayetteville State
University that will be used in conjunction with the SENCR-MIC Electron
microprobe to investigate the process of planetary assembly; engage under-
represented groups in hypothesis-driven Earth Science research; and strengthen
K-12 Earth Science education in southeastern North Carolina. Experiments
conducted in the laboratory will generate new data that will facilitate a better
understanding of how primitive meteorites, the compositions of which are assumed
to represent that of the primitive solar nebula, behave during melting at
pressures that approximate asteroid interiors during early solar system
evolution. New data generated in the lab will help reconcile discrepancies that
exist between observations and models of planetary
formation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fayetteville State University is a historically
black college/university (HBCU) that is a constituent member of the University
of North Carolina system. It has an enrollment of ~6000 students, with females
comprising over 70% of the student body and African-Americans comprising 73% of
the student body. The presence of an experimental petrology laboratory on the
campus will allow for the inclusion of underrepresented groups into Earth
Science research with the goal of encouraging them to continue on to graduate
studies. FSU was founded as a teacher training college and continues to serve in
that role today. The nature of experimental petrology and the excitement that
comes with hypothesis-driven and discovery-based research will serve to
strengthen K-12 Earth Science education as teachers in training explore the
boundaries of our knowledge through experimentation in the lab.&lt;br/&gt;