* 0949254
* EAGER: Composites with Constrained Phase Transforming Ceramic Inclusions
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Roderic Lakes, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 08/31/2011
* USD 170,367.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION&lt;br/&gt;This project explores a completely new and
highly novel paradigm, invented by the PI, for the creation of new materials
that exhibit practically-important mechanical properties far in excess of those
exhibited by any previously-known materials. Examples of such properties are
stiffness (the ability to resist deformation under load) and damping (the
ability to dissipate vibration and sound). Preliminary theoretical studies by
the proposers indicate the great potential of this approach, and their
preliminary experimental studies have shown that a research sample created
following this new paradigm exhibits stiffness ten times that of diamond, the
previously-known stiffest material. The paradigm involves embedding a material
that would be unstable by itself in another, stable material and carefully
tuning the properties of the two materials so that the resulting combined
material exhibits the desired extreme properties. The present research is
directed toward providing the necessary further theoretical and experimental
scientific advances needed to confirm that such novel materials do indeed have
the potential for wide utility. This research is important because the paradigm
involved has the greatest potential of all existing approaches for dramatically
improving multiple mechanical properties of materials. It has potential impact
far beyond the specific work to be carried out, because the idea of employing
constrained instability could well lead to regimes previously inaccessible in
many other fields. The work also has great educational importance, in that it
demonstrates to students the potential for achieving the seemingly impossible by
critical outside the box thinking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
DETAILS&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work builds on recent theoretical and
experimental breakthroughs by the proposers which showed that composite
materials containing a negative-stiffness phase: (1) are theoretically predicted
to have stiffness, damping and piezoelectric properties far exceeding those of
any known material; (2) can be proved to be stable overall, and thus can evade
the bounds on overall material response that have been believed for the past
half-century to limit composite material performance, since these bounds assume
all component materials must have positive stiffnesses; (3) can be fabricated
using partially-constrained phase-transforming ceramic inclusions and can be
shown in laboratory testing to exhibit stiffness ten times that of diamond and
damping greatly exceeding that of either phase. The research involves close
coordination of theoretical stability and composite material behavior analyses
with laboratory fabrication and testing. The goals of the project are to extend
the robustness and operational range, in strain, temperature and stability, of
the proposers? preliminary laboratory composite materials comprised of
partially-constrained phase-transforming ceramic inclusions in a metal matrix,
and to provide convincing additional theoretical and experimental confirmation
of the validity and utility of this novel material creation approach. This
research is important, timely and potentially transformational because it
involves a completely new and novel material creation paradigm, and the PIs are
unaware of any other material creation paradigm having such potential for
dramatic improvement in material properties, and especially such important,
diverse and numerous properties as stiffness, damping and piezoelectricity (and
very possibly several additional ones). It is thought that this EAGER support
will result in convincing theoretical and experimental evidence that the
materials created can be utilized under the conditions that would give them wide
applicably. The project also has multiple important educational aspects:
broadly, it will teach students the potential for achieving the seemingly
impossible by critical outside the box thinking. Furthermore, the undergraduate
and graduate students working directly on the project will learn completely
novel research techniques involved with creating materials employing the idea of
tuned constrained metastability.