* 0949066
* RAPID: Seamount research with Eye-in-the-Sea
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2009,03/31/2010
* Edith Widder, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 03/31/2010
* USD 40,651.00

The PI was recently been invited, along with Sylvia Earle, Rick Starr, Bruce
Robison, and Jorge Cortes (from Costa Rica) to participate in a National
Geographic sponsored research cruise to explore a largely unstudied seamount
area 30 miles south of the Cocos Islands, Costa Rica (Pacific side). The goal is
to collect scientific data in support of a proposal by the conservation
community in Costa Rica to make this area into a marine reserve. The PI would
like to take advantage of this exceptional opportunity to use a new low-cost
version of the Eye-in-the-Sea (EITS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many deep sea
submersibles like the one being used on this expedition do not have adequate
payloads to accommodate the full EITS system, this has limited its general
utility. Recently, with funding from Australian Research Council the engineers
were able to design new low-cost, lander-version of the Eye-in-the-Sea. The PI
has requested a RAPID award to construct one of these low-cost, lander-versions
of the Eye-in-the-Sea to take advantage of this unique opportunity. Because
seamounts harbor exceptional numbers of endemic species they represent an
exciting frontier for the discovery of new species. No one has ever explored a
seamount with an unobtrusive observatory like the Eye-in-the-Sea. This is an
exceptional chance for new discovery as well as raising public awareness of the
need to protect these precious and fragile biodiversity hotspots.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of
the expedition is to obtain scientific data and images to support a proposal to
create a 1,900 km2 marine reserve on a seamount area 30 miles south of Cocos. To
leverage the efforts of the conservation community in Costa Rica, will collect
data on the abundance of fishes and invertebrates - that are threatened by
fishing - living on the seamounts, with particular emphasis on fish
aggregations. The PI will be blogging (in English and Spanish) from the ship as
has been done for other National Geographic expeditions. In addition, a
documentary for Costa Rican TV and hopefully also for National Geographic
international channels is being planned. Further the three senior scientists on
this expedition, Dr. Sylvia Earle (National Geographic Explorer in Residence),
Dr. Bruce Robison (MBARI Senior Scientist) and Dr. Widder have been extensively
involved in public outreach, speak passionately on the need for ocean
stewardship, and are called upon for numerous public speaking engagements where
results from this expedition will undoubtedly be presented. &lt;br/&gt;