* 0949532
* Genome-level resolution of species boundaries and phylogeny of the North American tiger salamander radiation
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2014
* Ruriko Yoshida, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* David Mindell
* 02/28/2014
* USD 450,000.00

Tiger salamanders are used in a range of biological and biomedical research,
with much emphasis placed on a single species, the Mexican Axolotl, due to ease
of rearing and experimental manipulation. However, this species is just one
representative of a large and diverse radiation of tiger salamanders.
Collectively, this group can serve as a model system for research ranging from
speciation to regeneration, but little is known about how many species actually
exist and little is known about their natural history, evolution, development,
and relationships. This research will leverage new molecular technologies and
existing genetic data to provide a comprehensive assessment of tiger salamander
species diversity across North America and place these species into a
comparative framework to understand their evolution. Concurrently, there will be
development of new statistical tools to identify genes that have been uniquely
influenced by other factors, such as natural
selection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research forges a strong link between
statistical and biological research programs, an increasingly important form of
collaboration as Biology moves further into the realm of genomics. Support and
training of human resources will be provided at the postdoctoral and graduate
level and persons employed by this grant will be integrated into a modern and
multidisciplinary research program. This work will result in the collection of
one of the largest set of genetic data at the level of populations for a
naturally distributed organism.&lt;br/&gt;