* 0949744
* Ecological Functions of Algal Neurotoxins- do they interact with Ion Channels and Cellular Signaling in Non-toxic Phytoplankton Species?
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2010,01/31/2014
* Alison Taylor, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Standard Grant
* Kent Chapman
* 01/31/2014
* USD 308,252.00

Some photosynthetic unicellular marine phytoplankton species, including the
marine dinoflagellates, are known to produce nuisance or harmful algal blooms
(HABs) such as "Red Tides". Of these, several species produce toxins which,
under bloom conditions, can have devastating impacts on coastal ecosystems,
causing significant economic loss in fisheries and tourism of coastal
communities. Moreover, the occurrence of HABs poses significant risk to public
health because several human illnesses are associated with exposure to the algal
neurotoxins that are produced by these bloom-forming unicellular organisms. The
occurrence of HABs is thus presenting a growing global problem for fisheries,
aquaculture and public health. The question of why these microscopic algae
produce toxins, particularly neurotoxins, has been much debated, yet remains a
poorly understood phenomenon. The harmful effects of algal neurotoxins arise
because they interact with ion channels and receptors in cell membranes,
interfering with conduction of nerve impulses (also known as action potentials)
and signaling in animals and humans, thus leading to paralytic, amnesic and
diarrhetic shellfish poisonings. Recent biophysical work has demonstrated such
ion channels and action potentials are highly evolutionarily conserved, and
utilized by a range of unicellular marine organisms, including diatoms,
coccolithophores and dinoflagellates themselves. The hypothesis that these may
be the most relevant ecological targets for HAB toxins will be investigated.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this project is w on Karenia brevis, a
species that produces extensive HABs in the Gulf, SE and NE USA. This
dinoflagellate produces a range of toxins known as brevetoxins and researchers
at the Center for Marine Sciences at the UNC-Wilmington are the world-leading
experts on K. brevis and the chemistry of their toxins. In collaboration with
this team, experiments will be conducted to advance understanding of why these
neurochemicals are produced by dinoflagellates and whether they interact with
homologous targets in competing non-toxic micro-plankton. Using a combination of
cell physiology, imaging and biochemical techniques, experiments will be
conducted to characterize the cellular ion currents, action potentials and
calcium signals in K. brevis themselves before testing effects of brevetoxins,
saxitoxins, okadaic acid and domoic acid on K. brevis and non-toxic
phytoplankton. The experimental work will provide crucial insight into the
sensory biology of toxin producing dinoflagellates and mechanistic insight into
how their toxins interact with ecologically relevant targets in the marine
ecosystem. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcomes of this project will lead to a
better understanding of the factors that regulate HAB bloom dynamics in coastal
areas affected by K. brevis, may lead to development of novel biotechnological
tools, and will contribute to recent national initiatives related to Oceans and
Human Health.