* 0949599
* Program Review of the NSF Science and Technology Centers, 2000-2009
* O/D,OIA
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Daryl Chubin, American Association for the Advancement of Science
* Standard Grant
* Dragana Brzakovic
* 08/31/2011
* USD 591,044.00

The American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) proposes a review
of the NSF active Science and Technology Centers (STC): Integrative Partnerships
as a program. The review will focus on the ``value added`` of the STCs, i.e.,
what these centers provide that individual investigator research does not, and
would characterize the STC portfolio, not individual centers. Our aim is to
appraise the collective impact of the STCs on the conduct of academic
research?upon individual faculty and students and upon universities; the range
of disciplines that constitute the research foci of the centers; and the
progress of the scientific enterprise in creating and nurturing new
(inter)disciplines.

Intellectual Merit AAAS proposes this review for several reasons. First, the STC
program as a totality has been reviewed only once in its history. The 17 centers
launched in 2000, 2002, and 2005-06 have never been subject to a program review.
Second, within NSF and outside NSF, expectations and requirements concerning the
need for evidence of program impacts have intensified. Third, and most
important, are compelling intellectual reasons: (a) new understanding of the
course of scientific discovery and progress, including increased attention to
the presence of competing theories and research priorities in the initial phase
of what over time comes to be seen as dominant paradigms in which discipline
evolve; (b) increased appreciation for the interaction among advances in theory,
experimentation, and instrumentation; and (c) conjectures about the selective
contribution that patrons of science-corporations and private foundations as
well as federal agencies-make to the direction and pace at which some research
trajectories flourish.

Broader Impacts The project will address additional outcomes from the conduct of
research created through the mechanism of investing in STCs: (1)to inform NSF,
and thus provide a management tool for investment of public funds. (2) At the
same time, the STCs constitute a high-profile program and investment in team
science. Capturing and clarifying these impacts demands metrics related to the
consumers of knowledge, products and other benefits. Capturing and clarifying
these impacts demands metrics related to the consumers of knowledge, products
and other benefits. Howe can differences in outcomes be traced to STC processes
and research impacts, and in turn provide insights into the federal investment
process while demonstrating accountability. The STCs are challenged to
demonstrate leadership in fostering participation in groups traditionally
underrepresented in science and engineering. Thus, should this mechanisms be
found to have significant added value in the ways investigated, there will be
lessons to share on how the mechanisms of investments affect the diversity of
performers and the character of their work. The site www.aas.org , as well as
the Research Competitive Program and Capacity Center sites, will be used to
highlight the project and the results. We will disseminate the report findings
to the STCs, the policy community (in peer-reviewed outlets such as Research
Evaluation, Research Policy, and Science and Public Policy), and all interested
in research partnerships, management, and evaluation. Finally, presentations of
lessons learned may be instructive to agencies when aiming for certain goals and
building portfolios.