* 0949531
* Collaborative Research: A Field-experimental Test for Evolutionary Trait-mediated Indirect Effects in Food Webs
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2010,09/30/2016
* Jonathan Losos, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 09/30/2016
* USD 248,490.00

This project utilizes a set of small islands in the northern Caribbean as a
model system to understand how interactions between ecological, evolutionary and
behavioral factors determine major features of biological communities. The
project centers on a large-scale experiment in which presence/absence of large
predatory lizards is varied across a series of islands. Large lizards affect
smaller, intermediate-size predatory lizards, and the effects cascade down
through insect herbivores to the plants. The effects of the top predator on
lower trophic levels are mediated largely through effects on the intermediate
predator. Such effects can be driven by changes in species densities, but can
also depend on specific behavioral and evolutionary traits. The effects of
variation in these traits on food-web interactions will be followed over
multiple generations. The intermediate predator would be expected to initially
decrease but then recover as it behaviorally and evolutionarily adjusts to
increased predation risk. The pattern of density change combined with the
habitat shift should cause major changes in lower levels of the food web. A
comparative study parallels the experiment to determine the food-web pathways
generating the experimental results. This study will inform us regarding the
interplay between ecology, behavior, and evolution in complex food
webs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study substantially promotes undergraduate
research experiences in field and lab studies and targets groups
underrepresented in science. The study also provides graduate-student training
and communicates findings to the public via popular articles, public
presentations, documentary films, and museum exhibits. Every effort is made to
relate this research to applied sciences such as improving agroecosystems,
dealing with biological invasions, and preserving species and habitats.