* 0949807
* RUI: Thermophilic Ammonia-Oxidzing Archaea: Physiology, Genomics and Role in Nitrogen Cycling at High Temperature.
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2015
* Jose de la Torre, San Francisco State University
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 02/28/2015
* USD 509,978.00

Intellectual Merit

Recent years have seen a significant revision of our understanding of the
nitrogen cycle. The discovery of new biological processes such as anaerobic
ammonia oxidation, and the recognition that key metabolic processes like ammonia
oxidation are more broadly distributed among extant organisms and across broader
habitat ranges have forced us to reevaluate nearly a century of data collection
and biogeochemical modeling. Furthermore, genomic analyses between organisms
mediating key processes in the nitrogen cycle also oblige us to revisit our
assumptions of how these metabolic pathways first developed. The recent
discovery of a thermophilic nitrifying archaeon has expanded our view of the
organisms and habitats capable of supporting ammonia oxidation based metabolism.
With the discovery of other thermophilic microorganism capable of transforming
nitrogen compounds, these results suggest the existence of a complex, possibly
ancient nitrogen cycle in high temperature environments. Understanding the
organisms and metabolic processes that contribute this high temperature nitrogen
cycle may inform how these nutrient cycles first evolved. The principal
objective of this project is a detailed investigation of the physiology and
biochemistry of the pathway for ammonia oxidation in the thermophilic ammonia
oxidizing archaeon Nitrosocaldus yellowstonii. Researchers at San Francisco
State University will use a combination of physiological, biochemical, molecular
and genomic approaches to better understand the biology of N. yellowstonii and
the evolution of ammonia-oxidation based metabolism.

Broader Impacts

The results of these studies are expected to significantly advance our
understanding of the evolution of ammonia-oxidation based metabolism and of the
microbiology of nitrogen cycling in high temperature environments. However, an
important aspect of this project is the training and promotion of young
scientists from groups traditionally underrepresented in Science. This project
will be conducted at San Francisco State University, a large, comprehensive,
public university with a large pool of underrepresented minority (URM) students.
The project will train one URM postdoctoral fellow, two graduate students and
1-3 undergraduates through mentoring by the PI (a URM himself) and senior
laboratory personnel. The PI will incorporate these studies into his
undergraduate and graduate teaching to stimulate student interest in microbial
ecology, evolution, and genomics.