* 0949559
* US-Malawi Planning Visit:  Developing a Multidisciplinary, Multinational Study of Continental Rifting, Seismicity and Volcanism Around Northern Lake Malawi
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2010
* James Gaherty, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* DeAndra Beck
* 08/31/2010
* USD 23,400.00

Intellectual Merit: The ~2500-km-long East Africa Rift system is one of the best
examples of active rifting of a continent in the world. Volcanism and seismicity
associated with rifting pose a substantial risk to people who live in or near
the rift valley. We are developing a multidisciplinary, multinational project to
investigate the region around northern Lake Malawi in the southern part of the
East Africa Rift system. We recently submitted a pre-proposal for this project
to Continental Dynamics (1 April 2009), and plan to submit a full proposal for
the 15 November 2009 deadline. Our project would involve scientists and students
from the U.S., Malawi and Tanzania, and we plan to further contribute to
scientific infrastructure and education in this region through AfricaArray. Our
proposed project would involve imaging of the sediments, crust and mantle
lithosphere around northern Lake Malawi, monitoring of surface deformation and
seismicity over a 2-4 year time period, and geochemical analysis of volcanic
rocks from a magmatic province at the north end of the lake. This powerful
combination of temporal and spatial constraints will enable us to obtain unique
insights into magmatic and tectonic processes throughout the lithosphere during
early rifting. These datasets would also be applied to geohazard
characterization and mitigation. We propose a planning trip for four US
scientists to visit Malawi in order to strengthen relationships with foreign
scientists and to solve key logistical challenges. US scientists will meet with
Dr. Leonard Kalindekafe, Director of the Geological Survey of Malawi, and Mrs.
Lostina Chapola, Head of the Geography Department at the Catholic University of
Malawi, as well as other scientists and officials in relevant government
ministries. Together, they will make specific plans for the full proposal, which
will be submitted in November. Our ambitious project also poses several
logistical challenges, particularly the identification of an appropriate vessel
to deploy geophysical instrumentation and acquire data within the lake. A
significant portion of the trip will be spent assessing academic and industry
vessels. These particular PI?s from the Continental Dynamics proposal will be
most closely involved in different aspects of the ?marine? portion of the
experiment, and are thus needed to assess port facilities and ships. Finally, we
propose to visit the field region to assess different strategies for deploying
onshore instruments in the rugged terrain around the lake, inspect port
facilities at Nkhata Bay and Chilumba, and acquire preliminary data for planning
purposes. We plan to re-occupy two GPS monuments in our proposed study area
(which were installed and used for data acquisition in 1997) for two to three
days.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Magmatism and seismicity associated
with extension in this part of the Western Rift pose a serious hazard to
surrounding communities in Malawi and Tanzania, particularly those residing near
the Rungwe volcanic province. Our proposed Continental Dynamics program will
provide unprecedented details on seismicity and present-day deformation in this
region, which can inform hazard assessment and mitigation. Additionally, our
study complements other active research and outreach efforts in this region,
such as the Lake Malawi Drilling Project; it would provide a broader tectonic
context for results on recent climate changes and the evolution of early humans.
Our project will also contribute to scientific education and research in this
region by augmenting AfricaArray (www.africaarray.org). The proposed program
includes support for graduate students from Malawi and Tanzania, who will
participate in acquiring data, evaluating geo-hazards, and analyzing the
resulting datasets. Data from our temporary deployment will complement permanent
and temporary AfricaArray stations in the south EARS, enhancing the value of
both datasets. The team of US scientists contains a mixture of senior and junior
scientists with a spread of expertise and varying levels of experience working
in Africa. A planning trip would make it possible for them to gain local
knowledge and strengthen collaborations in Malawi in order to develop a viable
plan for a major investigation in this region. The longer-term impact of this
trip is that it provides the opportunity for several scientists, including two
early-career scientists, who have never worked in Africa to develop the contacts
and familiarity necessary to plan and execute future scientific and educational
programs here. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;