* 0949947
* Understanding the Diversity and Biology of Microbes in Late Paleozoic Ecosystems
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2010,04/30/2017
* Thomas Taylor, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Skog
* 04/30/2017
* USD 390,746.00

Microorganisms, including bacteria, cyanobacteria, microalgae, and various fungi
and fungal-like organisms (e.g., Peronsporomycetes), are critical components of
all communities today. These organisms certainly performed similar functions in
the past, and were responsible for the evolution and sustainability of ancient
ecosystems in activities ranging from decomposition to nutrient cycling.
Unfortunately, however, relatively little is known about how precisely the
individual groups of microorganisms functioned in the geologic past. In this
research program, various microorganisms that are three-dimensionally preserved
in Early Devonian to Late Carboniferous cherts will be investigated. The
Devonian and Carboniferous are important periods of geologic time in which all
major lineages of vascular land plants (except angiosperms) and the fundamental
architectural principles of their body plan (e.g., roots, shoot axis, leaves)
evolved. As a result of this increased plant diversity, the number of
ecologically distinct (micro-) habitats increased drastically, which, in turn,
has resulted in the evolution of new and specific plant-microbe interactions
(e.g., leaf endophytism). Because both microbes and their hosts are preserved in
chert, these associations provide an extraordinary opportunity to document the
diversity of microbes through an important segment of geologic time, and also to
study a number of complex interactions that were critical in the functioning of
the ancient terrestrial ecosystems. Some of these interactions include
parasitism, saprophytism, and various degrees of mutualistic association. To
accomplish the goals of this research agenda an international team was assembled
that has expertise with both fossil and extant microbes. The project will
encompass four interrelated themes: 1) documenting overall microbe diversity, 2)
examining diversity through segments of geologic time in which there are well
known host plants, 3) characterizing certain types of mutualistic (mycorrhizal)
fungi based on spore wall features used with extant glomeromycoytan fungi, 4)
documenting microbe interactions based on host responses. The utilization of
structurally preserved organisms is the only method available to directly
investigate complex interactions that existed between various microbes and their
fossil hosts. Documenting these microorganisms, their associations, and
interactions with other organisms will make it possible to trace co-evolutionary
trends that can be used together with modern approaches to investigate the
evolutionary history of certain types of biological and ecological processes
that sustain and drive terrestrial ecosystems.