* 0949962
* Collaborative Research: Facility Support: National Lacustrine Core Facility (LacCore)
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2016
* Amy Myrbo, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 05/31/2016
* USD 1,528,606.00

0949962&lt;br/&gt;Ito&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative grant between the
University of Minnesota - Twin Cities and Duluth (EAR-0949285) campuses supports
renewed support of operations and laboratory improvements at LacCore, a national
multi-user lacustrine core archival and analysis facility. LacCore was
previously supported under EAR-0652769. The LacCore Facility supports the
limnological community for studies that contribute to our understanding of past
climates, ecological systems, and biogeochemical dynamics on the continents
though detailed sedimentological analysis and archival services for lacustrine
cores. LacCore operates open laboratories to allow community access to
specialized field and laboratory equipment and staff expertise for Initial Core
Description (ICD) methods including: core splitting; non-destructive multi-
sensor core logging; palynological preparation; grain size analysis; carbon
coulometry; phase identification via x-ray diffraction; biogenic silica
analysis; preparation of samples for subsequent stable isotopic analysis;
digital core photography, and optical petrography/smear slide analysis. LacCore
also provides refrigerated and frozen core storage and archival services and
field coring equipment and curatorial materials (D-tubes) support for lake
coring expeditions. LacCore staff are also responsible for curation of lake core
ICD metadata and the routine transmission of all data to NOAA?s National
Geophysical Data Center. The Large Lake Observatory at Duluth will now be a node
of LacCore and will provide x-ray fluorescence (XRF) core scanning services to
the broader paleorecords research community for rapid down core elemental
analysis. LacCore will institute a user fee schedule beginning in 2011. The
Facility will continue as a training ground for hundreds of researchers,
particularly graduate students, in coring and core analysis techniques. LacCore
staff are engaged in education and outreach including an ongoing collaborative
project aimed at study of the paleoenvironments of wild rice lakes in northern
Minnesota with tribal college students and teachers from the Fond du Lac Band of
Lake Superior Chippewa and Fond du Lac Tribal and Community College.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***