* 0949595
* Collaborative Research: The roles of demography, genetics, and stochasticity in colonization
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2016
* Brett Melbourne, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 04/30/2016
* USD 202,173.00

An important problem in ecology is understanding the factors that enable (or
prevent) the successful founding of new populations. Scientists know that two
key factors are the numbers of individuals in the founding group (its
demography) and the genetic composition of those individuals. A question that
has received surprisingly little attention to date, however, is the relative
importance of demography and genetics, and how they might interact. The primary
reason for this neglect is that populations comprised of more individuals
typically harbor more genetic variation, making it difficult to separate the two
causes. The study to be carried out will pair a biological model (flour beetles,
Tribolium castaneum) with mathematical and statistical models to understand the
role of stochasticity (chance) and disentangle the relative contributions of the
size and genetics of a founding group as it initiates a new population and
spreads in a novel environment.

The research findings will benefit society in multiple ways. They will be
relevant to conservation efforts aimed at improving the designs of management
plans to reintroduce a species to the wild (such as was done with the California
condor). The results will also advance understanding and management of
biological invasions, which occur when a species from one area is inadvertently
introduced into a new region, and subsequently proliferates to economically and
environmentally damaging levels. The study's conclusions will thus enable both
policy makers and managers to make better-informed decisions. Additionally, the
laboratory experiments to be conducted are of a scale that makes them ideal for
involving undergraduates in research, providing excellent, hands-on learning
opportunities. Further, graduate students in experimental and mathematical
biology will receive training through this project. They will work directly with
the senior scientists and with one another, gaining skills not only as
scientists, but also learning to communicate and collaborate with individuals
outside their specialized fields. Wide dissemination of the study's results will
spread them well beyond traditional expert audiences.