* 0949108
* Computational Social Science Workshop at Harvard University's Institute for Quantitative Social Science in January 2010.
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2009,07/31/2011
* David Lazer, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 07/31/2011
* USD 49,984.00

There is a new and rapidly emerging method of inquiry regarding human behavior,
which we label ?computational social science.? As with other computational
sciences, computational social science is driven by the availability of massive
data sets and the computational power to analyze those data. These data sources
include ?massive, passive? sources such as call logs, e-mail data,
transportation data, corpuses of text, as well as active instrumentation of
humans. Computational social science offers great opportunities to produce truly
novel insights into collective human behavior.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of
this workshop is to pull together many of the scattered researchers involved in
the emergence of computational social science to address two questions: (1) what
is the scientific potential of CSS? And (2) what are the institutional barriers
to the forward motion of this area? The first day will therefore be devoted to
discussing applications in network science, natural language processing, as well
as the value and issues raised in analyzing massive data sets. The second day
will be focused on how to build the field?what infrastructure is necessary? What
incentives are required? How to facilitate access to data, and how to manage the
deep issues around privacy and security? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computational social science offers great
potential in terms of adding to the collective knowledge of humanity about
humanity, and to improve collective well being. The borader impact of this
workshop is that it will accelerate forward motion of this emerging field, and
help avoid the very substantial potential pitfalls, such as around the area of
privacy, that could cause harm to individuals and impede the development of the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop has the potential to affect policies
in academia around the country as to how to foster computational social science.
Successful forward movement in this field offers substantial value to the
broader public, through improved insights in everything from the spread of
pathogens in the population, to collaboration within
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;