* 0949759
* Collaborative Research:  Phylogeny and rates of evolution in an ecologically hyperdiverse mammalian radiation (Chiroptera: Noctilionoidea)
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2014
* Liliana Davalos Alvarez, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 02/28/2014
* USD 258,489.00

Noctilionoid bats comprise more than 200 species that span nearly the entire
ecological diversity of land mammals. They range from tiny insectivores and
nectarivores to large carnivores, and even vampire bats. This superfamily
provides an unparalleled system for understanding how, when, and where bats
evolved new diets, changed roosting habits and developed different kinds of
echolocation. This project will use DNA sequences and comparison of
morphological variations to reconstruct evolutionary relationships among these
bats, including the fossils of &gt;20 extinct species. Together with powerful
methods for estimating the timing of historical events, this extensive fossil
series will provide a timeline for investigating patterns and processes of
ecological adaptation, speciation, and extinction across all
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will mentor and train postgraduate,
graduate, and undergraduate students in molecular and morphological laboratory
techniques and research methods. The data generated during the course of this
study -- including photographs and DNA sequences -- will be freely available to
the public through existing databases and online repositories heavily used by
educators at all levels. Extensive documentation of morphological data through
Morphobank will facilitate future research. Finally, this project will provide a
robust framework for exploring the mechanisms driving ecological and species
diversity in a hyperdiverse group of mammals.