* 0949322
* Upgrade of UCSC Mineral Physics Laboratory
* GEO,EAR
* 11/01/2010,10/31/2012
* Quentin Williams, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 10/31/2012
* USD 278,707.00

This award will permit the upgrading of existing equipment in the mineral
physics laboratory at UC Santa Cruz. This equipment will not only provide a
state-of-the-art training ground for a broad group of graduate and undergraduate
students, but will also ensure adherence to high-level laser safety protocols.
The mineral physics laboratory at UCSC has an extended history of training
students for placement in academia and industry who have expertise in the high-
pressure spectroscopy of Earth materials, and this upgrade will allow this
training to continue with more user- and safety-friendly equipment. In addition
to safety upgrades of the UCSC pressure-measurement system, a new Raman
spectrometer will be acquired that will replace a marginally functional and
obsolete 18-year old apparatus with an instrument that has higher spatial
resolutions, vastly improved detection technology, and modern instrument-control
and data-collection software. The issues addressed by the research enabled by
this upgrade include: the water and carbon storage capacity of the deep Earth,
and how exchange of water and carbon takes place between the deep Earth and the
surface environment, with relevance to the formation of Earth?s oceans; the
structure and physical properties of melts and fluids at high pressures, with
implications for issues ranging from explosive volcanic events generated via
subduction-related processes, to the possible presence of partially melted zones
near Earth?s core-mantle boundary that may represent the ?roots? of deeply-
derived volcanic upwellings. This apparatus will be deployed for non-high
pressure materials-characterization as well, including probing fine-grained
archeological samples, and fluid inclusion and paleontologic studies. In
essence, it will also function as a tool for rapid and fine-scale mineral and
fluid characterization that will yield insights into phenomena as diverse as the
firing temperatures of ancient ceramics, the degree (and type) of fossilization
produced in different geologic environments, and the compositions of ore-forming
fluids trapped in mineral hosts.