* 0949120
* Collaborative Proposal:  Decoding Virus Leviathans
* BIO,EF
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Steven Wilhelm, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 09/30/2013
* USD 281,954.00

Giant viruses are loosely defined as having a genome greater than 280,000 base
pairs (bp) and currently there are less than 20 full virus genome sequences in
this size range. A cursory analysis of this group immediately reveals a diverse
range of viruses including poxviruses, phycodnaviruses (algal viruses),
herpesviruses, a bacteriophage and nimaviruses (shrimp white spot syndrome
virus). The largest to date is the Acanthamoeba polyphaga Mimivirus at 750 nm
diameter with a 1.2-million bp genome. Genome sequence data from these giant
viruses can help clarify their taxonomic position. These giant viruses possess
novel and typically non-virus genes, many of which encode central cellular
functions and metabolic pathways. Preliminary observations by flow cytometry and
analysis of the Global Ocean Sampling (GOS) database suggest that giant viruses
are extremely abundant in aquatic environments and have been overlooked by
biased sampling techniques. Most virus studies look at what passes through a 0.2
micrometer filter. Giant viruses, up to 0.75 micrometers, will be caught on
these filters and evade detection. The central hypotheses of this project by
Drs. W. Wilson (Bigelow Lab for Ocean Sciences) and S. Wilhelm (Univ Tenn) are
that giant marine viruses are ubiquitous, diverse and contain large amounts of
novel genetic information. Four algal viruses from current collections and 16
additional giant viruses isolated from seawater are being sequenced in this
project. The environmental viruses are being isolated and sequenced by adapting
single cell sorting techniques. Once sorted, giant viruses are being amplified
by multiple displacement amplification (MDA) to generate Giant Virus Single
Amplified Genomes (GV-SAGs) for downstream sequencing. To accomplish this work,
the PIs are using state-of-the-art facilities for flow cytometry (Bigelow) and
sequence analysis (University of Tennessee/Oak Ridge National Laboratory)
coupled with bioinformatics expertise from collaborator Professor Jean-Michel
Claverie, a world-leader in giant virus research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research is being discussed during an informal Caf√© Scientifique program
designed to teach the public about the latest ideas in science. The PIs are also
incorporating a 3-orders of magnitude (virus, lipids/proteins &amp; DNA) module
into the Keller-Bigelow Laboratory Orders Of Magnitude (BLOOM) program, designed
to teach Maine high school students about marine ecosystems. The PIs are
partnering with the School of Journalism at the University of Tennessee (UT) to
bring undergraduate and graduate journalism students into the lab to document
this research for the general public.