* 0949102
* Developmental and Evolutionary Regulation of Fish Body Shape, Conference Grant- the Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology annual meeting in Seattle WA, Jan. 4-7 2010
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2010,02/28/2011
* Jeffrey Walker, University of Southern Maine
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 02/28/2011
* USD 15,000.00

PI: Jeffrey A. Walker&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
0949102&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: Developmental and Evolutionary
Regulation of Fish Body Shape&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major direction of current
and future biological research is to understand how multiple, interacting
functional systems coordinate to produce a body that works. This understanding
is complicated by the fact that organisms need to work well in multiple
environments, with both predictable and unpredictable environmental
perturbations. Furthermore, organismal design reflects a history of past
environments and not a plan for future environments. How complex, interacting
functional systems evolve, then, is a truly grand challenge. This symposium will
be held to convene scientists ranging from geneticists, to physiologists, to
ecologists, to engineers to facilitate the emergence of fish body shape as a
model system for understanding how complex, interacting functional systems
develop and evolve. Fish body shape is a complex morphology that 1) results from
many, many developmental paths and 2) functions in many, many different
behaviors. Understanding the regulation and coordination of the many paths from
genes to body shape, body shape to function, and function to a working fish body
in a dynamic environment is now possible given new technologies from genetics to
engineering and new theoretical models that integrate the different levels of
biological organization (from genes to ecology). By convening a diverse array of
researchers and encouraging participants to think about how these fields overlap
and interact, this symposium will facilitate a holistic, or systems, approach to
understanding complex functional systems.