* 0949211
* Collaborative Research: ATOL:  A Phylogenetic and Genomic Investigation of the Algal Heterokont Tree
* BIO,DEB
* 06/16/2009,08/31/2012
* Robert Andersen, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Ranker
* 08/31/2012
* USD 636,743.00

An award has been made to Robert A. Andersen (Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean
Sciences, West Boothbay Harbor, Maine), Rose Ann Cattolico and Gabrielle Rocap
(University of Washington, Seattle, Washington), Robert Jansen, Elizabeth Ruck
and Edward Theriot (University of Texas, Austin Texas), Matt Julius (St. Cloud
State University, St. Cloud, Minnesota), Stefano Draisma (National Herbarium and
Leiden University, Leiden, The Netherlands) and Hiroshi Kawai (Kobe University,
Kobe, Japan) to determine the relationships among the heterokont classes by
generating two large molecular data sets. Currently, 14 taxonomic classes of
heterokont algae are recognized, and they include over 100,000 described species
(as many as one million total species has been estimated by experts). Common
members include brown seaweeds (e.g., kelp) and the diatoms. Remarkably, despite
two centuries of light microscopic study, 50 years of electron microscopic
study, and 20 years of molecular investigations, the phylogenetic relationships
among the 14 classes remains unknown. DNA sequences of seven nuclear,
mitochondrial, and chloroplast genes from 270 heterokont algal species and 30
nonalgal relatives will be obtained and, entire chloroplast genomes from 30
species will be sequenced. The genome sequences will provide important new data
for understanding chloroplasts and their origin(s), especially since knowledge
in this field is greatly biased toward land plants. Algae serve as the base of
the food chain for all organisms that dwell in the ocean and account for
approximately half of the global photosynthesis, and therefore they provide
approximately 50% of the oxygen we breathe. Members of the heterokont algae vary
in morphology from simple unicells to highly complex seaweeds. Brown algae are
the principal elements of seaweed beds and these macroalgae have high economic
values as food and biomass resources. A number of heterokont algae are harmful
to marine life. For example, some algae produce toxins that when concentrated in
shellfish kill humans, while other species of heterokonts are well-known fish
killers. Conversely, other heterokonts serve as a human food source, they are
used in industrial processes and they have found new recognition in the
nanotechnology industry. The closest relatives to the heterokont algae are the
pseudofungi, which include many plant pathogens, such as the fungus that caused
the Irish potato famine, and various molds and mildews. Graduate and
undergraduate students and postdoctoral fellows from diverse cultural and ethnic
backgrounds will be supported and trained in a wide diversity of fields,
including evolution, genomics, molecular biology, computational biology, and
plant biology. The research will be integrated with K-12 educators, public
museums and parks using already established programs at several of the
participating institutions. A Deep Brown web site already has been established,
and it will be greatly expanded as part of this project.

