* 0949082
* Illuminating the Lanternfly Tree: Phylogeny of the Planthopper Families Fulgoridae and Dictyopharidae  (Insecta: Hemiptera: Fulgoroidea) and their Bacterial Endosymbionts
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/2010,04/30/2013
* Jason Cryan, New York State Education Department
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Whiting
* 04/30/2013
* USD 474,796.00

Lanternflies (order Hemiptera, family Fulgoridae) and their sister-group of
planthoppers (family Dictyopharidae) constitute a strikingly diverse and
exceedingly charismatic insect group, with some iconic species (such as the
'peanut-headed bug') ubiquitously used to exemplify bizarre insect evolution and
tropical insect biodiversity. Together, these insect families include more than
1,000 described species that are distributed around the world (with the highest
diversity occurring in the tropics). These insects are exclusively sap-feeding
herbivores, and can cause damage to their host-plants. Additionally, the insects
harbor, within their guts, multiple species of bacteria that provide essential
nutrients to the insects that are not available in the insects' plant-sap diet.
Despite the many interesting aspects of these insects, their evolutionary
history is virtually unknown. The goal of this project is to reconstruct the
evolutionary relationships within this group and to explore co-evolutionary
trends between the insects and their bacterial endosymbionts. Analyses will be
based on data integrating modern DNA sequencing technology and traditional
comparative morphology. Products of this research will include not only the
phylogenetic trees of the insects and their endosymbiotic bacteria, but also new
internet-accessible tools to aid in the taxonomic identification of included
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will provide an evolutionary
framework for integrating other scientific studies conducted on the biology and
ecology of individual planthopper species. The identification tools to be
developed will be of considerable value to scientists studying these insects.
Additionally, the cutting-edge evolutionary analyses carried out through this
research will serve as a model for similar studies on other plant and animal
groups. This project will provide training for several students at virtually all
academic levels, adding to the next generation of experts in systematic
entomology.