* 0949061
* REVSYS: A revision of New World Ampullariidae: an emerging model system in evolutionary biology and systematics training
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2015
* Robert Cowie, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 02/28/2015
* USD 541,064.00

The ability to assess the severity of the biodiversity crisis hinges on
addressing the taxonomic impediment -- the serious lack of experts able to
identify and classify organisms. This impediment is felt most seriously in the
largest groups of animals on earth, the invertebrates, and in particular the
mollusks. The primary goal of the project is to assess the diversity and
identities of freshwater snails in the family Ampullariidae (apple snails). More
than 250 species have been described in this major group of snails, but how many
of these are real species, as well as their true identities, is unknown.
Knowledge of their diversity and distributions is thus extremely confused and
studies of their ecology, behavior, pest status and control are confounded. The
project will resolve this confusion by studying the snails' shells, internal
anatomy, DNA sequences and behavior. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These snails are
important components of many ecosystems. One species of apple snail native to
the United States is the key food item of the endangered Everglades kite, but
introduced invasive apple snails are potentially serious pests in both natural
and wetland agricultural (e.g., rice) ecosystems, as well as being potential
vectors of parasites that cause disease in humans and animals. Introduced widely
in south-east Asia, they have also become the number one pest of rice.
Understanding the identities, relationships and origins of these invasive
species is thus of great importance. However, the lack of taxonomic expertise in
such groups of snails is a serious problem globally, and so a major focus of the
project is training of young scientists both in the United States and in South
America in order to build this needed expertise, while also providing tools to
assist others such as agricultural and customs inspection officials to correctly
identify these species.