* 0949012
* Conference: 2010 Biomolecular Interactions &amp; Methods GRC and GRS to be held in Galveston, Texas on January 16-22, 2010
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* Karen Fleming, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Michele McGuirl
* 12/31/2010
* USD 10,000.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The sixth biennial Gordon Research Conference on
Biomolecular Interactions and Methods will be held at the Hotel Galvez in
Galveston, Texas from January 17-22, 2010, and the first associated Gordon
Research Seminar will precede the main GRC on January 16-17, 2010 at the same
location. This Gordon Research Conference is a premier meeting that mixes
"methods" experts with "systems" scientists working on compelling biological
problems. The goal is to develop novel collaborations that enable quantitative
characterization of biological samples. This conference has five distinguishing
features: (1) First is the multidisciplinary, multi-scale goal of this GRC: this
conference brings together biologists, biophysicists, structural biologists,
practitioners of kinetics and thermodynamics, chemists and theoreticians. (2)
The second defining feature is an exceptional speaker roster that includes most
well-established scientists and rising young investigators. (3) This conference
is unique in its format and content. Other major biophysical meetings, such as
the biophysical society, are larger in scale and scope. (4) Liberal Information
Communication: Having the meeting under the auspices of the GRC enables the free
exchange of information beyond that achieved by presentations at more formal
meetings. (5) A final defining feature of this conference is the accompanying
Gordon Research Seminar (GRS), which is organized by and for students and
postdoctoral scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;This
conference has broader impacts at many levels: (1) This conference plays a
unique role in facilitating novel collaborations by bringing together "methods"
practitioners together with diverse scientists investigating important
biological problems. (2) This conference has a long history of training young
scientists. The first ever GRS meeting for this conference, which is being
organized by one student and one postdoctoral scientist, both women. will be
formalized. The main GRC meeting chair is mentoring these young investigators,
and they have put together a program that includes student and postdoctoral
speakers and a career panel session. (3) This conference is committed to
diversity: two of the four GRC chairs are women, both GRS co-chairs are women;
two of nine session chairs are women; and invited speakers are from Europe, Asia
and the US and from both academic and industrial organizations. The organizers
have reserved a significant number of invited talks to be chosen from the
abstracts to ensure additional diversity in the speaker selection.