* 0949403
* Software Application Discovery Initiative (SADI) Study
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2009,02/29/2012
* Stephen Crago, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Katz
* 02/29/2012
* USD 280,961.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Model-based simulation is a
computational approach that enables manufacturing firms to perform virtual
prototyping instead of relying exclusively on physical prototyping. Research by
the Council on Competitiveness indicates that leveraging cyberinfrastructure to
do virtual prototyping is a "game changing" technology for manufacturing
companies. If such companies cannot&lt;br/&gt;leverage established, proven
technologies to improve their processes, they will continue to have difficulties
competing in the global marketplace.&lt;br/&gt;Unfortunately, manufacturers
today are not able to apply available HPC resources at scale to do virtual
prototyping. This unmet potential is the result of a fundamental disconnect
between the computational scientific community and the manufacturing industry.
This disconnect could be&lt;br/&gt;overcome through a major NSF manufacturing
modeling, simulation and data analysis discovery program. However, the success
of such a program requires a catalyst to enable manufacturing firms to leverage
available HPC resources and drive research on ultra-scale challenge problems in
computational science with manufacturing applications. This proposal describes a
study to gather the requirements for a Software Application Discovery Initiative
(SADI) Center to act as the necessary catalyst. The proposed study will involve
the following activities:&lt;br/&gt;? Hold a series of workshops with key
thought leaders representing the industry user community, ISV companies, HPC
centers, computational science academic researchers and non-profit
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;? Gather feedback through periodic collaboration and
reviews through personal&lt;br/&gt;interaction with key individuals and
organizations, and through public briefing&lt;br/&gt;opportunities to engage in
the larger academic and industry communities.&lt;br/&gt;? Develop a set of
recommendations for a major NSF manufacturing modeling,&lt;br/&gt;simulation and
data analysis discovery program through engagement in the workshops and personal
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;? Generate a final report that defines the proposed
center?s goals, founding industry participants, organizational structure, ultra-
scale computational discovery challenges, and recommendations on closing the
collaborative computational science innovation loop.