* 0949517
* REVSYS:   Revision of Australian Inocybaceae: studies in systematics and evolution of ectomycorrhizal Agaricales from the southern hemisphere
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2014
* Patrick Matheny, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 03/31/2014
* USD 370,959.00

&lt;br/&gt;Fungi represent a poorly understood and neglected group of organisms
that are rich in scientific research potential. An explanation of the roles of
fungi in applied research requires baseline knowledge of their diversity,
ecological roles in nature, and evolutionary history. Here the investigators
will produce baseline data for Australian Inocybaceae. The mushroom family
Inocybaceae is ideal for a revisionary synthesis because of its cosmopolitan
distribution (including a highly diverse assemblage that occurs across tropical
and temperate Australia), and its long evolutionary history of obligate
symbioses with both tropical and temperate plants. Integration of austral
tropical and temperate taxa is important to understand historical processes that
have shaped current distributions and diversification patterns.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the use of modern taxonomic revisionary
methods, analytical studies of the evolutionary history of Inocybaceae over the
past 65 million years will be performed to address hypotheses of broad
biological appeal. This research will include collaborations between scientists
from different continents and provide field and analytical training for two
junior researchers. Results will be disseminated online and via monographs,
journals, and conferences and forays involving scientists, students, and nature
enthusiasts.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;