* 0949443
* Geoinformatics:  A Petascale Cyberfacility for Physics-Based Seismic Hazard Analysis (SCEC PetaSHA3 Project)
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2010,06/30/2013
* Thomas Jordan, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Leonard E. Johnson
* 06/30/2013
* USD 1,814,968.00

The SCEC PetaSHA3 project will develop computational models of system-level
earthquake processes and, running these models on NSF supercomputers, derive
more accurate estimates of the strong ground motion expected from future
earthquakes in California. SCEC?s CyberShake computational platform recently
produced the first physics-based probabilistic seismic hazard analysis (PSHA)
for the Los Angeles region?a major scientific innovation of the PetaSHA2 project
and a breakthrough in workflow-managed, high-capacity computing (50-day
continuous run on &gt; 4000 processors of the TACC Ranger supercomputer). SCEC
will implement CyberShake on the largest NSF supercomputers, including Blue
Waters, with the goal of calculating high-resolution, high-frequency PSHA maps
for the entire State of California in the next two years. This will require
validation against very large data sets and a hundredfold increase in
computational efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use the
CyberShake platform to represent time-dependent seismic hazard for operational
earthquake forecasting (OEF). The goal of OEF is to provide authoritative
information about the time dependence of seismic hazards to help communities
prepare for potentially destructive earthquakes. The first OEF model for
California (UCERF3) is now being developed by SCEC, USGS and CGS under a
contract with the California Earthquake Authority. By coupling UCERF3 into the
CyberShake system, the project will produce PSHA maps that show how seismic
hazards are changing on a daily basis?i.e., it will extend CyberShake from the
mapping of long-term hazard (seismic climate) to short-term hazard (seismic
weather)?an entirely new capability not possible using conventional PSHA
techniques. If successful, these developments are expected to have substantial
impacts on seismic engineering, insurance rate-setting and reinsurance
strategies, and earthquake preparedness activities, as well as basic research on
earthquake predictability.