* 0949653
* Unraveling at Micro- and Macro-scale the Mineral Surface Reactions of Amino Acids and Small Peptides Using Phage Display Technology Coupled with Synchrotron-Based Spectroscopy
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2013
* Kang Xia, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 06/30/2013
* USD 200,028.00

Intellectual merit: The latest terrestrial N cycle paradigm considers soluble
organic nitrogen (SON) as a rate limiting step for regulating the overall N
availability in ecosystems. Our lack of understanding of the micro-scale
processes/mechanisms of interactions between soil minerals and SON compounds
hinders our ability to predict N flux between different soil compartments at the
ecosystem-scale. To address this issue, an interdisciplinary approach that
combines a broad array of novel molecular, biological, and synchrotron-based
spectroscopic techniques is proposed to investigate the interaction mechanisms
between soil minerals and amino acids and small peptides, two key components of
soil SON. Novel methods will be used to achieve the research. The phage display
technique will be used to screen, in a short period of time, billions of random
small peptide sequences for those peptides displaying a selective affinity for a
particular mineral surface. Macro-scale adsorption isotherms for amino acids and
small peptides on four minerals commonly found in soil will be obtained. Using
the samples collected from the adsorption isotherms experiment, polarization-
dependent N (1s) near-edge x-ray absorption fine structure (NEXAFS) will be used
to investigate, at micro-scale, the average molecular surface orientation.
Lastly, a microbial essay method will be used to understand at micro-scale how
molecular surface organization on mineral surfaces affects the microbial
utilization of adsorbed amino acids and small peptides.

Broader impacts: The PIs are cooperating with two local high schools (The
Mississippi School for Mathematics and Science and The West Oktibbeha County
High School) to recruit future minority undergraduate students for summer
research projects. Those summer research projects will provide minority high
school students opportunities to gain hands?]on experience in biogeochemistry
research and state of the art instrumentations, to obtain insight into the
nature of both undergraduate and graduate school, to work with university
professors and graduate students as an interdisciplinary team, and to have
informed choices about how to advance their future career. The students will
also be given the opportunity to attend regional or national meetings and to
visit national laboratories. The work from these students and the research of
this proposal will be showcased at their high schools and highlighted in state
competitions such as the Engineering Fair and the Young Scientist Division at
the Mississippi Academy of Science.