* 0949877
* Functional Analysis of Cilia in Hedgehog Signaling and Gli Activity Regulation
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2010,12/31/2013
* Aimin Liu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Anthea Letsou
* 12/31/2013
* USD 450,000.00

Hedgehog (Hh) family of secreted proteins is critical for cell proliferation and
cell fate determination in animal development. The PI recently showed cilia,
tiny 'hairs' on top of most mammalian cells, are needed for cells to respond to
Hh. In this proposal, the PI will investigate whether and how cilia influence
the ability of Gli proteins, a group of three proteins involved in gene
expression regulation, to mediate the cell's response to Hh. First, the PI will
genetically test the hypothesis that cilia are essential for the activation of
all three Gli proteins. Subsequently, the PI will investigate the mechanisms by
which these Gli proteins are transported into the cilia, using cell biological
and biochemical approaches. Finally, the PI will test the hypothesis that Gli
proteins cannot be activated without getting into cilia by genetically
engineering Gli proteins such that they are no longer transported into the
cilia. The research program proposed here will not only elucidate the mechanism
by which cilia regulate the activities of Gli proteins, but also provide more
general insight into how basic cellular machinery regulates information flow to
ensure normal development of an animal. The integration of research and
education will be achieved by applying the research material to undergraduate
teaching, encouraging undergraduate students to participate in lab research and
providing opportunities for graduate students to be involved in teaching
activities. Female and minority students will be recruited to participate in
this project through NASA sponsored programs. Finally, the PI will be actively
involved in outreach activities such as hosting high school students and
participating in lecture series aimed at disseminating scientific knowledge to
the local community.