* 0949424
* Collaborative Proposal: Genetic architecture of reproductive isolation and introgression in experimental and natural hybrid zones in Louisiana Irises
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2015
* Noland Martin, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 02/28/2015
* USD 129,494.00

The interplay of genetic exchange and reproductive isolation is central to the
origin and maintenance of adaptation and biodiversity. Ultimately, biological
diversification involves speciation, which occurs when reproductive isolation
results from development of barriers to interbreeding, such as selective mating
or hybrid sterility. Reproductive barriers lead to relatively infrequent
interbreeding and hybrid formation, but the production of hybrids still can have
important evolutionary implications, particularly when hybrids mate with their
parent taxa. Mating between hybrids and their parent taxa can lead to the
transfer of important genetically-based adaptations (e.g., traits such as
tolerance to flooded conditions) between the parent species through genetic
introgression. This project will apply a new technique that allows very fine-
scale analysis of the genome to study speciation that is accompanied by
introgression between two species of Louisiana Irises in order to determine how
the genes underlying reproductive barriers affect introgression.

This project will contribute to understanding of mechanisms of biodiversity
increase and adaptation and will advance applications of new molecular genetic
techniques. This project will provide training for undergraduate, graduate, and
postdoctoral researchers at two universities and will provide scientific
information to the public. This research into the process of introgression is
directly applicable to the selective breeding of microorganisms, plants, and
animals upon which humans depend for food, clothing, and shelter.