* 0949525
* Collaborative Research: Spatial and Temporal Dynamics of Local Extinctions: A 300-Year Experiment
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2014
* Dov Sax, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 03/31/2014
* USD 402,864.00

Species extinction is a poorly understood process, particularly at local scales,
because there are few ecological data sets that span long enough time periods to
reveal patterns of extinction. There is perhaps no single place on Earth where
changes in the local assemblage of species have been carefully observed and
documented continuously over several centuries. As a consequence, many basic
questions about patterns and rates of species extinction following environmental
change are difficult to answer. For example, how many species have been lost
from specific local areas? Do extinctions follow immediately after a
disturbance, or are post-disturbance extinctions delayed, resulting in an
'extinction debt' to be paid in the future? Data collected by this project will
begin to fill a deficit that has limited scientists' ability to answer these
basic questions. Paleontological techniques that have traditionally been used to
study changes in plant communities over many thousands of years will be used to
examine changes in plant communities in the past few hundred years. Seeds, leaf
fragments, and pollen will be analyzed in sediment cores from disturbed wetlands
in the Indiana Dunes to create a long-term ecological data set for approximately
ten-year intervals from the present day to about 300 years ago. Analysis of
these long-term data will advance ecological theory and aid conservation
practice by supplying information critically needed to gauge what current
patterns of ecosystem change mean for the future.

This project will provide training and mentorship for several undergraduate
students, a high school student, a high school teacher, a technician, and a
postdoctoral researcher. The project will also support the development of
educational and outreach material for K-12 programs.