* 0949134
* III: Travel Support for US-Based Students to Attend the 2009 IEEE International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM 2009)
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2010
* Xindong Wu, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2010
* USD 15,000.00

International travel support enables U.S.-based graduate students to attend the
2009 IEEE International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM 2009), held in Miami,
Florida, USA December 6-9, 2009 (http://www.cs.umbc.edu/ICDM09/). ICDM is the
world's premier research conference in data mining. It provides an international
forum for presentation of original research results, as well as exchange and
dissemination of innovative, practical development experiences. The conference
covers all aspects of data mining, including algorithms, software and systems,
and applications, as well as related areas such as data management, machine
learning and bioinformatics. The conference proceedings are published by IEEE.

With the growth of the Web, the Internet, and data intensive technologies such
as Sensor Networks and Bioinformatics, ICDM seeks to continuously advance the
state-of-the-art in data mining as an extremely important area in Information
Technology. The total number of ICDM participants in the past has been in excess
of 300, with a majority of the participants from the U.S., then Europe and Asia.
This travel support is expected to provide scholarships to 15 U.S.-based
graduate student participants to partially defray travel costs for the qualified
student participants. An additional aim is to broaden participation in computer
science among the underrepresented students. A strong representation of U.S.
junior researchers at the ICDM 2009 is useful in fostering U.S. competitiveness
in this important area.