* 0949667
* EAGER:    Software Development for Simulation and Optimization of Nanoscale Integrated Circuits
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Wei Lu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Krishna Kant
* 08/31/2012
* USD 200,000.00

This EAGER project is focused on:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Multi-level simulation
tools for circuits consisting of quantum tunneling devices such as resonant
tunneling diode (RTDs) and quantum dots. &lt;br/&gt;- The design of new
integrated circuits using these tools both at mesoscale (RTD-based design) and
at nanoscale (0-dimensional RTD- or quantum dot, QD-based
design).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall research project will be divided into
two different tasks: task-1: Reverse Synthesis of RTD structures in order to
optimize the overall circuit performance; and, task-2: Design, Fabrication and
Simulation of RTD and Quantum Dot based integrated
circuits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The US National Nanotechnology Initiative has
projected the nanotech market to grow to $1 Trillion by year 2015, and
integrated nanoelectronics and nanosystems are expected to make heavy commercial
inroad within a decade. However, one of the chief obstacles to their adoption at
present is the lack of integrated, multi-level software for studying their
properties, and aiding their design, simulation, optimization and interaction
with peripheral systems. Many of the desirable features and characteristics of
such software, identified by the International Technology Roadmap for
Semiconductors (ITRS) in 2005, are integral to this project?s research
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops the theory and prototype
software that will aid in the multilevel design, simulation and optimization of
circuits consisting of quantum tunneling devices as well as conventional
devices. To insulate circuit designers from the quantum-physical transport
details in device operation, this project develops a Q-Device Model module that
operates in conjunction with QSPICE so that system-level optimization is
possible in a reverse-synthesis approach. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project's
research may have the following broader impacts: &lt;br/&gt;- new and efficient
nanocircuits and nanoarchitectures to supplement and complement existing
applications and products, &lt;br/&gt;- a new tool for design of such integrated
nanoelectronics, &lt;br/&gt;- pedagogical methodology in inter-disciplinary
training to the next generation of circuit engineers who will then be equipped
to transfer principles and skills gained in this new paradigm to still further
technologies like molecular electronics, &lt;br/&gt;- audio/visual material
clips showing the growth of self-assembled nanowires and colorful images of
strings of atoms viewed through Scanning Electron Microscopes to stimulate
excitement in high-school and community-college students and in the community at
large, &lt;br/&gt;- promotion of female and minority students in doctoral degree
program in electrical and computer engineering, and &lt;br/&gt;- collaboration
between theory, simulation and experiment, and between academia and US industry,
and international institutes.