* 0949426
* Nutrient Uptake and Metabolic Adaptation by the Oomycete Plant Pathogen Phytophthora Infestans
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2014
* Howard Judelson, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 08/31/2014
* USD 504,000.00

Two indispensable attributes of all organisms are the abilities to absorb
nutrients and adapt their metabolism to changes in the environment. The Judelson
laboratory will study these processes in the microbe Phytophthora infestans,
which causes the economically important late blight diseases of potato and
tomato. P. infestans is believed to absorb nutrients during plant infection
through the use of specialized structures that it inserts into host cells, and
to adjust its metabolism to adapt to the nutrients encountered in its different
hosts, but neither phenomenon is well-understood. A combination of molecular and
cellular tools will be used to explore these processes, such as methods to
identify genes that are turned on and off in response to different feeding
conditions and techniques to localize within P. infestans the proteins that
participate in nutrient sensing and uptake. This work is significant since
organisms like P. infestans cause disease on hundreds of different plant
species, and those diseases are difficult to control with existing tools. The
research may lead to practical applications, such as inhibitors of the pathways
used to assimilate nutrients which might be used to reduce the incidence of
disease. The project also integrates research, education, and outreach at
several levels as it will support junior scientists and graduate students, as
well as undergraduates that might be interested in careers in science.