* 0949400
* Equipment Upgrade for Electron Microprobe, University of Houston Department of Earth and Atmospheric Sciences
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Jonathan Snow, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 07/31/2014
* USD 159,861.00

Sisson&lt;br/&gt;0949400&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides $159,861 in
NSF funding over 24 months to acquire wavelength and energy dispersion add-ons
for an existing electron microprobe (EMP) at the University of Houston. Other
upgrades (cathodoluminescence, upgraded crystal monochromator) are also
requested to enhance the instrument?s performance. This instrument will be used
for cathodoluminescence (CL)-imaging for zircon geochronology; garnet and other
silicate zoning analysis using visualization capabilities; thermobarometry,
geochronology and structural analysis (using X-ray mapping); phase
characterization in relict mineral phases from mantle peridotites and basaltic
glasses from the Arctic mid-ocean ridges and elsewhere; and retrograde
eclogites, high-pressure jadeitites and their associated rocks from the Motagua
suture zone, Guatemala. The instrument will be heavily involved in discovery
through education. The facility expects to support over 80 undergraduate
students per year, exposing them to modern microbeam materials characterization.
The institution serves the minority communities in the East Texas regions, and
is the top minority STEM graduate producer in a region. The enhanced microbeam
analytical facility will help attract and retain high-quality graduate students,
postdoctoral fellows, and junior faculty. The PIs will be responsible for
routine maintenance, training and scheduling - through an advisory committee.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***