* 0949243
* 2010 Protein Folding Dynamics Gordon Research Conference and Seminar in Ventura, CA from January 9-15, 2010
* BIO,MCB
* 12/01/2009,11/30/2010
* Susan Marqusee, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Michele McGuirl
* 11/30/2010
* USD 18,000.00

The 5th Gordon Research Conference on Protein Folding Dynamics and the
accompanying Graduate Research Seminar, which is a workshop for graduate
students and post docs addressing the methods and models of protein folding will
take place at the Ventura Beach Marriott,Ventura, California from January 9-10
(GRS) and January 10-15 (GRC), 2010. Funding from the NSF will allow a broad
participation from both young and established scientists working in this field.
Protein folding is a multidisciplinary area of research addressing fundamental
problems in biology. Consequently, few other fields see such a successful blend
of physical and biological sciences. Progressively, more studies that bring
together experiment and theory are being published, and this combination is
advancing our fundamental quantitative understanding of the information encoded
within protein sequences. Technological and theoretical advances have altered
our view of the protein folding and dynamics. Fast events can be observed
experimentally on timescales that approach those accessible by all-atom
molecular dynamics simulations. New,sophisticated models of proteins allow
ensemble kinetics to be sampled and compared to experiment.&lt;br/&gt;The Gordon
Research Conference in Protein Folding Dynamics, is a relatively new
conference,first set up in 2002, aimed specifically to bring experiment and
theory together to explore advances in the field and to serve as a forum to
discuss fundamental problems from polypeptide energetics and dynamics; to
chaperone assisted folding and the relationship between protein misfolding and
disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: As the field matures and
development in the physical sciences are being applied to important problems in
protein dynamics and energetics, it becomes even more important to provide this
venue to foster this communication and training at this interface between theory
and experiment. The GRC fosters an environment that attracts the brightest and
the most interactive members of the community. The ideas and hypotheses
developed at this conference will continue to advance the field of protein
folding dynamics as well as larger community interested in understanding the
information encoded in protein sequences, fields as diverse as biomaterials to
human genetics.&lt;br/&gt;The Graduate Research Seminar in Protein Folding
Dynamics is a meeting being organized as a satellite to the GRC in Protein
Folding Dynamics. This workshop serves as a venue for graduate students and
postdoctoral scientists to i) develop background on current techniques, theories
and models in preparation for the GRC in Protein Folding Dynamics, ii) share
their knowledge of protein folding methodologies and techniques and iii) meet
each other and discuss their own research. The involvement and inclusion of
young and developing scientists represents a key objective in the vision of the
conference to provide this vibrant multi-disciplinary research area with
scientists who are broadly based in both experimental protein folding
methodologies and the models and theories that provide a basis for the
interpretation of experiment in this field.