* 0949300
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:   WINTER CLIMATE CHANGE IN A NORTHERN HARDWOOD FOREST
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2014
* Lynn Christenson, Vassar College
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 08/31/2014
* USD 54,730.00

In the northeastern U.S., climate is changing more rapidly in winter than in
summer. The impacts of winter climate change on ecosystems are greatly
complicated by effects on snow depth and soil freezing. Snow is important as an
insulator of the soil, and many northern hardwood forest soils normally remain
unfrozen during the winter. A lack of snow can result in soil freezing, which is
a significant disturbance to forest ecosystems, potentially killing tree roots
and microorganisms and disrupting nutrient cycling processes leading to losses
of nutrients to water and air. These losses can decrease the productivity of the
forest ecosystem and lead to air and water pollution. In this project
investigators will use a landscape-scale approach to evaluate three aspects of
the effects of changes in snow depth on soil freezing and the cycling of carbon
and nitrogen in the northern hardwood forest at the Hubbard Brook Long Term
Ecological Research site (HBR) in New Hampshire. First, the research will
address uncertainty about the occurrence of colder soils in a warmer world, and
whether this pattern will increase losses of nitrogen, an important plant
nutrient and source of water and air pollution, from the northern hardwood
forest at HBR. Uncertainty about the extent and effects of soil freezing in a
warmer world is rooted in limitations in our understanding of where two "tipping
points" occur across a forest landscape experiencing climate change; where
snowpacks are too shallow to insulate the soil, and where air temperatures are
too warm to freeze the soil. This uncertainty will be addressed by measuring and
modeling snow depth, and soil climate across the entire ~3000 ha Hubbard Brook
Experimental Forest (HBEF), which encompasses the range of climate variability
that has been predicted for the northeastern U.S. over the next 50-100 years.
Measurements of soil temperature, moisture and frost, and nitrogen losses to
water and air will be made at 20 experimental field sites that experience a
broad range of long-term snowpack regimes to explore critical uncertainties
surrounding soil freezing events and their effects on nitrogen cycling. Second,
the proposed research will address how winter climate change affects microbial
and soil invertebrate processes and resultant changes in carbon flow during
winter, testing the hypothesis that carbon flow is the key integrative regulator
of winter microbial activity. To test this hypothesis, the movement of
isotopically labeled carbon and nitrogen will be traced from sugar maple
detritus into and through the soil ecosystem in six intensive study sites that
represent the full range of variation in winter climate at HBEF. Third, the
proposed research will address if soil freezing alters hydrologic controls of
ecosystem nitrogen processing at snowmelt and subsequent export of nitrogen to
receiving waters. Snowmelt dynamics will be tested by adding isotopically
labeled nitrogen to the snowpack and tracing its movement into and through the
soil ecosystem. Effects of soil freezing on export to receiving waters will be
tested by analyzing nitrogen export and solutes that serve as natural tracers of
hydrologic flowpaths on small watersheds that differ in winter climate/soil
freezing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will include education and policy
activities that explore the effects of winter climate change in the Northeast
U.S. on recreation, timber harvesting, biomass energy production, and other
ecosystem services. The project will connect ecosystem researchers with relevant
stakeholders and interest groups, including loggers and foresters, ski-area
operators, maple sugar producers, recreational snowmobile users, conservation-
oriented NGOs, citizen scientists, and public and private land managers through
a "Science Links" program. There will also be two pilot educational initiatives:
a winter field course for undergraduates and creation of a teaching guide for
middle and high school teachers. Finally, the research will be well integrated
into ongoing HBR research on modeling the effects of climate change, fostering
extension of current climate change modeling studies to depict the hydrologic
and biogeochemical response to soil freezing under future climate change
scenarios.