* 0949336
* Development of a high-resolution gas source isotope ratio mass spectrometer
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2012
* John Eiler, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 09/30/2012
* USD 749,350.00

0949336&lt;br/&gt;Eiler&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides funding to
develop a high-performance gas-source isotope ratio mass spectrometer (IRMS) for
analyzing multiply-substituted isotope patterns in various materials. The PIs
will collaborate directly with engineers from Thermo Fisher Scientific
('Thermo'). The new instrument designs relies on combining an inlet system and
ion source from an existing gas-source IRMS (the MAT 253) with the analyzer and
detector array of an existing large-radius, double-focusing multi-collector mass
spectrometer (the Neptune). The design goal will be to increase maximum mass
resolution for rare isoptologues. The hybrid will achieve high mass resolution,
high sensitivity, and high precision. The primary motivation is to advance
"clumped isotope geochemistry" - the study of naturally occurring multiply
substituted isotopologues. Current analytical limitations make isotopologue
measurement extremeley challenging. Clumped isotope geochemistry is a rapidly
developing new field with potential extensions to materials other than carbon
dioxide will potentially provide many new scientific insights. The overall
scientific near-term goals are to advance "clumped isotope" thermometers for
methane and other hydrocarbon gases, understand reduced atmospheric gas
photochemical lifetimes, and determining possible origins for organic materials.
Carbonate clumped isotope thermometry, the most developed current application
will immediately benefit from the new instrumentation. The instrument will have
broad applicability in paleoclimatology, biogeochemistry, tectonics, atmospheric
chemistry, geobiology and environmental science, and will ultimately provide new
analytical approaches to organic and inorganic geochemistry. The new instrument
will be a resource for training the next generation of isotope geochemists -
offering a "new" analytical tool for opening new research avenues. Studies into
the basic principles of molecular bonding and reaction mechanisms will also be
supported with the enhanced analytical capabilities. The partnership with Thermo
will eventually lead to a commercially-available instrument.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***