* 0949038
* Collaborative Research:   Species delimitation, speciation, and evolution of the niche in slimy salamanders (Plethodontidae: Plethodon)
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2014
* Matthew Gifford, University of Arkansas Little Rock
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 01/31/2014
* USD 163,830.00

This research will examine geographic patterns of variation in DNA sequences to
delimit species in a widespread group of eastern North American salamanders (the
Plethodon glutinosus group). These salamanders are often the most abundant
vertebrates in forested habitats and play a key role in ecosystem functioning.
However, due to their overall similarity in appearance and ecology, identifying
the number of species in the group has been problematic. The investigators will
use a novel combination of genetic, physiological, and microclimatic data to
discover species, and to explore the roles that stasis and divergence in the
ecological niche play in the origin and maintenance of species
lineages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the role that the ecological niche
plays in generating and maintaining species boundaries will advance our
knowledge of how species will respond to rapid changes in climate. Resolving
uncertainty surrounding the species-level taxonomy of the Plethodon glutinosus
group will have immediate conservation implications in rapidly developing
regions of the southeastern United States. In addition, the proposed research
will provide training in evolution, ecology, and conservation biology for a
postdoctoral student, two graduate students, and several undergraduate
researchers.