* 0949057
* RUI: Spectroscopy in bulk superfluid 4He
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2013
* Jussi Eloranta, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Tanja Pietraß
* 02/28/2013
* USD 368,090.00

In this award, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms (CSDM)
Program of the Division of Chemistry, Professor Jussi Eloranta of California
State University at Northridge together with his undergraduate and graduate
students, will study the interaction of atomic and molecular species with
superfluid helium through optical spectroscopy based methods. Superfluid helium
is an exceptional solvent with unique properties (e.g., vanishing viscosity,
super-thermal conductivity, and liquid phase down to 0 K), which allow for fast
energy dissipation, free diffusion of atoms and molecules, and minimization of
thermal effects. Atomic and molecular species to be studied include copper and
boron atoms and their dimers, as well as highly fluorescent molecules such as
tetracene and glyoxal. The atomic species are expected to be useful for studying
the superfluid properties of the liquid on the nanometer scale. Conversely, the
surrounding superfluid liquid can also be used to probe the electronic
properties of the solvated species.

The long-range goal of this project is to understand how the unusual solvent
effects, such as solvent layer guiding and vortex alignment of atomic orbitals,
can be used to alter the way chemical reactions proceed. This may result in
chemical reactions following paths that would normally be suppressed at elevated
temperatures. Examples of possible applications include preparation of novel
molecular structures, synthesizing high-energy materials and fuels, and
controlling chemical reactions at low temperatures ("field guided molecular
synthesis"). Students working with Professor Eloranta will gain skills related
to optics, lasers, vacuum technology, and electronics as well as theoretical
tools required to solve quantum mechanical problems.