* 0949036
* ULTRA-Ex: Resilience in an Urban Socioecological System: Water Management as a Driver of Landscape and Biodiversity in Fresno-Clovis, California
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2010,02/28/2015
* Andrew Jones, California State University-Fresno Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2015
* USD 299,232.00

Human beings have transformed the Earth into an increasingly urban planet, with
nearly half of humanity now living in cities. A city is a unique type of
ecosystem where human social, economic, and cultural activities play a prominent
role in shaping the landscape, which, in turn, influences the distribution and
abundance of other species and consequent patterns of biodiversity. The long-
term sustainability of cities is of increasing concern as they continue to grow,
straining their infrastructure and pushing against environmental constraints on
available natural resources. A key natural resource is water, especially in the
more rapidly urbanizing arid regions of the world. Understanding water
management and use in cities therefore is critical to developing a deeper
theoretical understanding of urban ecosystems as well as effective urban policy.
The American West faces a water crisis. Drought, urban growth, climate change,
and the continued demands of agriculture have combined to heighten the
competition among water users and spurred the search for institutional
arrangements to conserve water. Common tools used by governments to regulate and
reduce water consumption are the water meter and a use-based pricing structure.
In the rapidly urbanizing San Joaquin Valley of California, which is located in
an arid region subject to prolonged drought cycles likely to be exacerbated
under regional climate change projections, many cities now are installing meters
to reduce household water use. Metering is expected to reduce water availability
throughout the urban ecosystem, with residential landscaping choices mediating
its effects upon the distribution of plants and animals. Urban land-use
decisions result from dynamic interactions between institutional and individual-
level factors. Landscaping and irrigation at any particular residence, for
example, are products of local environmental conditions, the homeowners'
cultural preferences, socioeconomic status, neighborhood dynamics, zoning laws,
market conditions, city policies, and county/state/federal government
regulations. Because land use is a key determinant of habitat for other species,
overall urban biodiversity is strongly driven by the outcome of interactions
between these variables, but these interactions remain poorly understood. This
research project will address the significance of water as a key resource
shaping regional patterns of landscape and biodiversity in the Fresno-Clovis
metropolitan area of central California. Fresno currently is installing water
meters and will start charging for use by 2013, while Clovis has been doing so
for almost a century. This contrast in water policies between the two cities
provides a unique comparative experimental opportunity to study the impact of
metering on human landscaping choices and consequent patterns of urban
biodiversity. The objectives of this project are to analyze and contrast current
patterns of water use in these cities by focusing on institutional policy and
decision making regarding metering; individual homeowner decision making about
landscaping; landscape structure at multiple spatial scales; and patterns in the
distribution of plant and bird diversity. The investigators will employ a range
of methods from multiple disciplines including field observations, institutional
and individual homeowner surveys, face-to-face interviews with stakeholders,
geographical information systems, remote sensing, global positioning systems,
statistical tools, systems modeling, and advanced computer visualization
techniques. In addition to addressing many fundamental ecological and
socioeconomic questions, the research will be tightly integrated with the
education of undergraduate and graduate students and a strong citizen science
component built upon the ongoing Fresno Bird Count project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will have significant implications for urban
socioecological theory, methodology, and application. In terms of theory, this
project will shed light on complex dynamics of interrelated processes among
government regulatory policies, human behavior, landscape and habitat structure,
and plant and bird distribution at multiple spatial and temporal scales. In
terms of methodology, the research will integrate multidisciplinary methods and
advanced technologies to investigate the complexity of the study system,
leveraging a "natural" experiment occurring due to Fresno's installation of
water meters, and involving citizen scientist participation in data gathering.
With respect to broader impacts, the project will provide practical information
for urban governance by measuring the impact of a common regulatory tool on
citizen behavior and its resulting impacts on landscape and biodiversity.
Understanding the relationships among institutions, individual citizens, and
biodiversity will help guide urban planning towards more sustainable, resilient,
and environmentally healthy cities in the region and throughout the world. This
award was funded as an Urban Long-Term Research Area Exploratory (ULTRA-Ex)
award as the result of a special competition jointly supported by the National
Science Foundation and the U.S. Department of Agriculture Forest Service.