* 0949121
* Reconciling gene trees: Deciphering the source and extent of genealogical discordance
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2014
* David Spooner, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 05/31/2014
* USD 505,379.00

The discordant signal obtained from analysis of different genes has raised new
challenges for biologists. When contradictory evolutionary relationships are
detected across different parts of the genome, it is difficult to recover and
describe the history of a group of species. But this discordance among genes has
also raised new opportunities: hybridization, gene flow, and other biological
processes each leave their own signature in the pattern of gene tree
variability. The goal of this project is to estimate the discordance between
gene trees and the biological processes that have affected species and
populations. An interdisciplinary team of statisticians, biologists and computer
scientists will develop new and robust statistical methods for analysis of genes
and species relationships. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The tools developed through
this project will be implemented in a user-friendly program so that all
phylogeneticists can utilize them. Software will be freely distributed to
facilitate the utilization of these tools for the study of other groups of
species. Undergraduate and graduate students will be trained at the interface
between biology, statistics and computer science. Insights from this research
will enhance educational modules in evolutionary theory at the undergraduate
level and at K-12 teacher workshops.