* 0949350
* Acquisition of an X-Ray Fluorescence Spectrometer
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2010,05/31/2011
* Jeffrey Keith, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 05/31/2011
* USD 225,000.00

X-ray fluorescence spectrometry is widely used in the geosciences as a precise
method to determine major and many trace element concentrations in rocks and
other materials. With this grant, we will acquire a state of the art wavelength
dispersive X-ray fluorescence spectrometer to replace the 17-year-old instrument
in the Department of Geological Sciences at Brigham Young
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The major and trace element
compositions of rocks provide fundamental clues to their origin and evolution
and are vital to most modern geological studies. Such data are commonly acquired
by students using XRF spectrometry because of its relative ease of use and high
precision for many elements. Specific research areas include the nature and
causes of super eruptions, the evolution of mafic magmas related to hot spots
and rifts, the relationship of magmatism to base and precious metal deposits,
the geochemistry and chronology of tuff deposits in sedimentary basins, and the
growth of continents as revealed by multi-disciplinary studies of the tectonic
evolution of southern Asia, New England, and western North
America.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The benefits to society stemming
from use of this instrument range from purely scientific understandings of magma
evolution to the applied fields of volcanic hazards and the search of metallic
ore deposits. A new XRF spectrometer will also provide extensive education
opportunities to undergraduate and graduate students; they will be trained as
part of the next generation of analysts. By doing their own analyses and not
just ?sending samples off? to an external lab, students will be able to
understand the limitations of the data because they have personally dealt with
analytical problems, sample preparation issues, and with the sources of error in
their data. This XRF lab will also have major impacts on education and research
beyond BYU, as a result of our collaboration with other colleges and with the
Utah Geological Surve, and USGS. Two of these institutions recently changed from
junior colleges to BS granting universities with geology degrees. Few analytical
instruments are available in these emerging programs, so access to this facility
will provide new experiences for students at these colleges.&lt;br/&gt;