* 0949931
* Collaborative Research - The Mechanistic Basis of Parallel Evolution: Functional Analysis of Hemoglobin Polymorphism in Andean Ducks
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2010,05/31/2013
* Jay Storz, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 05/31/2013
* USD 378,104.00

PROJECT TITLE: Collaborative Research: The Mechanistic Basis of Parallel
Evolution: Functional Analysis of Hemoglobin Polymorphism in Andean Ducks

PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATORS: Kevin G. McCracken and Jay F. Storz

PROJECT NUMBER: IOS-0949439 and IOS-0949931

Conclusive inferences about adaptive evolution ultimately require an
understanding of mechanism. Patterns of DNA sequence variation can provide
suggestive evidence for a history of natural selection on a particular gene or
set of genes, but these indirect inferences should serve as a stepping-off point
for experiments to identify specific mechanisms of adaptation. Accordingly, the
purpose of the proposed research project is to follow up a comprehensive survey
of DNA sequence variation in the hemoglobin genes of Andean waterfowl to gain
insight into the functional (and possibly, adaptive) significance of the
observed amino acid polymorphisms. The goal of this project is to determine
whether parallel amino acid substitutions in highland populations of eight
species of Andean ducks have produced similar functional changes in
hemoglobin-O2 affinity. This project will integrate DNA sequence data with
functional experiments to identify possible mechanisms of adaptation, and will
determine whether the same or different mechanisms underlie adaptation to high-
altitude hypoxia in eight replicate lineages that independently colonized the
high Andes. The research will provide information about the number and types of
amino acid substitutions that are involved in potentially adaptive traits, and
will also provide a point of contrast for studies of humans inhabiting high-
altitude regions. The work will assemble a diverse team of collaborators from
North America and South America, and will develop collaborations with high-
altitude physiologists. A postdoc, graduate students, and undergrads, will be
mentored by faculty conducting research in structural biology, biochemical
physiology, and population genomics. Understanding the mechanistic basis of
traits that underlie adaptation to high-altitude environments will be
motivational for the conservation of Andean species, as well as their habitats.
This collaborative award is co-funded by the NSF Division of Integrative
Organismal Systems and by the NSF Office of International Science and
Engineering, Americas Program.