* 0949024
* RUI: Investigations into the Role of the CHD1 ATPase in Chromosome Structure in Drosophila
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2014
* Jennifer Armstrong, Claremont McKenna College
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 04/30/2014
* USD 480,195.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;In eukaryotic cells, DNA interacts with histone
proteins to form a structure called chromatin, the basic unit of which is the
nucleosome. While chromatin was once thought to be inert, present only to
organize and compact the DNA, it is now clear that chromatin can actively
control gene expression. Formation and maintenance of the correct chromatin
structure is therefore critical. The goal of this project is to use the powerful
molecular and genetic tools of Drosophila melanogaster (the fruit fly) to
understand how the structure of chromatin is maintained during gene expression.
The research focuses on the role of the chromatin remodeling factor CHD1. CHD1
(chromodomain, helicase, DNA-binding domain protein) is a highly conserved
ATPase that is localized to transcriptionally active genes. This project
addresses the specific hypothesis that CHD1 is targeted to active genes to
promote chromatin reassembly in the wake of transcription, thereby modulating
global chromosome structure. This hypothesis will be tested through two specific
aims: (1) Investigate changes in chromatin composition and histone modifications
following loss or gain of CHD1, and (2) Identify proteins that functionally
interact with CHD1 using a biochemical approach complemented with a novel
genetic assay. To address these aims the investigator will employ a variety of
genetic, biochemical, and cell biological tools and techniques that are ideal
for the investigation of chromosome morphology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts: &lt;br/&gt;The understanding of how chromosome structure is maintained
during gene expression is relevant to our basic understanding of cell biology. A
more immediate impact of this research is the involvement of undergraduates.
Undergraduate students from Claremont McKenna, Scripps, and Pitzer Colleges of
the Claremont Colleges will carry out much of this research under the mentorship
of the investigator. These three top-tier liberal arts institutions share the
investigator's unique department (The Joint Science Department, consisting of
physicists, chemists, and biologists). Most of the science majors conduct
research as part of a senior thesis, and many students begin research in their
sophomore or junior years. Over the three years of this project, the
investigator will provide a substantial (often multi-year) research experience
for 10-15 undergraduates, providing them with skills to help them succeed in
postgraduate education and in their chosen careers. This will allow
undergraduates to have true ownership of their own projects, and participate in
research at a level usually reserved for graduate students. Senior level
undergraduates will have the opportunity to participate in the training of
younger undergraduates, giving them insights into how to teach science and
explain how research is done.