* 0949147
* Hidden diversity in parmelioid lichens (Ascomycota, Lecanorales)
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2013
* Theodore Esslinger, Field Museum of Natural History
* Continuing Grant
* Robb Brumfield
* 02/28/2013
* USD 282,548.00

Hidden diversity in parmelioid lichens (Ascomycota)

Up to 1.5 million species of mushrooms are estimated to exist in nature. With
approximately 100,000 described species, only a small fraction is currently
known. A large group of mushrooms forms associations with algae and bacteria,
and the resulting associations are called lichens. The delimitation of species
in this group of mushrooms has been based on morphological characters. There is
a growing body of evidence from molecular studies that the number of existing
species in this group of mushrooms is underestimated. However, understanding the
diversity of lichens is pivotal for our understanding of overall biodiversity.
Lichens are important indicators for climate change, air pollution, forest
health and potential sources of antibiotics and biocontrol agents. In this
project the investigators will use molecular data: 1) to assess the diversity of
species in a group of lichens common in North America and 2) to understand the
evolution of this group of lichens.

A postdoctoral researcher will be trained and undergraduate students will
participate in summer-intern programs. The PI will also participate in public
lecture series and assist in developing exhibits at the Field Museum of Natural
History. High school visits are designed to bring modern research into the
classrooms to attract the future generation of scientists. The international
nature of these collaborations will foster initiatives to develop a worldwide
network of researchers. Also, results of this project will be disseminated
through web sites.