* 0949951
* Collaborative Research:  Unraveling a Gordian knot:  Biodiversity of Gordian worms, phylum Nematomorpha, in the New World
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2015
* Matthew Bolek, Oklahoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 07/31/2015
* USD 196,170.00

Abstract &lt;br/&gt;Horsehair worms are parasites of insects, but are free-
living in aquatic environments as adults. They are fascinating from an
ecological/behavioral perspective, as these parasites modify host behavior,
leading the definitive host to enter water, where the adult worms are released.
Since morphological identification of horsehair worms larvae is problematic, a
novel molecular approach will be used to identify larvae in hosts. This will
facilitate linking the juvenile and adult stages, essential to understanding
each species' ecology and life history. The proposed research will also greatly
increase our understanding of these parasites by documenting their diversity and
evolutionary relationships in the New World using DNA and anatomical
characteristics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project would represent a major
advance in the study of a very interesting, phylogenetically key, but poorly
known phylum. The results are likely to have an impact on our understanding of
the evolution of exoskeleteon-bearing organisms, including model organisms in
the phyla Arthropoda and Nematoda. It will involve three early career scientists
and foster international scientific collaborations. Graduate and undergraduate
students will have large roles in this project from fieldwork to publication and
presentation. Information will be made available to scientists and the public
through an internet website (www.nematomorpha.net), scholarly publications, and
education programs targeting K-12 students and college-level instructors.