* 0949263
* Acquisition of a Mobile Tower System for Interdisciplinary Atmospheric Research
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2011,12/31/2013
* Howard Neufeld, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 12/31/2013
* USD 191,397.00

0949263&lt;br/&gt;Emanuel&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will fund acquisition
of a mobile land-atmosphere research tower allowing flux measurements in the
Southern Appalachian Mountains which are stressed by land use changes,
pollution, development, invasive organisms and climate change. The proposed
instrumentation will support understanding interactions between terrestrial and
atmospheric environments. The tower system will be used in short- to
intermediate-term mass and energy fluxes measurements over southern Appalachian
landscapes; trace gas and aerosol sample collection for assessing regional air
quality and climate issues; atmospheric deposition studies and deposition
controls on southern Appalachian landscapes; high precision precipitation data
collection for understanding precipitation processes and controlling factors in
the region; and experimental design flexibility that cannot be achieved with a
similarly equipped fixed tower. The instrumentation will support multiple
departments including Geology, Biology, Chemistry, Geography and Physics and
will also support the Appalachian Atmospheric Interdisciplinary Research
(ApplAIR) Program. The latter program supports regional issues with air quality,
meteorology, climate and bioshpere-atmospheric interactions. The requested
mobile towers will support the permanent tower currently operated through
AppAIR. The instrument will incorporated into student research projects and
coursework within the five relevant departments and will serve an
interdisciplinary program in Environmental Science. Field work will be
coordinated with the McKinney Geological Teaching Museum for public outreach.
The PI will leverage NSF research funding for transporting and deploying the
tower systems. Use will be prioritized by the PI with preference given to funded
research projects. The PI has ample experience setting up, deploying and using
the requested field-based instrumentation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***