* 0949911
* EAGER:  Combining Sketching and Computer Vision Techniques in Cultural Heritage Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,02/28/2011
* Holly Rushmeier, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Rosenblum
* 02/28/2011
* USD 100,000.00

Computer graphics has been successfully used in a wide range of cultural
heritage applications.&lt;br/&gt;It has been proven both in the context of study
by subject specialists and in the preparation of exhibits for education of the
general public. Each year hundreds more computer graphics based cultural
heritage projects are initiated around he world. However, the use of digital
material remains demanding and requires technologists as well as subject
specialists. This research project will impact the development of exhibitions
used to communicate historical and cultural information to the general public.
Preparing such exhibits will be easier for subject specialists, and it will be
possible to create more engaging interactive displays of
information&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to change the
methods for both authoring and using digital objects in communication. The
research addresses the problem of generating compelling 3D displays of heritage
sites, where large archival photographic documentation is available. Recent
innovations in sketch-based modeling, in particular the ?Mental Canvas?
framework that relies only on 3D strokes rather than full solids, will be
exploited along with computer vision techniques. The Mental Canvas framework
will allow user annotation in order to facilitate the application of recent
improvements in image feature detection and bundle estimation to compute 3D
points from archival images. Annotation is required since current methods often
fail when all camera characteristics are unknown and photographs were not taken
from views designed to facilitate 3D reconstruction. The output of the proposed
system will be a 3D model that can be easily navigated by a casual user. The
system will then be able to naturally navigate through space and browse solid
models, archival imagery and textual data. An exhibit of artifacts and imagery
from the Dura Europos site that is being prepared by the Yale Art Gallery is
serving as the testbed for the research.&lt;br/&gt;