* 0949765
* A Teleost Model to Study Sex Steroid Regulation of Early Oogenesis and Ovarian Follicle Development
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2014
* Penny Swanson, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 08/31/2014
* USD 465,000.00

The production of a vertebrate egg is a complex process controlled by systemic
and ovarian hormones. Critical gaps exist in knowledge of the regulation of the
early stages of development, including humans, when a variety of maternal
materials that support early embryonic development are laid down in a
coordinated fashion in the developing egg (oocyte). Thus, many aspects of "egg
quality", the term used to describe an egg that can be successively fertilized
and lead to a viable offspring, are determined during this time. Using a novel
tissue culture system and molecular and cell biology approaches, this project
will characterize the effects of sex steroid hormones on early development of
oocytes of coho salmon, determine their modes of action, and determine the
complex interplay between systemic and locally acting ovarian hormones in
regulating development. It is anticipated that androgens and estrogens act in a
steroid-specific and stage-dependent fashion, and that a number of novel,
steroid-regulated genes will be identified. Because of the conserved nature of
egg development in vertebrates, the research will improve fundamental knowledge
on the systems regulating egg development in vertebrates, including humans and
agriculturally important animals, permit the development of an experimental
platform that will allow critical assessment of the potential impact of
environmental endocrine disrupting contaminants that interfere with signaling by
endogenous steroids, and may lead to the development of improved methods to
overcome reproductive dysfunction of captive-reared fish in conservation and
commercial aquaculture. This project will also have a significant impact on the
education of a postdoctoral trainee, a MS student and undergraduate researchers.