* 0949387
* ULTRA-Ex: Exploring Linkages Among Ecosystem Services, Public Health, and the Green Area Factor in New York City
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2010,01/31/2014
* Wade McGillis, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 01/31/2014
* USD 298,989.00

For the first time in human history, more than 50 percent of the world's
population resides in urban centers. By the year 2015, this fraction is expected
to rise by more than 10 percent. The increasing expansion of urban centers is
significantly impacting ecosystem services and the human communities dependent
on these services, not least because the biogeophysical environments of urban
regions and their surrounds are substantially different from those of rural
areas. The effects of this difference can be seen in modified water cycles and
climates within urban centers and exurban areas, amended urban soil properties
and ecosystem species, and polluted urban airways and waterways. In many cases,
degraded urban biogeophysical environments also are contributing to severe
health problems among urban populations. Concern about the major ecological
impact of urbanization has prompted the development of numerous strategies for
improving ecological services within cities, many of which are focused on the
preservation and/or recreation of natural landscape features. One strategy that
is gaining rapid attention in the U.S. is the concept of an urban Green Area
Factor (GAF) program. The goal of a GAF program is to provide a cost-effective,
decentralized approach to the restoration or expansion of ecosystem services in
urban environments, by setting targets for the percentage of "greening" to occur
in the development of different parcels of urban land. The use of the GAF as an
urban planning tool has multiple potential benefits from the perspectives of
improving urban ecology and health, improving the aesthetics and habitability of
urban environments, and engaging urban stakeholders in strategies for
sustainable development. But despite its potential, scientific linkages between
GAF guidelines and ecological outcomes remain nascent. Furthermore, information
about U.S. public willingness to provide support and stewardship for various GAF
strategies is limited. The goal of this research project is to conduct
interdisciplinary research on the dynamic interactions between people, natural
ecosystems, and green technologies in the dense urban environment of New York
City. The investigators will build on their own prior research as well as
partnerships with diverse local community groups and practitioners to monitor
and quantify the ecological and public health benefits of natural ecosystems and
evolving green technology interventions in three New York City neighborhoods; to
establish the acceptance and value of such systems and interventions to
stakeholders; and to develop a GAF-based tool that might work as a common
planning platform for urban stakeholders interested in optimizing the ecological
and public benefits associated with different urban greening
strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will help provide the underlying
scientific basis to advance and refine the GAF concept in order to more
effectively take account of human interactions with urban greening strategies,
including environmental justice communities. Optimally, it could be applied to
dense and diverse urban environments such as the mega-city of New York. As well
as advancing scientific knowledge, the project will deliver a new planning tool
that can provide a common platform for different New York City stakeholders to
explore various greening strategies in the context of their different missions
and goals. The project also will build a team of scientists, community
organizations, and practitioners who can work together to create new knowledge
on urban ecosystem sustainability and functionality. Research training will be
provided to post-doctoral scholars, graduate students, and undergraduate
students, and educational, outreach, and teaching activities will form major
components of the project. This award was funded as an Urban Long-Term Research
Area Exploratory (ULTRA-Ex) award as the result of a special competition jointly
supported by the National Science Foundation and the U.S. Department of
Agriculture Forest Service.