* 0949324
* Collaborative Research:  Nutrient co-limitation in young and mature northern hardwood forests
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2017
* Ruth Yanai, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 06/30/2017
* USD 471,598.00

Nutrient Co-limitation in Young and Mature Northern Hardwood
Forests&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Temperate forests have long been thought to be
nitrogen (N) limited, but chronic N deposition from air pollution should reduce
N limitation over time, and theory suggests that ecosystem productivity should
be co-limited by multiple nutrients. Experimental tests of N vs. phosphorus (P)
limitation in temperate forest systems are lacking. This study will combine
modeling and field studies to explore nutrient limitation in relation to
successional change in managed forest ecosystems. An improved understanding of
ecosystem optimization of resource use is important to forest management,
environmental protection, and basic scientific knowledge. Balanced nutrient
cycling is essential to maintaining forest sustainability, and scientists and
managers at the White Mountain National Forest will evaluate silvicultural
practices in light of results from the proposed research. For example, their
forest management plans require justifying intensive harvest removals in terms
of the ability of forests to acquire nutrients for regrowth. Feedbacks such as
the biological enhancement of mineral weathering when nutrients are limiting are
clearly relevant to this appraisal.&lt;br/&gt;The Multi-Element Limitation (MEL)
model includes P as well as N, carbon, light, and water, and is being applied to
simulate succession in northern hardwood forests. Using nutrient additions of N
alone in some forest stands, P alone in some forest stands, N+P in some forest
stands, in replicated stands of three ages (~20, 30, and &gt; 100 years) at the
Bartlett Experimental Forest in New Hampshire, the investigators will test the
patterns of resource limitation. The model predicts a greater response of
aboveground productivity to N+P than N or P alone. In older stands, it predicts
a greater response to N than to P addition, but in younger stands, the model
suggests that the supply of N from detritus should be sufficient to create P
limitation.