* 0949027
* Collaborative Research:  Untangling Tropical Diversity:  A phylogenetic Analysis of Tritrophic Interactions
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/2010,01/31/2014
* Robert Wharton, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Standard Grant
* David Mindell
* 01/31/2014
* USD 119,576.00

Last Modified Date: 12/13/09 Last Modified By: Scott D. Snyder Abstract Plants
and insects represent the majority of multicellular species on Earth. Most of
those species are tropical; yet, most species in the tropics remain
undiscovered. The proposed research has three primary goals: 1) discover and
describe species of parasitic wasps that attack a very diverse group of plant-
feeding flies; 2) discover patterns of host-use by the wasps; and, 3)
reconstruct the history of the wasps' diversification (the evolution of many
wasp species). To reach these goals, the team of investigators and their
students will collect and rear insects, analyze the DNA of immature stages and
adults, and analyze physical traits of adults.

This project addresses a major biological question: is diversification mediated
by interactions among organisms or is diversification an ecologically neutral
process? The project focuses on three groups of economically important
organisms: plants related to pumpkins; fruit flies related to major agricultural
pests; and wasps that attack the flies and are potentially important for pest
control. Undergraduate education is a key component of the project.
Undergraduates will be involved in all aspects of the research, including
fieldwork in the tropics, molecular data collection and analysis in the
laboratory, and communication and dissemination of the research.