* 0949164
* ULTRA-Ex: Hierarchical Analysis of Socioecological Interactions in the Charlotte Metropolitan Region: Can Urbanization, Forest, and Working Lands Coexist?
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2010,02/28/2013
* Todd BenDor, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2013
* USD 13,966.00

Each year societies worldwide are demanding more developed land on a per-capita
basis. In the United States, this growing trend is especially common in rapidly
urbanizing regions, where conversion of forests and farmlands to low-density
built land uses has compromised the sustainability and resilience of local
ecosystems and the resources they provide. The natural amenities that once
fostered nascent urban economies, such as the availability of clean water, rich
farmlands, and productive forests, are being exhausted by more than half of the
world's population whose demands for these same essential resources must now be
filled by costly surrogates. In most metropolitan regions, these effects are
accelerating with little sign of embracing alternative futures for urban growth.
Despite the vital services that remnant natural lands provide society,
surprisingly little is known about the complex socioecological factors
influencing the persistence of forests and farms in areas of rapid population
growth. Is it possible for natural and developed lands to coexist in a setting
of rapid growth, or are they mutually exclusive? This research project will
examine the complex interactions between people and the environment to find ways
that allow natural landscapes to remain functional in a rapidly urbanizing
region. The project will focus on processes affecting the persistence of forest
landscapes in Charlotte, North Carolina. Charlotte is a rapidly growing
metropolitan region that sits in the middle of the "Charlanta" megalopolis,
which is one of the largest mega-region in the U.S. The investigators will
construct and validate a contextual framework of multilevel interdependencies
between societal and ecological factors that influence persistence and quality
of forest. They will use hierarchical structural equation modeling augmented by
interviews, choice experiments, ecological measurement, visual analytics, and
the use of geographic information systems and remotely sensed imagery. The
project's empirical results will parameterize a spatially explicit agent-based
model that will explores alternative futures of urban growth and dynamic
interactions between people and environment based on changes in policy, cultural
values, and economic drivers at local, regional, and national
scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Efforts to promote public health and sustainability
in rapidly urbanizing regions are routinely impeded by limited understanding of
the complex socioecological, multi-scalar, and often conflicting factors that
influence persistence of natural landscapes. This research will contribute
theoretical and methodological advances to the emerging field of coupled human
and natural systems by building an interdisciplinary, policy-oriented analytical
framework that combines hierarchy theory (ecology) and structuration theory
(social science) with technological advancements in GIScience and visual
analytics. This construct will bridge common analytical disconnects related to
higher-level institutional processes, ecological heterogeneity, and micro-level
consequences of human agency in a testable, contextualizing framework. The
combination of hierarchical structural equation modeling, ecological
measurement, and interactive survey response will quantify human and ecological
intrinsic factors of forest persistence that are notoriously difficult to value
in natural resource and environmental economics. The project will involve a
diverse group of community engagement partners into all aspects of the research
process, including study design, community relations, education, interpretation
of results, and outreach. This approach will improve the intellectual merit of
the research and widens the range of land-use change solutions and viewpoints
ultimately available to regional planners, conservation practitioners, land
managers, policy makers, and concerned citizens. The project will explore market
and cultural strategies that are likely to emerge when human and ecological
intrinsic values of natural lands are better understood. This award was funded
as an Urban Long-Term Research Area Exploratory (ULTRA-Ex) award as the result
of a special competition jointly supported by the National Science Foundation
and the U.S. Department of Agriculture Forest Service.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;