* 0949746
* RUI: Human and disease impacts on aquatic communities: effects of trematodes and nanomaterials on freshwater benthic interactions
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2010,02/29/2012
* Melody Bernot, Ball State University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 02/29/2012
* USD 142,500.00

This project will focus on the relationships among novel manufactured
nanomaterials, parasitism of a keystone grazer species, and aquatic ecosystem
structure and function. Aquatic ecosystems are experiencing increased stress
from multiple anthropogenic influences, including alteration of physical habitat
and water chemistry, and the introduction of novel materials. The way in which
these stressors modify cryptic food web interactions, such as between parasites
and their hosts, is largely unexplored. Trematodes are common parasites of
freshwater snails that affect their body elemental composition, reproduction,
and behaviors that may subsequently influence stream and lake benthic ecosystem
processes. Despite their small size, parasites such as trematodes may have a
disproportionate effect on ecosystems by altering the cycling of nutrients or
flow of energy in aquatic habitats. Engineered nanomaterials are increasingly
used in manufacturing, medical applications, and consumer products, and are
currently entering ecosystems. These materials have novel properties and unknown
consequences on ecological processes. Freshwater communities consisting of
bottom-dwelling microbes, plants, and animals will likely be influenced by water
soluble nanomaterials such as nanosilver. This project will examine the
interactive effects of nanomaterials and trematode parasites on aquatic
communities. Field surveys and mechanistic, multi-species and whole community
experiments will be used to study how nanomaterials and parasites indirectly
alter species interactions and nutrient cycling in simple communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance a broader understanding of how
disease ecology is modified by the introduction of novel materials. It will
bridge gaps among disease and stress ecology, parasitology, and ecosystem
function. A significant broader impact of this project will be to provide
opportunities for local high school students to learn about the quality of their
own water resources. Relationships between researchers and the local community
will be created while integrating basic ecological research with in-depth
research experiences for high school students and the development of K-12
classroom and field curricula.