* 0949000
* ULTRA-Ex: Collaborative Research: Land- and Water-Use Decision Making and Ecosystem Services Along a Southwestern Socioecological Gradient
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2010,03/31/2014
* Clifford Dahm, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 03/31/2014
* USD 120,000.00

Rapid population and physical expansion of cities worldwide has increased the
urgency for understanding the factors that result in urbanization and the
consequences of urban expansion for human beings and the environment. Present
understanding of urbanization as a coupled socioecological system is limited by
inadequate knowledge of the type, quantity, and quality of ecosystem services
delivered in metropolitan regions and how actors incorporate both considerations
of ecosystem services and household preferences into management decisions.
Ecosystem services provide a service and function that is scientifically
measureable and derived from a scientific understanding of ecosystem structures
or processes, such as cooling from tree canopy cover. Ecosystem preferences are
measurements of what ecosystem services people are willing to pay for, such as
being close to recreation areas or clean air. These preferences often are
revealed in housing prices. This interdisciplinary research project will
investigate how decision makers respond to and make land-use and water-use
decisions based on measured and preferred ecosystem services on the wildland-
rural-urban fringe surrounding urban areas in the arid southwest. A comparative,
gradient approach using the metropolitan areas of Las Cruces and Albuquerque,
New Mexico, and Phoenix, Arizona, as case studies will be employed. By examining
three cities along population, economic, and physical gradients in an arid
environment, this project should add to basic knowledge about scaling in the
urbanization process in a resource scarce environment. Choosing a southwestern
regional context will provide greater insight into the urbanization processes in
desert cities, which are underrepresented in urban theory. Primary methods
include stakeholder forums and focus groups with decision makers, hedonic
modeling of houses prices and ecosystem service amenities, and biophysical
modeling of ecosystem services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The degree to which
decision makers consider ecosystem services and preferences in their decisions
remains unclear. In an era when urban sustainability is increasingly important
for guiding policy, this project will address this understudied but critical
aspect of urban governance. The project will provide new understanding about
ecosystem services and preferences to practitioners in arid urbanizing regions,
which they can use to formulate and facilitate best management practices.
Proposed interviews and stakeholder forums will give decision makers and citizen
groups a voice in how land and water should be managed on the rapidly growing
fringe. The proposed activities also will allow the research team to assess
which ecosystem services and preferences are important to stakeholders, so that
future research can address those concerns. The activities and results will
reach decision makers at the city, county, state, and federal levels as well as
concerned citizen groups, real estate developers, and tribal groups. This award
was funded as an Urban Long-Term Research Area Exploratory (ULTRA-Ex) award as
the result of a special competition jointly supported by the National Science
Foundation and the U.S. Department of Agriculture Forest Service.