* 0949601
* Diversity and Climate Change:  using elevational gradients to uncover processes underlying mammalian species distributions
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2014
* Christy McCain, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 04/30/2014
* USD 482,843.00

Rapid rates of extinction resulting from habitat destruction, resource
exploitation, and climate change lend an unprecedented urgency to documenting
and understanding biological diversity. Furthermore, effective conservation
efforts will require a better comprehension of the mechanisms creating and
maintaining biodiversity. Small mammal distributions will be examined on two
contrasting montane gradients in the Southern Rocky Mountains, the San Juans and
the Front Range, to test hypotheses related to the maintenance of biological
diversity and to detect range shifts due to climate change. Three elevational
transects within each mountain range will be surveyed to document diversity,
species distributions, population trends, climate, food resources, and habitat
characteristics. Comparisons between current ranges and historical distributions
at a landscape scale will determine the degree of range shifts associated with
documented climate changes.

Knowledge of the interrelated processes structuring small mammal communities
will serve as a foundation for understanding biodiversity patterns and their
protection, and it will illustrate human impacts on species distributions in
montane systems. Broader impacts of this project will include integration of the
research into a science education program for under-represented grade school
girls, participation in the San Juan Initiative to incorporate young people of
Latin and Native American descent into science, and active recruitment of under-
represented students into the research. The project will aid in the training of
young scientists and involve active participation of undergraduates enrolled in
the PI's classes. Additionally, a data repository and an education-outreach
website will be used to disseminate research findings.