* 0949303
* Acquisition of a Gas-Source Isotope Ratio Mass Spectrometer (GS-IRMS) to upgrade the University of Alabama Geological Sciences Stable Isotope Laboratory
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2012
* Paul Aharon, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 06/30/2012
* USD 200,000.00

0949303&lt;br/&gt;Andrus&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will enable the
purchase of an isotope ratio mass spectrometer, an in-line continuous flow
carbonate/CO2 extraction device, and ancillary equipment to couple the new
instrumentation to existing devices. The major analytical requirements are
carbon and oxygen isotope analysis in accretionary carbonates, like mollusks,
brachiopods, corals, fish and speleothems. Deuterium and oxygen isotope ratios
are also routinely analyzed in water samples. Other research focuses on nitrogen
isotope variability in biominerals and organic sediments. Research foci are
biomineralization, terrestrial and marine paleoclimate reconstructions,
paleoecology, geoarchaeology, and collaborative efforts with anthropologists
marine biologists. This grant will allow the facility to have two parallel IRMS
set-ups - decreasing maintenance and repair and allowing higher data throughput.
The PIs will also be able to analyze deuterium isotopes in continuous flow
obviating off-line preparation for later dual-inlet measurement. The Alabama
Stable Isotope Lab is currently directed by the co-PI. A full-time research
technician is supported by the institution. Day-to-day maintenance is supported
by PIs' research grants and user fees. Currently, income exceeds maintenance and
expendables costs. The stable isotope lab is routinely used for graduate and
undergraduate courses. Research courses for undergraduates also utilize stable
isotope measurements (hands on). Undergraduates are routinely hired for hourly
lab work and thus receive training. A second IRMS will allow enhanced student
use. Several K-12 outreach programs currently use the facility. A McNair Scholar
program exists for stimulating underrepresented student
participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***