* 0949945
* Collaborative Research: Wings to Flippers-Phylogenetics, Character Acquisition, and Feather Biomechanics in the Evolution of Wing-Propelled Diving
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2010,07/31/2013
* Kevin Middleton, University Enterprises Corporation at CSUSB
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 07/31/2013
* USD 64,201.00

While transformations to an aquatic lifestyle have been intensely studied in
organisms ranging from insects to whales, basic questions remain unanswered for
birds: e.g., how many times has 'aquatic flight' been gained and aerial flight
lost? A large collaborative team will focus on resolving the controversial
evolutionary relationships of wing-propelled diving birds (including new
fossils). Phylogenetic comparative methods will be used to investigate
musculoskeletal, neurosensory, and feather microstructure changes across aerial
to aquatic flight transitions. Techniques such as X-ray computed tomography,
histology, and computer modeling will also be
utilized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts focus on interdisciplinary
undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral training in systematics, histology and
biomechanics. Highlights include a mentored research experience for
undergraduate students from under-represented groups. Public outreach and
education activities include co-instruction of a 3 year Geoscience module of the
nationally-recognized 'UTeach' secondary school teacher preparation program,
'Expanding Your Horizons' workshops to encourage young women to pursue science
careers, web-cast lectures and distribution of curricular materials via
university and museum programs, and a dedicated blog. Broad dissemination of
research findings is achieved through peer-reviewed publications, conference
presentations, and data sharing via online databases.