* 0949334
* Aquisition of Equipment to Facilitate Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopic Study of Volatiles in Glasses and Crystals
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2010,05/31/2012
* Sheila Seaman, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 05/31/2012
* USD 40,145.00

The Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy laboratory in the Department of
Geosciences at the University of Massachusetts houses a Bruker Vertex 70
infrared spectrometer coupled with a Hyperion 3000 microscope. The FTIR
laboratory, and particularly the mapping capability of the system, has made
possible research projects on the relationship between flow banding and water
concentration variations in rhyolitic lavas, volatiles in the K-T Deccan basalts
of India, the role of water in deformation of quartz crystals in shear zones,
and water concentrations in lunar and Martian glasses and crystals, among
others. This grant will fund the purchase of a heating stage that will be used
to homogenize bubble-bearing melt inclusions so that accurate measurements of
volatile concentrations can be obtained. In addition, the grant will fund the
purchase of a cooling stage that will be used to freeze samples so that the
spectral characteristics of H-O species can be examined to determine whether
water occurs as part of the mineral structure or whether it occurs in fluid
inclusions in the crystal. Finally, a video camera for characterizing textural
characteristics of specimens, and a rotatable stage to permit collection of
spectra in orientations parallel to principal crystal vibration directions are
funded. This instrumentation all contributes to the analytical goal of
evaluating the origin and evolution of volatiles in igneous systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broad significance of this project is the exploration
of volcanic processes through Earth history and the role that volatile compounds
play in explosive behavior and in climatic effects of volcanic eruptions.
Minerals host samples of the molten material from which they crystallized. These
captured samples of the parent melt are known as melt inclusions. Analyses of
melt inclusions provide an evaluation of the climate-affecting gases that were
dissolved in the parent melt and that were contributed to the atmosphere during
volcanic eruptions. The equipment funded by this grant will be used to improve
the ability of the Fourier transform infrared spectrometer in the Department of
Geosciences at the University of Massachusetts to accurately measure volatile
concentrations in melt inclusions and to evaluate the behavior of volatile
compounds in Earth reservoirs.&lt;br/&gt;