* 0949365
* Characterization of functional/structural constraints operating on the Drosophila genome
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2010,02/29/2012
* Jose Ranz, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 02/29/2012
* USD 135,000.00

Chromosomes, the cellular entities that carry genes, can suffer modifications in
their structure due to breakages and reattachments in new configurations. These
breakages do not occur at random: some chromosome regions are prone to
participate in chromosomal rearrangements while others are seldom affected. The
reasons for these differences in susceptibility among chromosome regions are
unclear. The current notion is that genes that work cooperatively or that have
common molecular requirements are clustered in particular chromosome regions. It
is thought that the viability and/or fertility of the organism can be impaired
if these regions are disrupted by rearrangements. In humans, multiple diseases
correlate with rearrangements of particular chromosome regions. Interestingly,
those chromosome regions are intact in healthy individuals, an observation that
also applies to other vertebrate species. This grant funds the first rigorous
experimental test to understand the consequences of disrupting these delicate,
ultra-conserved genomic regions. The work will use the fruit fly Drosophila,
which is one of the best model organisms to understand the consequences of
chromosomal rearrangements. Drosophila chromosomes possess the same kind of
delicate, ultra-conserved regions as vertebrates do. In addition, Drosophila
researchers have molecular tools to induce precise chromosomal rearrangements
and to subsequently monitor their effects on the organism. The principal
investigator plans to disrupt these special chromosome regions of Drosophila in
order to analyze the consequences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is likely
to have implications for understanding human genetic diseases. Furthermore, this
grant will train undergraduate students and postdoctoral fellows in advanced
concepts of genetics.