* 0949051
* Probing Motoneuron Dendritic Integration during Locomotion with Targeted Ion Channel Manipulation in Drosophila
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2010,07/31/2013
* Richard Levine, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Coppola
* 07/31/2013
* USD 523,766.00

In all animals, motor behaviors such as walking, breathing, swimming, or flying
rely upon the coordinated patterns of muscle contractions, which in turn, depend
on information processing in neural circuits located in the nervous system.
Motoneurons transfer neural information from the central neural networks to the
muscles. Although the neural network plays critical roles in generating the
coordinated information output to the muscles, motoneurons are equipped with
intrinsic membrane currents that also sculpt the final motor output. Motoneuron
membrane properties are further influenced by neuromodulatory substances which
can be released during motor activity to shape patterned motor output. Despite a
half century of studying motor pattern generation, our knowledge of how
motoneuron membrane currents shape patterned motor output remains fragmentary.
One major experimental problem in studying the specific functions of motoneuron
membrane currents has been that most pharmacological or genetic loss-of function
experiments target all neurons of the network. This project will use the genetic
tools available in Drosophila to target genetic manipulations specifically to
motoneurons without affecting the rest of the network. In a comparative approach
the experiments will focus on two locomotor activities with different
requirements for motoneuron activation; larval crawling and adult flight. In the
first step, the study will determine which genes code in motoneurons for
calcium, calcium-activated potassium, and hyperpolarization activated currents.
Based on this, specific currents will be manipulated genetically only in these
motoneurons to test their functions by recordings during motor behavior. The
investigators expect to unravel new motor strategies and cellular properties
that are relevant to normal motoneuron function and to understanding defects of
motoneurons perturbed by disease or injury. The Broader Impacts of this work
include interdisciplinary training of undergraduates and graduate students.
Additional educational activities will include training of students from
underrepresented groups; for instance, the PI will recruit students from the
local Bioscience High School and mentor these students while the students are
involved in the proposed research. Finally, the PI will contribute to the
University?s Minority Access to Research Careers program to increase
participation by underrepresented undergraduate students in STEM.