* 0949305
* REVSYS:  Phylogenetic and Taxonomic Revision of Chytridiales (Chytridiomycota)
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2015
* Martha Powell, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* David Mindell
* 07/31/2015
* USD 382,673.00

Chytridiales (=chytrids) are zoosporic fungi comprising over 320 species. As
parasites of algae and decomposers of pollen, cellulose, chitin and keratin in
soil and aquatic ecosystems, chytrids are environmentally important, impacting
primary productivity and serving as critical links in food webs. Despite their
ecological significance, patterns of biodiversity and the evolutionary history
of chytrids are poorly known. In this project, chytrids will be collected and
cultured from diverse habitats in southeastern and gulf coast US states, with an
emphasis on algal parasites. Phylogenetic analyses of phenotypic structures, as
well as multiple gene sequences, will be used to identify isolates and to
conduct phylogenetic analyses. Newly discovered species will be described and
monographed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Taxonomic summaries, with interactive keys and
illustrations, will be posted on a web site and published in journals, making
these data openly accessible. Many new cultures will be made available to other
researchers. A post-doctoral researcher will be trained, filling the void of
chytrid specialists, and graduate and undergraduate students will learn modern
techniques in systematics and the study of biodiversity. Program participants
will present workshops to Alabama Science in Motion high school teachers and
will contribute species pages to the Encyclopedia of Life, expanding knowledge
of chytrids to a global community.