* 0949453
* Microbial Genome Sequencing:   High-Resolution Phylogenomics of Halophilic Archaea
* BIO,EF
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Aaron Darling, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 09/30/2012
* USD 724,678.00

Halophilic archaea share the common ability to live in hypersaline environments
(typically in excess of 3M NaCl) but also possess a diverse set of metabolic
activities, some of which have already found their way into biotechnological
applications. Several members of the archaeal family Halobacteriaceae are being
fully sequenced by Dr. Facciotti (UC Davis) and collaborators Dr. Eisen (UC
Davis) and postdoc scholar Dr. Darling to advance our understanding of genome
organization and evolution of microbial genomes and to provide a foundation for
systems biology efforts to experimentally query novel aspects of microbial
biochemistry, physiology, metabolism, development and cellular biology. The
critical aspect to this study is that these genome sequences will provide
sufficient coverage of this phylogenetic family (both in breadth and depth) so
that comparative studies on the organization of genomes and the exchange and
reshuffling of genetic information will become possible. Because the organisms
proposed for sequencing have adapted for life in hypersaline environments, the
development of these as model systems will also directly shape our understanding
of salt tolerance, an issue that continues to be of great relevance in the
development of salt and drought resistant food crops. The PIs also intend to
address whether the biological species concept can be applied to archaea. The
project will also investigate archaeal DNA replication, which shares aspects
with both eukaryotic and prokaryotic genome replication, and genome
organization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since halophiles are excellent
model systems for classroom use, the PIs intend to develop a new educational
module with high school teachers and students to learn genome sequence analysis.
The PIs will make this module freely available via www.halophiles.org.