* 0949255
* Early Career:  Acquisition of a Computer Cluster
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2011
* Caroline Beghein, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 09/30/2011
* USD 73,771.00

Beghein 0949255

This award provides funding for a new Linux computer cluster for seismological
research at UCLA for an early career PI. The cluster will be incorporated into
the campus-wide cluster so that unused cycles can be shared. Research will
involve both forward and inverse modeling. Forward modeling will focus on
seismic velocity and anisotropy, and quantitative model uncertainties. Solving
the non-linear inverse problems will over-challenge current computing resources.
Earthscope USArray Transportable Array data will be processed using the new
cluster. Future work constraining seismic anisotropy in the mantle and core will
involve full spectral coupling, which is computationally demanding. Wave
propagation code will also be used to test models. Three-dimensional core
structure models will assist in defining an inner inner core, phase and/or
compositional changes within the inner core, and defining density changes at the
core boundary, ultimately furthering our understanding of the geotherm. Other
study areas for the new cluster include mantle deformation geometry, plate
motion-sub-lithospheric deformation coupling, asthenospheric deformation versus
fossil lithospheric deformation, mid-ocean ridge spreading, surface tectonic
signatures of upper mantle processes, crust, upper mantle lithosphere and the
asthenosphere interactions, and thermal versus compositional nature of the
mantle at various depths. The new cluster will benefit researchers from many
different fields, in Earth Sciences, Astrophysics, Physics,Biology, and Computer
Sciences as it will be incorporated into the existing campus-wide cluster. The
cluster will provide data on basic Earth system functioning. New modeling
techniques and scientific results will be published, and models will be freely
disseminated over the internet. The cluster will be used for student training
both in Geosciences and within other disciplines - producing a new generation of
scientists with the ability to understand forward modeling and parallel computer
programming. The cluster will be incorporated into the campus-wide shared
cluster. UCLA Academic Technology Services (ATS) then provides maintenance and
installation at no cost. ATS also provides system administration including OS
maintenance and upgrade, hardware resolution and scheduling. ATS also provides
training.

***