* 0949058
* REU:  Assessing the relationship of natural resource exploitation strategies with the rise of social complexity in the Hawaiian Islands through stone tool geochemistry
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2013
* Peter Mills, University of Hawaii at Hilo
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2013
* USD 139,789.00

With National Science Foundation support, Drs. Steven Lundblad and Peter Mills,
in collaboration with staff of the Bishop Museum, will conduct an extensive
provenance study of stone from previously excavated, pre-contact habitation
sites in Hawai`i. It is the first large evaluation of these materials using non-
destructive Energy Dispersive X-ray Fluorescence (EDXRF). This program will
build upon pioneering geochemical work done over the past 20 years as well as on
recent work in the UHH geoarchaeology laboratory on Hawaiian lithic (stone)
artifacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The settlers of the Hawaiian Islands appear to
have rapidly developed from a small initial colonizing population to the most
complex chiefdom in all of Polynesia between circa AD 800-1000 and 1778. This
study will address relationships between natural resources and culture which
combined to result in this rapid intensification. Due to the lack of other
mineral resources on these island chains, much of the work of deciphering
ancient Oceanic economic and cultural history is based on the types and
abundances of durable artifacts. These are mainly stone tools and debris from
tool manufacture found at domestic sites. Studying the nature of quarrying
activity and the distribution of products from quarry sites provides a framework
for interpreting the role of natural resources in Hawaiian economies and social
evolution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Economic exchange studies based upon
microscopic and geochemical analyses of lithics, however, have only just begun
to address issues of geochemical variability within larger quarry sites and to
identify the geochemistry of smaller source areas. This project will result in
the first significant and systematic geochemical analysis of artifacts from
domestic archaeological contexts spanning the Hawaiian archipelago. EDXRF
provides a means for this large-scale, sustained, and non-destructive effort
which will lead to more robust models of Hawaiian exchange and consequent
sociopolitical development in relationship to valued natural resources across
time.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Specific components supported by this project, which
will span a two-year period, include the following phases. Quarry site sampling
in the Hawaiian Islands will allow mapping of the geochemical signatures of the
stone tool sources. Comparing these to the geochemical and technological
analyses of the existing, well-documented collections of finished stone tools
from the Bishop Museum will show the provenance of those tools. Researchers will
develop models of natural resource exploitation patterns through time, and
relate them to the evolution of Hawai`i's complex chiefdoms. These three phases
all include the primary goal of education of Native Hawaiians and other Pacific
Islander students. Students will participate through an integrated education
program, with undergraduate research internships for anthropology and geology
majors at UH-Hilo in collaboration with the Bishop Museum (Honolulu).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The use of non-destructive EDXRF analyses is not new, but
its use to build an expansive geochemical database on Hawaiian stone acquisition
is. This novel use in a large-scale, focused effort will apply new research to
existing archived archaeological collections. The non-destructive nature of the
new analysis will set the new standard for culturally appropriate methodologies
for understanding the Hawaiian past. The study will provide exciting
opportunities for Pacific Islander students to explore how their ancestors
interacted with their environment and each other. Interpretation of exchange
patterns based on this information will engender further insights into
culturally significant activities of the past, which is of great interest to
modern Hawaiians. The study will provide the framework to develop robust socio-
economic models of the underpinnings, development, and social complexity of
Polynesian chiefdoms.