* 0949774
* Collaborative Research: Predicting Effects of Climate Warming on Stream Ecosystems Using Metabolic Theory and Iceland's Unique Geothermal Environment
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2014
* Alexander Huryn, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 06/30/2014
* USD 529,004.00

Climate warming has been identified as one of the most important threats to
freshwater ecosystems globally. Because temperature is the fundamental driver of
nearly all biological processes, climate warming will likely have strong effects
on freshwater ecosystems and the ecosystem services they provide for humans.
Despite recent theoretical advances that provide clear predictions about how
organisms should respond to warming, our current understanding is hindered by
(a) the short-term and small-scale nature of most previous studies and (b) the
non-trivial practical challenges associated with experimental warming of
freshwaters at the ecosystem scale. This study will take advantage of a unique
geothermally-active watershed in Iceland that contains a steep gradient of
stream temperatures and very little difference in solute chemistry. Using a
landscape gradient study of ?temperature-acclimated? streams, streamside
manipulations, and an ecosystem-scale experiment, this study will quantify the
effects of warming on critical ecosystem processes (ecosystem metabolism and
nutrient cycling) and the flow of energy and elements through stream food webs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed multi-scale design will produce much-needed
data concerning the response of stream ecosystems to impending changes in
temperature regime, benefitting society through increased understanding of how
climate warming will influence freshwater ecosystems and the critical services
they provide to humanity. The project will integrate research and education
through training and mentoring of undergraduates, graduate students and a post-
doctoral associate. In addition to communicating our results through traditional
outlets (publications, national/international meetings), findings will be
presented to local grade schools, high schools, and the community at large with
presentations, an interactive research blog, and semi-annual meetings with
Icelandic colleagues.