* 0949702
* LTREB: Acorn pulses and the dynamics of rodents, ticks, and Lyme-disease risk in oak forests
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2015
* Charles Canham, Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 04/30/2015
* USD 450,000.00

Long-term data on the abundance of arthropod vectors that transmit important
human diseases are necessary to predict risk. Risk of human exposure to Lyme
disease is related to the abundance of blacklegged ticks (the vector) that are
infected with Borrelia burgdorferi (the pathogen). The objective of this
research is to understand the causes of dramatic variation in risk at
representative sites in the northeastern U.S.A. Prior research suggests that
Lyme disease risk is correlated with prior abundance of white-footed mice (a
critical host for ticks and pathogens), and that mouse abundance is correlated
with prior abundance of acorns (a crucial food for mice). Tick and mouse
populations, and acorn production, are potentially influenced by changing
climatic conditions. The proposed research will establish which climatic
variables influence tick survival, mouse abundance, and acorn production. It
will clarify the nature of the relationships between acorns and mice, and
between mice and ticks. The results will facilitate the integration of climate
change with forest health to predict risk.

Results of this long-term project are used for K-12 classroom teaching
(including a PBS NOVA unit), undergraduate education (independent research
projects and material for textbooks in ecology, conservation biology, and
mammalogy), and public education (local and regional presentations about Lyme
disease risk factors, media coverage in newspapers and magazines). The proposed
research has strong practical implications because it allows prediction of times
and places of high disease risk.