* 0949280
* RUI:  Measuring local adaptation to test the Geographic Mosaic of Coevolution Theory in a three trophic level interaction:  a fly, a galler, and a parasitoid
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2014
* Timothy Craig, University of Minnesota Duluth
* Continuing Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 02/28/2014
* USD 418,498.00

Coevolution, the reciprocal evolution of species, is hypothesized to be one of
the major processes producing biological diversity. Interacting species in
different geographic areas can coevolve with each other resulting in each
species becoming locally adapted to variation in the other species. This will
produce a geographic mosaic of genetically differentiated populations of each
species. Local adaptation of organisms has frequently been documented, but the
contribution of coevolution to local adaptation has been difficult to quantify.
The PIs will measure the role of coevolution in producing local adaptation among
a plant, a specialized herbivorous insect, and a wasp that parasitizes that
insect. Studying this tightly interacting group of species will be the first
step towards understanding coevolution at the level of the ecological community.
Each of these species shows evidence of local adaptation, but the role of
coevolution in producing this adaptation has not been determined. To measure
coevolution the PIs will reciprocally transplant populations of each species
among three sites with different environments to create all possible
combinations of the local populations of the three species. By measuring the
survival and reproduction of each species they will quantify the relative
contribution of coevolution and other environmental factors to local adaptation.

The results will have implications for agriculture, forestry, and conservation
efforts because movement of populations to new locations is common in all these
disciplines. The research will provide training for a large number of
undergraduates in ecological research techniques.