* 0949376
* Acquisition of an X-Ray Fluorescence instrument for research and teaching at Wesleyan University
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Johan Varekamp, Wesleyan University
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2015
* USD 149,720.00

The analytical technique of X-ray fluorescence (XRF) is well proven, and
provides quantitative information on a broad range of elements, with relatively
simple sample preparation and ease of use. This award will fund the acquisition
of a new XRF instrument that is ideal for use in teaching and research in a mid-
sized, intensely focused earth science department such as the Wesleyan
University E&amp;ES department. Wesleyan BA and MA students as well as those
from neighboring universities will use the new instrument for their research.
Wesleyan teachers will use the instrument to inspire students on the path of
?original discovery? and stimulate curiosity into scientific endeavors that may
ultimately lead to innovations in industry, recognition of environmental
hazards, or new energy resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Science education of
college students is important given the role that technology and scientific
discourse play in society and the need to compete in the global economy. The use
of ?active learning projects? greatly facilitates the teaching of science.
Students collect new data from their samples, and interpret these to test a
hypothesis, show a spatial anomaly, or derive a new hypothesis on the origin of
the samples. The chemical composition of rocks and minerals provides direct
evidence on their origin and evolution. Therefore, petrology is a prime tool in
deciphering earth history as well as helping to locate new energy resources or
ore bodies. Sedimentary rocks may reveal evidence of the climate at the time
when they were deposited, whereas volcanic rocks yield clues to the deeper,
inaccessible parts of the earth, such as the mantle. The chemical composition of
soils and sediment may give clues to anthropogenic or natural pollution with
toxic elements, including Lead, Copper and Arsenic. Acquisition of a new X-ray
fluorescence spectrometer at Wesleyan University enables us to reach these
goals.&lt;br/&gt;