* 0949728
* Role of Nuclear Receptors in Neural Plasticity
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2010,08/31/2014
* Rodrigo Velarde, Wake Forest University
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 08/31/2014
* USD 420,000.00

ABSTRACT PI (Fahrbach) Proposal #0949728 Role of Nuclear Receptors in Neural
Plasticity

This project studies the changes that occur in the structure of the brain when
an adult animal learns to do something new. Young honey bees work within the
hive, but at approximately three weeks of age begin to forage to flowers for
pollen and nectar. Changes in the size of individual nerve cells and the volume
of entire brain regions result from the shift from in-hive tasks to foraging.
This project investigates the role of hormones in promoting brain growth in
response to new experiences using the honey bee model. The responses to
important developmental hormones of bee neurons growing in culture will be
studied using both microscopy and methods that permit gene expression to be
measured. These studies will yield an understanding, at a cellular and molecular
level, of why nerve cells are more likely to grow during some stages of life
than others. This project will provide training in neuroscience research for a
graduate student. In addition, the co-PIs will develop a new bioinformatics
course for undergraduates. Teaching materials developed for this course will be
made freely accessible to all interested teachers and students via a bilingual
(English/Spanish) web site maintained at Wake Forest University.