* 0949044
* Acquisition of a Laser Fluorination System for Oxygen Isotopes at IIRMES, California State University, Long Beach
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2012
* Gregory Holk, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 04/30/2012
* USD 37,539.00

0949044 Holk

This award will be used to acquire materials for fabricating a laser
fluorination system to prepare samples for oxygen isotope measurements. The
laser fluorination system will allow small-scale isotopic variation studies,
increase sample throughput, and allow isotope measurements on ?resistant?
minerals. Isotopes will be used to understand the role of aqueous fluids in the
genesis of magmas, hydrothermal systems, sedimentary basins, hydrothermal vent
systems, shallow subduction zones, and in groundwater circulation. Water-rock
interaction history will be applied to understand metamorphic rock exhumation.
Laser fluorination would allow oxygen isotope measurements on individual
minerals within rocks, allowing better constraints on geochronologic cooling. As
part of the Geoscience Diversity Enhancement Program (GDEP), samples from the
Catalina Schist will be analyzed by the new system to better understand
petrologic and tectonic evolution. Oxygen isotope data from thermally-altered
intrusions will be used to establish the degree of isotopic disequilibrium to
estimate water-rock ratios and duration of hydrothermal activity in the Southern
White Pine Range in Nevada. In addition, fluid inclusions will be analyzed using
laser fluorination to reveal silica sources. Stable isotopes will be used to
source historic gunflints and paleoindian quartzite tools. Biogenic silica and
sediment organic matter will be analyzed and used as a proxies to estimate past
oxygen and salinity concentrations. This fluorination system would allow CSULB
to provide a system-wide facility for geology and archeology isotope and trace
elements (GAITE) measurements. The instrument will be used for undergraduate and
graduate-level student training. CSULB is a Hispanic Serving Institution and is
highly ranked for conferring minorities with bachelors. The Institute for
Integrative Research in Materials, Environments, and Society (IIRMES) was
formally established in 2004 with a purpose to promote intellectual exchange and
foster interdisciplinary collaborations among faculty and students with
different educational and research backgrounds. The PI will be responsible for
building the vacuum lines The instruments will be installed at the CSULB stable
isotope laboratory in the IIRMES facility. The facility will operate as fee-
based for outside samples.

***