* 0949025
* EAGER: True Government Transparency: Comprehensive National Data Finding and Navigation Tools
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2011
* Paul Jaeger, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2011
* USD 299,977.00

E-government information can be difficult to find, access, and use because much
of it is hidden in the deep Web, e.g. dynamic content automatically generated
from databases. Although commercial and governmental search engines and
directories provide access to much Federal information, significant challenges
remain. Techniques for exposing Deep Web portal pages are not nearly as well
defined as the field of full text searching. Since databases typically have far
more dimensions than regular web pages, the question is how to create a topical
index that is detailed enough to get potential users to a site portal page, but
not so enormous as overwhelm users with a large set of databases for any query.
The access of Deep Web portals requires extra data structures such indexes.
Although automatic computational software may be able to generate preliminary
index words and descriptions for the Deep Web portals, the automatically
generated data structure is highly noisy and inaccurate. In this project, the
team plans to solve this by combining automatic information processing with
social computing mechanisms, particularly collective knowledge accumulation and
collaborative sense-making ? social cognitive processes by which people
collectively gather, organize, and understand information and knowledge. By
introducing social computing mechanisms, the challenge of designing incentive
mechanisms is introduced. These will be explored using mechanisms from incentive
centered design. The major pay-off in this proposal is the improvement in
transparency and information services provided by government websites, exposing
resources and helping users to understand them.&lt;br/&gt;