* 0949963
* EAGER:  Computer Interface Issues for Young Adults with Down Syndrome to Transition to the Workplace
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Jonathan Lazar, Loyola University Maryland, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2012
* USD 178,352.00

Down syndrome is a genetically based impairment that affects an individual's
overall development, including the areas of cognition, sensory perception and
processing, gross and fine motor skills, and short term memory skills. Estimates
are that there are over 450,000 individuals with Down syndrome in the United
States. A preliminary survey carried out by the PIs of 561 young adults with
Down syndrome established that they do use computers frequently, but that there
exist a number of challenges to the human-computer interaction. The PIs' goal in
this project is to impact the quality of life for individuals with Down syndrome
by laying the groundwork for improving their ability to successfully use
computers in the workplace, for socialization, and for activities of daily
living. To this end, the PIs will take an in-depth, multi-method approach to
understanding how people with Down syndrome interact with computers. They will
conduct an ethnographic observation of 10 very successful users with Down
syndrome; this will be followed by a study of 10 typical users with Down
syndrome in the area of computer security features, and 10 users in the area of
social networking. Through these studies the PIs hope to acquire a more detailed
understanding of how users with Down syndrome interact with existing computer
interfaces, and how modifications to these interfaces might improve their
interaction. The research focus will be on web-based security mechanisms and
social networking, two critical tools in today's workplace. Over the last
decade, research in human computer interaction and assistive technology has
expanded from the previous focus on people with motor and perceptual
impairments, to include research on people with cognitive impairments. Yet
issues relating to computer usage by people with Down syndrome remain relatively
unexamined. This is because in the past these individuals have typically been
included with other populations (such as those with Autism Spectrum Disorders or
Williams syndrome), as part of a general "users with cognitive disabilities"
category, whereas the specific fine motor, memory, and language challenges faced
by users with Down syndrome lead them to experience different problems and have
different strengths compared to other labeled groups. The PIs' long-term
collaboration and involvement in the Down syndrome community will be an
invaluable asset for recruiting participants, for conducting the research, and
for disseminating findings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The goal of
universal usability - to make all user interfaces easy to use for all user
populations - continues to elude us. This research will make an impact on both
academic research and the practical design and development of applications and
interfaces for users with Down syndrome, and will lead to wider employment
possibilities and more independent living options related to computer skills.