* 0949602
* MSB:   Conflicts among members of interacting symbioses: How do symbiotic fungi influence plant defense against leaf-cutting ants?
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2010,08/31/2012
* Stephen Rehner, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 08/31/2012
* USD 320,473.00

Plants and insects host a wide diversity of beneficial fungi. Previous studies
have focused on the reciprocal benefits within a particular host-symbiont pair,
but have rarely investigated interactions among more complex or linked
symbioses. Interactions will be investigated between fungi that are part of two
separate symbiont pairs; i) leaf-cutting ants and their fungal gardens, and ii)
tropical plants and foliar endophytes, cryptic fungi within leaves. The former
involves ants and the fungus they cultivate as a food crop. The latter is a
widespread but less well understood association. In some cases foliar endophytes
provide benefits by chemically defending leaves against herbivores. Laboratory
and field experiments will be used to test whether the presence of endophytes
reduces the harvesting efficiency and long-term development of ant colonies. The
ecological implications of such costs are significant because mature leaf-
cutting ants cause severe defoliations in forests, in reforestation plots, and
in human agriculture. In addition to the implications for plant communities,
this project will describe how leaf-cutting ants manage a wide spectrum of
microbes that are potential antagonists to their fungal crops, and will
elucidate costs of controlling such infections through time. Leaf-cutter ants
cause an estimated US$1 billion in damages per year to agriculture and
agroforestry. Understanding how nest density is limited naturally could lead to
environmentally-friendly forms of biological control and lessen the economic
impact of these ants. Additional broader impacts will result from increasing
participation of under-represented groups by involving collaborators and
students from Panama. The project includes a bi-lingual educational outreach
program to Panamanian and U.S. K-12 students via video link. Allowing students
from different countries to interact with researchers and with each other via
video-link will simultaneously bridge the students? appreciation for biological
and cultural diversity.