* 0950106
* RUI: Interacting effects of climate and invasive herbivores on island plant populations and communities: Santa Rosa Island as a model system
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2010,02/28/2015
* Diane Thomson, Claremont McKenna College
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 02/28/2015
* USD 274,359.00

Global climate change and invasion by non-native species are considered among
the most important physical and biological drivers, respectively, of future
changes and extinctions in ecological communities. These drivers can interact in
complex ways, yet relatively little research has been done on their combined
effects in a single ecosystem. Cattle, deer, and elk were introduced to Santa
Rosa Island, part of the Channel Islands National Park, more than a century ago,
but were removed from the island beginning in 1998. Long-term data sets from
Santa Rosa Island will be used to develop statistical and population models for
five rare plant species and quantify how they have responded to both climatic
variation and the removal of invasive herbivores. A parallel analysis will be
used to determine effects of these factors on the composition of island plant
communities. Comparing responses for both individual populations and communities
will test how well predictions for a few well-studied species can be
extrapolated to larger communities. The project also will assess whether species
responses are correlated with their life histories, an approach which could be
used to improve predictions about which species are at risk.

The results of this work will contribute to more informed conservation
management, especially for the Channel Islands National Park, which supports 75
endemic plant species. The project will also enable continued collection of
valuable long-term data sets that will be accessible for use by other
researchers. This study will support mentorship and training of undergraduate
students by creating 2-4 summer research and senior thesis opportunities each
year. The data will also contribute to development of course materials for
teaching quantitative skills, to be made available on the web and in educational
journals. Finally, the project will involve substantial public education and
outreach efforts.