* 0950464
* Impact of Chromatin Structure on DNA Replication
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2010,03/31/2013
* Michael Weinreich, Van Andel Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Susannah Gal
* 03/31/2013
* USD 549,797.00

During each cell division cycle the genetic material must be precisely
duplicated in a process called DNA replication. In eukaryotic cells, DNA
replication initiates at hundreds to thousands of replication origins dispersed
throughout the genome. Within cells, DNA is complexed with histone proteins as
chromatin, which effectively compacts and organizes the DNA into functional
regions. Importantly, the chromatin structure surrounding replication origins
strongly influences the initiation of DNA replication through mechanisms that
are not well understood. The long-term goal of this research is to determine how
chromatin structure impacts the initiation of DNA replication and to define the
chromatin-modifying proteins that act at replication origins. The specific goal
of this project is to determine how chromatin modifications and/or nucleosome
positioning regulates assembly of the pre-Replicative Complex (pre-RC). The pre-
RC is a multi-protein complex that assembles at replication origins in G1 phase
and is required for initiating DNA synthesis in S-phase. Interestingly, loss of
the Sir2 histone deacetylase (HDAC) in the budding yeast allows genome-wide DNA
replication when pre-RC assembly is compromised. Sir2 is the founding member of
a conserved family of proteins called "Sirtuins" that are critical regulators of
aging, heterochromatin formation, cell cycle control and tumor suppression in
multiple organisms. This data linking Sir2 with replication initiation indicates
that Sir2 has a previously uncharacterized role throughout the genome that
inhibits DNA replication at a substantial number of replication origins.
Although little is known about the exact mechanism, Sir2 acts through specific
inhibitory elements within nucleosomes that are directly adjacent to the site of
pre-RC assembly.

The broad goal of this project is to determine how the chromatin environment at
replication origins regulates the initiation of DNA replication in the budding
yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Defects in pre-RC assembly can cause genome
instability because either too few or too many replication origins are activated
in a particular S-phase. Therefore, understanding how chromatin structure
influences pre-RC assembly is important for understanding how genetic stability
is maintained. The program will provide training opportunities for both
undergraduate and graduate students, including populations that are typically
underrepresented in science. In addition, yeast genetics and molecular biology
are wonderful tools for training young scientists in the fundamentals of doing
critical science.