* 0950128
* Investigating Paramutation at the Maize b1 Gene: Molecular Mechanisms of Heritable Epigenetic Gene Regulation
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2010,02/28/2013
* Vicki Chandler, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 02/28/2013
* USD 438,347.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;How an individual's genes are activated or
silenced is an essential question impacting all fields of biology. Gene
expression patterns, i.e. which genes are on and which are off in different
tissues and during development, are highly reproducible among individuals of
each species and those patterns are efficiently reset every generation. One
exception to these genetic rules is paramutation in maize. Paramutation leads to
certain genes becoming silenced and that silencing is retained when the genes
are transmitted to offspring. Depending on which genes are silenced dramatic
changes in the plant's growth and development can be observed. Prior work has
demonstrated that these heritable changes in gene expression are mediated by
RNA, demonstrating RNA is not just a vehicle for DNA's commands; it is able to
issue its own commands that alter how genes are expressed in the next
generation. This project is to characterize a gene that is required for
paramutation, mop3 (mediator of paramutation3). Initial research has
demonstrated that mop3 acts at a distinct step in RNA mediated gene silencing
relative to other previously characterized genes required for paramutation.
Thus, new mechanistic insights should be gained from further study of mop3 as
well as from the isolation and characterization of additional genes required for
paramutation, another major goal of this project. Understanding mechanisms for
heritable changes in gene expression will provide new insights into how plants
might mediate adaptive responses to a changing environment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;The investigators for this
project have had a long standing commitment to training and outreach. During the
past 12 years, 5 postdoctoral fellows, 8 graduate students, 45 undergraduate
students, 10 high school students and 5 high school teachers have participated
in the research efforts that generated the data that formed the basis for this
project. The current research project will provide training for two
undergraduate students each year and a high school teacher and her students. The
high school teacher will participate in a summer internship each year that will
involve direct participation in the experiments and designing curriculum to
engage the high school students during the academic year. The teacher will
participate in a broad network with other teachers so that each person's
curriculum innovation can be shared and thus, contribute to an increase in the
science literacy of a larger number of students.