* 0950785
* Flowering time control under short days by the regulatory network of VIN3 and FLC gene families
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2014
* Sibum Sung, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Ben Holt
* 07/31/2014
* USD 399,996.00

Sibum Sung&lt;br/&gt;IOS-0950785&lt;br/&gt;Flowering time control under short
days by the regulatory network of VIN3 and FLC gene
families&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Flowering is one of the major developmental
commitments in the plant life cycle. Plants have evolved intricate regulatory
networks to control flowering time in response to changing environmental
conditions. Two major environment cues that plants use to sense seasonal changes
are temperature (i.e. winter) and day length (i.e. photoperiod). In the model
plant, Arabidopsis thaliana, the VERNALIZATION INSENSITIVE 3 (VIN3) gene family
mediates environmental cues to regulate flowering time through a group of floral
repressors including the FLOWERING LOCUS C (FLC) gene family. This project will
use biochemical and genetic approaches to dissect the molecular mechanisms that
control flowering time through these two gene families. Proteins in the VIN3
gene family mediate histone modifications on target chromatin. Chromatin-based
gene regulation is a major regulatory theme in eukaryotic gene regulation. Thus,
the results of this project will be of interest to a broad scientific community.
Furthermore, the environmentally regulated nature of the VIN3 gene family
regulatory network will provide a unique opportunity to study the effect of
environmental inputs on the epigenetic regulation of gene expression. Flowering
time control also has a potential to be used in agricultural applications, as
many crops flower in response to environmental changes. This work may provide
new methods to improve crop productivity. Proposed research will provide an
ample opportunity to train a postdoctoral fellow and a graduate student. This
proposal will also provide undergraduate students and K-12 students with hands-
on experience in the research laboratory.