* 0950009
* A Signaling Pathway that Couples Spore Formation to the Completion of Meiosis in S. Cerevisiae.
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2010,02/28/2015
* Edward Winter, Thomas Jefferson University
* Continuing Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 02/28/2015
* USD 665,936.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;Meiosis is the cell division program that produces
haploids from diploids. The completion of meiosis is coupled to differentiation
programs that generate gametes. This project will use sporulation in the yeast
Saccharomyces cerevisiae, as a model system to study signaling pathways that
couple gamete formation to the completion of meiosis. Smk1 is a meiosis-specific
MAPK that controls the post-meiotic program of spore formation. Smk1 is
activated by phosphorylation as meiosis is being completed by the CDK activating
kinase, Cak1. A meiosis-specific targeting-subunit of the anaphase promoting
complex (APC) ubiquitin-ligase named Ama1 regulates the Cak1/Smk1 reaction. In
addition, Ssp2, a meiosis-specific protein of unknown biochemical function is
required for Smk1 activation. Collectively, these findings indicate that
Ama1-dependent proteolysis of an unidentified inhibitor protein, and the
association of Ssp2, control the activation of Smk1 by Cak1. One aim of this
project is to establish how Cak1 and Ssp2 activate Smk1. A second aim is to
identify the inhibitor of Smk1 that is targeted for destruction by Ama1 and
elucidate how this inhibitor controls Smk1 activation. Most of the proteins
studied in this project are evolutionarily conserved. It is therefore likely
that the research will generate testable hypotheses for how meiosis and gamete
formation are coupled in other organisms. As such, these studies will accelerate
the pace of research on gametogenesis in a broad range of organisms including
other microorganisms, plants, and animals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact:
&lt;br/&gt;The project provides an outstanding opportunity to train pre-doctoral
students in hypothesis-driven research. To increase the impact at the
undergraduate level, the principal investigator will partner with an educator at
Rosemont College who is interested in studying meiotic regulation in yeast and
involving talented undergraduates in the process of scientific discovery. This
partnership integrates educational objectives with the research activities of
this laboratory by promoting interaction between educators, researchers,
predoctoral trainees, and undergraduate students.