* 0950280
* Computational Study of Antimicrobial Peptide-lipid Membrane Interactions
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2013
* Max Berkowitz, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 12/31/2013
* USD 543,905.00

The objectives of this project are to understand the fundamental mechanism of
the interaction between antimicrobial peptides (AMP) and lipid membranes and to
understand the basic mechanism of pore formation in lipid membranes by AMPs. To
accomplish the first goal, the Principal Investigator (PI) will perform all atom
computer simulations in order to calculate the free energy of peptide adsorption
and its permeation across the lipid membrane. The microscopically detailed
information that will be obtained from simulations will allow the PI to
determine the energetic gain upon peptide adsorption and the pathway of peptide
permeation across the membrane. The second specific goal of the project will be
accomplished by performing simulations on systems containing multiple peptides
and a bilayer. The bilayer will contain either one kind of a lipid or will be
composed of a mixture of lipids having biological significance. The role of some
specific lipids present in the membrane will be carefully considered. For
example, the recent experimental study of cholesterol influence on action of
AMPs produced controversial results and interpretations. The molecular detailed
picture provided by simulations will be extremely useful to resolve these
controversies. To understand the molecular architecture of pores in cell
membranes, the PI will also perform comparative simulations on systems
containing different AMPs. In general, simulations performed by the PI will
provide a link between experiment, phenomenological theory and the microscopic
details responsible for AMP action in membranes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Work on the project will provide essential training in the
biophysics of membranes for undergraduate and graduate students and postdoctoral
fellows. The results from the research will be discussed in the lectures the PI
gives in a course on membranes which is taught as a module in the Molecular and
Cellular Biophysics program at the University of North Carolina. A less
quantitative version of these lectures is given in the Biophysical Society
summer course in biophysics for minority students. The objective of this course
is to introduce minority students from colleges and universities lacking formal
programs in biophysics to the exciting world of mechanistic and structural
biology, and the possibility of a career in biophysics. Some of the students
from the course also get hands on experience in membrane biophysics by
performing research in the PI's laboratory. The PI is also participating in the
work of the International Graduate Research Training Group, which includes
faculty and students, mainly from Germany and North Carolina. Under the
framework of this Group's activities, students from the laboratories in Germany
will be able to visit the PI's laboratory and work on the projects related to
the study of peptide/membrane interactions, while students from the PI's group
will be able to visit Germany.