* 0950600
* Collaborative Research:  Experimental determination of petroleum biodegradation patterns from a genomically-informed analytical vista
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2014
* David Valentine, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 05/31/2014
* USD 327,457.00

Intellectual merit: This proposal describes a series of laboratory studies
designed to assess the genomic and molecular patterns of petroleum
biodegradation under a range of conditions relevant to the Earth?s surface and
subsurface. The concerted application of comprehensive, two-dimensional gas
chromatography, Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance mass spectrometry, and
pyrosequencing-based metagenomics will provide unparalleled insight into
petroleum biodegradation and the responsible microbes, and distinguishes this
work from any previous studies. The primary hypotheses to be tested are the
following: 1) Hydrocarbon biodegradation by microbes acts simultaneously on
thousands of distinct compounds, not in a strictly stepwise fashion. 2)
Hydrocarbon preference pattern and associated genomic potential for a microbial
community are controlled primarily by the redox potential of the terminal
electron-accepting process. 3) High-molecular-weight and polar compounds are
bio-transformed through incomplete oxidation and structural alteration, not
through complete remineralization. These hypotheses will be tested by conducting
time-series laboratory experiments in which petroleum is biodegraded with
different electron acceptors and at different temperatures. The loss and gain
patterns for molecules within each treatment and differences across treatments
in these patterns and in genomic content will provide the data to test these
hypotheses. Results are further anticipated to reveal novel metabolic actions
and genomic capacity, and yield molecular degradation patterns that can relate
environmental genomic and petroleum content to the relevant biological
processes. New data analysis tools will also be developed and validated.

Broader Impact: Results from this research will contribute broadly to an
understanding of petroleum biodegradation and carbon cycling in the Earth
system, and will be broadly disseminated through popular outlets with assistance
from a professional artist. Knowledge gained from this research will also be
translated directly to federal agencies including the NOAA?s Assessment and
Restoration Division, as well as to private industry through existing corporate
ties. Direct educational impacts of this research include the training and
education of high school, undergraduate, and graduate students, as well as the
advanced training of postdoctoral researchers. High school students will be
incorporated through existing summer research programs targeting students from
underserved regions. Undergraduate students will be incorporated into all
aspects of the proposed research through integration into coursework and REU
support. Mentoring of a graduate student and postdoctoral researchers will be
provided by the PIs.