* 0950865
* Organization of Terpene Specialized Metabolism in Plant Roots
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2015
* Dorothea Tholl, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 02/28/2015
* USD 564,367.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;As multicellular organisms, plants rely on a
highly organized system of metabolic pathways. Compared to the animal immune
system, plants have developed a complex and diverse 'specialized', or secondary,
metabolism as an important defense mechanism against attack by other organisms.
Since insects and microbial pathogens use different strategies of feeding or
invasion, plant chemical defenses need to be tissue and cell-type specific but,
at the same time, maintain a sufficient level of plasticity. This project
investigates how plants coordinate and fine-tune specialized metabolic pathways
in different cell types and subcellular compartments. Focus is placed on the
metabolism of volatile terpenes in roots of the model plant Arabidopsis
thaliana. Terpenes are the most common specialized metabolites with significant
functions in plant defense. The study explores the genetic organization and
biochemical function of terpene biosynthesis modules consisting of enzymes
coordinated by root cell-type specific and stress-induced expression.
Furthermore, the project addresses the question of how strictly the formation of
terpene metabolites is limited to particular root cell types and examines
aspects of the organelle-specific regulation of terpene metabolism in
roots.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;Expected results may
allow developing novel strategies for sustainable control of agricultural soil-
borne pests and pathogens by engineering root chemical defenses in crop plants.
The project integrates high school and undergraduate student education into an
active research project by introducing novel experimental concepts for the pre-
college education program "Partnership for Research and Education in Plants
(PREP)" and its undergraduate-level extension (PREPu), developed at Virginia
Tech. For PREPu, experiments will be implemented as a laboratory module in the
undergraduate/graduate course "Introduction to Chemical Ecology". Plant mutants
generated in this research project will be tested in both educational programs
for their defense properties against root-attacking organisms. The study
integrates K-12 and undergraduate student learning through investigation and
promotes understanding of interdisciplinary and translational life science. The
project further provides interdisciplinary training and transformative education
for one postdoctoral fellow, one graduate student, and two undergraduate
students. Research on this project strongly supports graduate education in the
Molecular Plant Sciences Program at Virginia Tech and recruitment of individuals
from groups underrepresented in science.