* 0950040
* ROS as Mediators of Rapid Long-Distance Self-Propagating Signals
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2010,11/30/2010
* Ron Mittler, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Mark R. Brodl
* 11/30/2010
* USD 575,005.00

Plants are the principle solar energy converter sustaining life on Earth. To
optimize their carbon dioxide consumption and bio-energy production, plants must
rapidly acclimate to changes in their environment, as well as respond to a
diverse array of biological challenges. Being sessile organisms, plants evolved
sophisticated mechanisms to cope with biotic and abiotic challenges in their
environment. These can be activated in local tissues that initially interact
with the threat, as well as in systemic tissues that were not yet challenged.
The activation of defense or acclimation mechanisms in systemic non-challenged
tissues is often termed systemic acquired resistance, or systemic acquired
acclimation, and serves an important role in preventing further infection or
damage to the entire plant during stress. Fundamental mechanisms underlying
rapid systemic signaling in response to different environmental stresses in
plants are however largely unknown. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal of
this project is to determine the mechanism and mode of regulation of rapid
systemic signaling in plants. Dissecting the rapid systemic signaling pathway of
plants will identify key regulators that will be used to enhance the tolerance
of different crops and plants to global climatic changes, potentially preventing
yield losses estimated at 30-40 billions of dollars annually in the US.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will involve educational outreach for K-12
and multidisciplinary training to graduate and undergraduate trainees.
Undergraduate students will be trained in different aspects of signal
transduction, genetics and bioinformatics analysis. A summer outreach workshop
will teach high school students about molecular biology, signal transduction,
the environment, and modern agriculture. This laboratory-based internship
program will provide self-confidence building experiences and expose the
students to laboratories and scientists. Both undergraduate and K-12 outreach
and training activities will target the under privileged and underrepresented in
science.