* 0950650
* Integrated analyses of the seasonally quiescent ovary and female reproductive aging
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2012
* Ned Place, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 04/30/2012
* USD 246,773.00

Terms such as quiescent, inhibited, and inactive are often used to describe the
state of the ovaries in seasonally breeding mammals when considered outside of
the breeding season. However, recent findings have demonstrated important
structural and functional changes in the so-called quiescent ovary that appear
to modulate the reproductive aging process. More specifically, maintaining
female Siberian hamsters in short photoperiod is associated with profound
changes of the ovary that appear to manifest as decelerated reproductive aging.
The outcomes of the short-day-induced changes include improved fertility and a
preservation of ovarian follicles in older females. Therefore, the cessation of
ovulatory activity under conditions that do not favor breeding should not be
equated with ovarian inactivity. This research project will transform and inform
our thinking about the seasonally quiescent ovary and provide a better
understanding of its role in reproductive aging. Integrative analyses will
determine if and how photoperiod-induced changes in hormone secretion from the
pituitary gland contribute to the development of the short-day ovarian
phenotype. Because melatonin, a hormone secreted by the pineal gland, mediates
the effects of short photoperiod in seasonally breeding mammals, research will
determine if the absence of melatonin is associated with an acceleration of
ovarian aging. The broader impact of this research lies in its inclusion of
trainees in all aspects of the investigation, with a special effort made to
attract women and underrepresented minorities to the lab. The results of our
experiments will be of interest to a broad array of scientists, including
reproductive biologists, ecologists, chronobiologists, and gerontologists.
Because there is a continuing trend for women to delay having their first child
until an advanced reproductive age, our results may have important implications
for society, as insights into female reproductive aging may be applicable to all
mammalian species, including our own.