* 0950372
* RUI:  Molecular Characterization of Black Widow Spider Silks
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2015
* Craig Vierra, University of the Pacific
* Continuing Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 03/31/2015
* USD 458,749.00

Spiders spin a variety of high performance fibers with mechanical properties
that are unparalleled in the environment and comparable to the best synthetic
materials produced by modern technology. There is considerable interest in the
production of protein-based structural polymers through genetic engineering for
a wide range of applications, including protective clothing and equipment, ropes
and nets, tissue engineering, and materials for the automobile and aerospace
industry. These studies implement multidisciplinary approaches to identify
proteins assembled into aggregate gland-produced silk fibers, as well as reveal
regulatory switches and factors that control silk gene expression for aggregate
and tubuliform silk proteins in the black widow spider, Latrodectus hesperus.
This project has a common goal of advancing technologies to position scientists
to manufacture synthetic silks for human applications.

The broader impacts of the research will include training graduate,
undergraduate, and high school students in a wide range of modern molecular and
biochemical techniques. Disadvantaged minority undergraduate students will be
targeted from introductory, as well as upper division biology and chemistry
classes to gain educational experiences through research participation. Local
high school students will also be recruited for summer internships through a
connection with the Project SEED, a summer research experience program directed
by the American Chemistry Society that targets economically disadvantaged
students. A strong component of the research program will also involve the
general public. Individuals from the local community will learn about the
extraordinary properties of spider silk fibers through interactions with
research team members during routine spider collections. Individuals from the
local community will also receive education on the spider silk biology research
through Pacific's Center for Professional and Continuing Education Program.
Additionally, findings generated by this project will be disseminated in peer-
reviewed scientific journals, local high schools, newspapers, and local and
national research conferences. In summary, the research project will enhance our
understanding on spider silk biology and provide rich training for a wide range
of individuals at various educational levels.