* 0950765
* Rapid Hox gene evolution and the arthropod body plan
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2016
* Leslie Pick, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 04/30/2016
* USD 750,000.00

Understanding evolution is critical to understanding basic biology and is
equally important for applied aspects of science, including organismal
interactions with the environment. This project probes evolutionary changes in
regulatory genes, called Hox genes, and asks how they have impacted animal
development. The Hox genes are patterning genes that encode transcription
factors controlling embryonic development, which are remarkably conserved
throughout the animal kingdom. This finding was initially surprising because Hox
genes were first identified in fruit flies, where mutations result in bizarre
phenotypes (called homeotic transformations) in which one body part is
transformed to a different body part. However, cloning of these genes revealed
that they are present in all animals, including humans. In addition, studies
have shown that genes from mammals can substitute for those of the fly and
recapitulate functions of the fly homologs when expressed in the fly,
underscoring the high degree of relatedness of these genes and gene products
among different organisms. How then does each animal achieve its own specific
body form? This project addresses the question by tracking the evolutionary
changes in one Hox gene, fushi tarazu (ftz). The roles of ftz in development
have been shown to change during evolution due to changes in both its protein
coding sequence and its expression pattern. Studies undertaken in this project
will identify the points in evolutionary history at which these changes occurred
and using living animals that represent different branches of an evolutionary
tree, will determine how they impacted body patterning. In addition, this award
will contribute to the training of three Ph.D. students and at least 3
undergraduate students.