* 0950731
* CAREER: Novel Triplet Polymer based Solar Cells as a New Path for Higher Efficiency
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2016
* Quinn Qiao, South Dakota State University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 01/31/2016
* USD 436,000.00

CAREER: Novel Triplet Polymer based Solar Cells as a New Path for Higher
Efficiency&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research goal of this career development plan is to generate a new type of
highly efficient organic solar cells by creating a family of novel triplet
conjugate polymers, with controllable energy levels and bandgaps ranging from
infrared to visible regions that are currently unavailable. The current organic
photovoltaics (PV) are primarily based on singlet polymers with short-lifetime
excited states and narrow absorption spectrum, and suffer low efficiencies (6 ?
7 %). Thus, new materials are strongly needed to significantly increase the
efficiency. Using long-lifetime triplet materials to increase the device
efficiency is a much less explored area. The PI will address the fundamental
issues in these unique triplet polymers and their applications in high
performance organic solar cells. The specific research activities will include
calculation and synthesis of new triplet polymers, fundamental understanding of
the energy transport and generation processes in the new triplet polymers, and
development of highly efficient triplet PV cells. The proposed work will
potentially reveal some of the bottlenecks which have hampered high-efficiency
polymer solar cell development, by providing a completely different avenue to
the losses and limitations in the current singlet based polymers and
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The education goal of this career development plan
is to advance discovery while promoting teaching and learning at all educational
levels. The PI is committed to integrate this career development plan research
with an educational outreach program and involve the participation of K-12,
undergraduate and graduate students, including the Native American and female
groups. An education-based polymer photovoltaic lab station will be developed
for the South Dakota Mobile Science Lab. The Mobile Science Lab travels to
schools around the state during the school year. The primary purpose of the
Mobile Science Labs is to provide South Dakota students with an opportunity to
perform science lab activities with advanced equipment, technology, and methods
that are usually not available in small schools. Underrepresented undergraduate
and graduate Native American and female students will be encouraged and directly
hired to work in the PI?s laboratory.