* 0950158
* RUI:   Cloning and Characterization of OPENED IMMATURE FLOWER
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2015
* Xiao-Ning Zhang, Saint Bonaventure University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 02/28/2015
* USD 234,531.00

Intellectual Merit: Many studies of gene expression have focused on
transcription levels, leaving alternative splicing, a conserved mechanism that
increases transcript diversity, relatively unexplored. This project seeks to
deepen understanding of alternative splicing by identifying new factors within
the splicing network of plants. In Arabidopsis thaliana, SR45 belongs to a
family of factors that play important roles in splicing events. The gene OPENED
IMMATURE FLOWER (OIF) was recently identified as a genetic enhancer of SR45. To
understand how OIF modulates the splicing regulatory function of SR45, the OIF
gene will be isolated by map-based cloning and functional complementation by
transformation of candidate OIF genes into plants that are mutant for SR45 and
OIF. New factors in the splicing network will be sought by screening for
additional enhancers that produce an opened immature flower phenotype in the
sr45 mutant background. Mutant phenotypes will be further characterized by
scanning electron microscopy, and the splicing patterns of potential gene
targets will be analyzed using RT-PCR. Together, these approaches will provide
new insights into the role of alternative splicing in plant development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Undergraduate students will be engaged in
a unique research experience that can be replicated at other undergraduate
institutions. First, through a partnership between St. Bonaventure University
and the University of Maryland, students will be exposed to active research by
gaining first-hand laboratory experience at both institutions and by attending
national and international conferences. Second, a new integrative course, Plant
Development and Physiology, including research-based lectures, open-ended
research lab sessions, and interactive discussions, will be designed and offered
to undergraduates at the sophomore/junior/senior level. Prior to each lab
session, a student will be designated and trained to lead the lab with help from
the instructor. Students from the entire class will participate in generating a
poster describing their combined results from all lab sessions and share co-
authorship. One student will be selected to present the poster at a conference.
This innovative design will engage students in critical thinking, active
research and creative discussion. All the opportunities provided to the students
in this project are aimed at stimulating enthusiasm and building research
experience in preparation for future careers in scientific research.