* 0950396
* Creating a Learning Community for Solutions to Climate Change
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2009,03/31/2015
* Arnold Bloom, National Council for Science and the Environment/CEDD
* Standard Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 03/31/2015
* USD 1,916,507.00

Climate Change Education In response to the Climate Change Education program the
National Council for Science and the Environment's Council of Environmental
Deans and Directors (CEDD) is creating a nationwide cyber-enabled learning
community called CAMEL (Climate, Adaptation, and Mitigation e-Learning). CAMEL
engages experts in science, policy and decision-making, education, and
assessment in the production of a virtual toolbox of curricular resources
designed for teaching climate changes causes, consequences, and solutions. CAMEL
looks to the needs of the future workforce and citizenry in general as discourse
on climate change has shifted from whether such change is occurring to the
challenges of dealing with the ongoing impacts. This project acknowledges the
interdisciplinary nature of climate change and challenges educators to
curricular content based on the best available research and on the appropriate
pedagogical methods for enabling students to tackle complex problems. Specific
objectives are: - To assist faculty at institutions of higher education across
the United States as they create, generate, test, and share resources for
teaching students not only how to diagnose climate change problems, but also to
identify and effect solutions by presenting a multi/interdisciplinary treatment
of climate change; - To ensure that materials developed and shared are founded
on the best available scientific information and follow the most appropriate
educational practices; - To build a community of researchers, educators, and
students engaged in teaching about climate change causes, consequences and
solutions through face-to-face and online networking; - To develop
cyberinfrastructure that will support and promote the creation of materials and
community; and - To evaluate the determinants of successful community building
using cybermedia. In order to develop and disseminate innovative undergraduate
education that addresses these objectives, CAMEL's implementation strategy has
five interrelated components: content development, faculty development,
community-building, cyberinfrastructure, and program evaluation.