* 0950242
* Collaborative Research: Role of Arabidopsis CTD-Phosphatase-Like 1 in Gene Silencing Pathways
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2010,02/29/2016
* Jianhua Zhu, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* william eggleston
* 02/29/2016
* USD 387,524.00

Intellectual merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plant gene expression is a dynamic
process that involves positive and negative regulation at multiple levels.
Recent studies emphasize importance of RNA/gene-silencing mechanisms mediated by
small RNA molecules, which can trigger both transcriptional and
posttranscriptional gene silencing not only in plants but also in other
eukaryotes. Central to the small RNA production are proteins containing double-
stranded (ds) RNA binding motif (DRM). Among eukaryotes, plants contain unique
DRM-containing proteins. Carboxyl-terminal domain (CTD) phosphatase-like 1
(CPL1) proteins contain an N-terminal phosphatase domain and tandemly repeated
C-terminal DRM domains. The primary hypothesis to be tested in this project is
that a plant-specific CPL protein fine-tunes the level of gene silencing
mediated by small RNA. Since CTD phosphorylation can regulate the activity of
the pol II complex, our results imply that plants evolved an additional fine-
tuning mechanism of gene expression, which uses components of transcription
elongation for gene silencing. This project will dissect the interaction between
transcription elongation machineries and gene silencing by determining roles of
CPL1 in gene silencing. The specific aims of this project are: 1) to establish
CPL1 structure essential for in vivo function: essential domains of CPL1 protein
will be determined by genetic complementation assays using modified CPL1 genes,
2) to establish interaction between CPL1 and HYL1; the mode of CPL1-HYL1
interaction will be determined and its relationship with CPL1 function will be
analyzed, 3) to determine the RNA/gene silencing mechanism of CPL1; effect of
cpl1 mutation in DNA methylation, histone modifications and small RNA
accumulation/action will be analyzed using molecular genetic analysis as well as
transient RNAi analysis. The body of information to be generated in this project
therefore will reveal novel mechanism of plant gene regulation that will also
have implications in other organisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will be conducted by a two-institute
team consisting of two post-doctoral associates and a graduate student with
support from undergraduate student(s). The participants will be trained for
understanding and effective use of plant genome information and various genetic
resources as well as molecular biochemical skills to validate the information.
To train future scientists from diverse backgrounds, a graduate-level laboratory
module for the course Physiol. Mol. Basis of Plant Stress Responses, in which
students will have hands-on experience, will be taught in TAMU, some component
of which will be shared in the similar course in UM. This course has been taken
by numerous students in the field of field-oriented agriculture, therefore,
should provide basic knowledge for sustainable agricultural practices.
Undergraduate students will participate in the research program using REU
supplements. An international exchange program has been initiated and is being
developed with Gyeongsang Natl Univ, S. Korea, where visiting scholars and
students can participate in mutual research projects. This is an excellent
opportunity for students to be exposed to multi-disciplinary and multiculture
research environment.