* 0950266
* Comparative microbial genomics -- beyond the genes
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2015
* Jan Mrazek, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2015
* USD 477,761.00

The University of Georgia is awarded a grant to investigate the significance of
microbial genome features beyond the protein-coding and RNA-coding genes.
Standard computational analyses of genomes center on genes and gene content,
whereas the availability of software to analyze other genomic features is
limited. Investigating the full range of genomic features is important to
understand the mechanisms of genome evolution and function. Genome features of
interest include global and local characteristics. Global features range from
very simple, such as G+C content, through species-specific preferences in codon
usage, amino acid usage, and oligonucleotide composition, to cryptic periodic
signals related to DNA curvature and nucleoid structure. Local features include,
for example, specific sequence motifs and repeat structures (e.g., simple
sequence repeats, palindromes, close repeats, or various types of short
dispersed repeats), sequence patterns that can promote unusual DNA conformations
(e.g., Z-DNA, H-DNA, G-DNA), or sequences that locally affect physical
characteristics of DNA or RNA molecules (e.g., stability, curvature). Direct
evidence of biological significance of these genome features is scarce. With
limited experimental options, the detection of biologically significant genomic
features often relies on statistical methods. Computational tools will be
designed for analyses of these features in microbial genomes, and subsequently
these tools will be applied in systematic examination of prokaryotic genomes.
Comparative genomic approaches will be used for initial validation of the
results obtained by statistical analyses of individual genomes and some of the
specific hypotheses will be verified by experiments. The data ensuing from the
comparative analyses of microbial genomes will be available to other researchers
and can be utilized in interpretations of experimental data and design of future
experiments.

A significant part of this project is devoted to enhancing research
infrastructure by developing new computational methods, algorithms and tools for
analyses and comparisons of microbial genomes. The new software will be
distributed under the terms of the GNU General Public License, which allows
anyone to use and modify the software without restrictions. In addition to
making software available for download, interactive user interfaces will be
developed and combined in an online environment for analysis of prokaryotic
genomes. Software developed in this project will be used in courses and
workshops. Undergraduate and high school students will be recruited to
participate in the research. This effort includes a new student-parent summer
program, where high school or undergraduate students will execute a research
project together with a parent or other relative. Furthur information about this
project and its software may be found at the PI's lab website at
http://www.cmbl.uga.edu/.