* 0950494
* Dynamics Of Strand-Crossover Formation In Cadherin
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2014
* Susan Pedigo, University of Mississippi
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 06/30/2014
* USD 565,440.00

Lay Abstract MCB-0950494 Dynamics of Strand-Crossover Formation in Cadherin
Pedigo, Susan

Intellectual merit: Cadherins are proteins that protrude from the surface of
cells and interact with identical proteins on neighboring cells to form
adhesions between cells. These protein-protein interactions between cadherins on
opposing cells lead to solid tissue formation. Such interactions are critical
during normal processes such as development and tissue maintenance, and also
during abnormal processes such a cancer. Neural-cadherins are found primarily in
brain tissue. Epithelial cadherins are found primarily in epithelial cells.
These two proteins are very close relatives, but must have some difference that
makes them suited for their particular tissue type. The goal of this project is
to investigate the differences in the protein-protein interactions in neural-
and epithelial-cadherins that lead to their segregation into particular tissues.
Recently, this laboratory has observed a very striking difference between these
two proteins. Preliminary results indicate that the protein-protein interaction
between neural-cadherins is very slow to dissociate while that between
epithelial-cadherins dissociates quickly. This difference in assembly dynamics
is so striking that it may explain the segregation of these two proteins into
distinct physiological niches. Experiments proposed here elaborate this basic
observation by studying the details of how the interactions occur and the
factors that contribute to the difference in the dynamics of the interactions.
The project will investigate the protein-protein interactions in solution and in
single-molecule studies using fluorescence techniques. Broader impacts. The
experiments proposed here require the collaborative efforts and the diverse
skills of the Pedigo and Hammer laboratories. The laboratories will use a wide
range of experimental approaches that will expose students to diverse
disciplines in chemistry. Training undergraduate and graduate students is
critical to the research efforts of this project. The project will involve three
graduate students as the core of the research team and a number of
undergraduates through the Honors College and summer research internship
programs at this university. The plan is to continue involvement in local and
regional science education through visits of groups to the university, visits of
students and faculty to elementary schools and participation in the science
fairs.