* 0950688
* Blinding speed: Effects of relative motion on visually guided pursuit
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2010,05/31/2017
* Cole Gilbert, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 05/31/2017
* USD 324,999.00

Ever photograph a moving object using a camera set at too slow a shutter speed?
If so, then you know that the resulting image may be low contrast and blurry.
Similar optical principles apply to biological visual systems. When the speed of
retinal photoreceptors and/or neurons in the brain is not fast enough to
overcome the relative velocity between the observer and the target, the visual
image can become too blurred for the observer to recognize objects. Humans
rarely experience this effect because we move slowly, but many animals move
quickly and suffer motion blur during pursuit of targets. This project will
investigate the visual and locomotory systems of fast-running, predatory tiger
beetles that go blind while chasing prey and must stop briefly (tens of
milliseconds) to re-localize the prey and then run again. The basic question is
why does the beetle run faster than its eyes and brain can process target
images? Dr. Gilbert will use a combination of 1) electrophysiological
experiments on nerve cells at different levels in the beetle's visual system to
test their response to moving targets, 2) behavioral studies of tethered beetles
chasing computer generated, virtual reality images to quantify the effects of
motion blur on pursuit tracking, and 3) computer modeling of the perception of
the moving world viewed by a simulated beetle visual system to determine whether
the beetle goes blind in all areas of the visual field or whether some running
strategies may reduce blur in certain areas and allow continued tracking. By
investigating an extreme biological example of the effects of motion blur on a
tracking system, Dr. Gilbert will discover design principles about the nature of
all visual systems, as well as provide insight into the limits of man-made
machine vision systems and possible strategies for overcoming deleterious
effects of motion blur. In terms of broader impacts related to education and
nurturing of future scientists, the project will provide interdisciplinary
training between engineering and biology for a post-doctoral fellow and
undergraduate students.