* 0950432
* A Planning Workshop on Curriculum Standards for Parallel and Distributed Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Sushil Prasad, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Krishna Kant
* 08/31/2010
* USD 49,992.00

This award supports a workshop to explore the state of parallel and distributed
computing education and curricula, assess national education needs in the area
of parallel and distributed computing, and provide action plans and recommend
mechanisms for how best to address curricular needs in short and long term.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planning workshop and its related set of activities
will draw experts from various stakeholders, and engage the parallel and
distributed computing community as providers of information on the current state
of practice as well as consumers and evaluator of its results.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is an urgent need for curricular guidance on
parallel and distributed computing. This need emanates both from rapid
technological changes and from mass marketing of multicores and general-purpose
graphics processing units. Educators struggle to determine the right balance
between theory and practice, and to choose from the diverse set of models of
computation, languages, software and hardware platforms, and tools. There are
many stakeholders in this domain, including faculty and students, employers,
researchers, authors, developers, users, and industry, all who can benefit from
standards in curricula at various levels and in different courses which are
impacted by parallel and distributed computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
the workshop is to involve all stakeholder experts working together and
annually/biannually providing guidance on restructuring standard curricula
across various courses and modules related to parallel and distributed
computing. The community may employ these for teaching, for producing course
material, textbooks and tutorials, setting standards for certifications and
exams, and for creating programming environments and tools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop involves collaboration among experts from all
stakeholder groups to explore the needs and current problems, assess the state
of parallel processing education across curricula, and lay out long term plans
for setting up mechanisms to meet new curricular challenges. Two outcomes
expected are an annual curricular workshop at the IEEE International Parallel
and Distributed Processing Symposium (IPDPS), the IEEE's Computer Society
Technical Committee on Parallel Processing (TCPP) flagship conference (2010
being held in Atlanta in April) and formation of TCPP's Standards Committee on
Curriculum.