* 0950179
* MSB: Collaborative Research: Biological stoichiometry of microbes under severe P-limitation
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2016
* James Elser, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2016
* USD 975,749.00

All organisms require chemical elements such as carbon (C), nitrogen (N), and
phosphorus (P) for growth and development. P is of particular interest because
it is especially important in construction of genetic material such as DNA and
RNA and is often present in limiting concentrations in the environment. This
project will investigate the biological rules that determine the elemental
recipe ("stoichiometry") of microorganisms that grow under severely P deficient
conditions in a set of unique desert springs in
Mexico.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will use both laboratory and field
experiments, combined with cutting-edge methods of molecular biology and
genomics, to investigate how changes in P supply alter the ecological and
evolutionary dynamics of these microorganisms and to reveal how they cope with
shortages of this essential chemical element. Furthermore, the study will help
us understand how human alterations in P supply, such as those driven by
inefficient use of fertilizer or by inputs of P-rich sewage, affect microbial
ecosystems. It will also help in discovery of new genes and genetic strategies
by which organisms efficiently use P. These discoveries may be useful for
agriculture and other settings in light of growing concern about the finite
supply of economically recoverable P for fertilizer production. Finally, the
project will produce bi-lingual science education products that will enhance
science education in Arizona and nationally for both K/12 students and the
general public.