* 0950350
* Funding for Graduate Student Travel to International Conference on Image Processing 2009, November 7-11, 2009
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Ahmed Tewfik, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 08/31/2010
* USD 15,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides travel funds to fifteen
graduate students attending US institutions who have authored accepted papers at
ICIP 2009. Awardees will receive $1,000 each to help defray their travel
expenses. The 2009 IEEE International Conference on Image Processing (ICIP) will
take place in Cairo, Egypt, from November 7 to 11, 2009. The conference is
sponsored by the IEEE Signal Processing Society and is the premier forum for the
presentation of technological advances and research results in the fields of
theoretical, experimental, and applied image and video processing. ICIP 2009,
the sixteenth in the series that has been held annually since 1994, will bring
together leading engineers and scientists in image processing from around the
world. Research frontiers in fields ranging from traditional image processing
applications to evolving multimedia and video technologies are regularly
advanced by results first reported in ICIP technical sessions. &lt;br/&gt;The
project will lead to enhancements in all fields of image and video processing by
enabling a number of young and promising researchers to participate in the
discussion and presentation of the latest advances and in theoretical,
experimental, and applied image and video processing. Recipients of the travel
awards will be selected using the following criteria: (i) Full-time enrollment
in a higher education US institution, (ii) Accepted paper of superior quality as
evidenced by the reviews that the submission of the applicant received during
the review process, and (iii) Letters of recommendation from academic advisors
commenting about their overall achievements. No student of any of the selection
committee members will receive a travel grant to attend ICIP 2009.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;