* 0950538
* Altered thyroid hormone signalling in accelerated metamorphosis in desert frogs
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2010,06/30/2013
* Daniel Buchholz, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 06/30/2013
* USD 207,150.00

Hormones influence the development of every organ in the body and may underlie
the evolution of biodiversity. In particular, thyroid hormone (TH) plays
critical roles in brain and skeletal development, yet the role TH plays in
development varies widely across vertebrate species. Indeed, evolutionary
changes in TH physiology have been implicated in the enormous diversity found in
frog and salamander life history. How such an important hormone can change its
developmental role in evolution is not known. To more fully understand the role
of TH in evolution, this project will examine the role of altered expression of
TH receptors (TRs) underlying the evolution of accelerated metamorphosis in
desert frogs. Frog metamorphosis is dependent on TH, and desert frog species
have shorter larval periods compared to their non-desert relatives. Based on our
preliminary data, it is hypothesized that desert species will have a more robust
response to TH compared to non-desert species underlying their shorter larval
period. Successful completion of this project will functionally test the effect
of an evolutionary increase in TR expression on the rate of metamorphosis. The
rationale for this research is that knowledge of how altered TR expression
affects metamorphosis between frog species will advance our understanding of the
developmental and evolutionary roles of this powerful hormone system.
&lt;br/&gt;Integration of this research project with education will be
accomplished by involving undergraduate and graduate students, not only in the
research project, but also by enabling presentations of successful research at
conferences. The current project enhances infrastructure for research and
education through international collaborations and by providing educational
material for undergraduate teaching. Results of the proposed research will be
disseminated widely by publications in peer-reviewed journals and presentations
at professional meetings, and all material used in the project will be deposited
in research collections available for the scientific community. Finally, the
research is expected to benefit society as a whole, primarily through bringing
awareness to the general public of the underpinnings of evolution and
biodiversity.