* 0950245
* RUI: Catalysis and Coordination of the Steps of Protein Splicing by Non-canonical Inteins: An Integrated Research and Education Program
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/2010,04/30/2013
* Kenneth Mills, College of the Holy Cross
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 04/30/2013
* USD 471,500.00

This integrated research and education program is designed to engage
undergraduate students in hypothesis-driven research projects. The research
component explores the catalysis of protein splicing by non-canonical inteins.
The educational component provides undergraduates at Holy Cross the opportunity
to develop as young scientist-scholars in the classroom, laboratory and as
presenters at scientific meetings.

Intellectual Merit: Protein splicing is the self-catalyzed, post-translational
excision of an intervening polypeptide, the intein, concomitant with the
ligation of the flanking polypeptides, the exteins, to produce the mature
protein. The intein catalyzes this process without cofactors or auxiliary
proteins. Although the chemical mechanism of protein splicing is established,
the means by which the intein facilitates those steps is not well understood.
The research program focuses on the catalytic mechanism of two non-canonical
inteins, PolII and TerA, including how non-canonical inteins promote each step
of protein splicing, and how these inteins temporally coordinate each step. The
Pyrococcus abyssi PolII intein has a C-terminal glutamine in place of the highly
conserved asparagine, which is directly involved in step three of splicing. How
and why the PolII intein alters step three of splicing will be addressed by
studies on model peptides using an established biochemical assay developed by
the Mills group and by NMR spectroscopy, in collaboration with protein NMR
spectroscopist Chunyu Wang of the Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute. Questions of
particular interest include how conserved residues catalyze each step of
splicing and how the intein temporally coordinates the steps of splicing. The
Clostridium thermocellum TerA intein has an N-terminal glutamine in place of the
conserved nucleophilic serine or cysteine, and must somehow bypass the first
step of splicing in this intein. The Mills lab will address how this is done by
comparing the splicing of wild type inteins and site-directed mutants using SDS-
PAGE, Western blot and mass spectrometry, and initiate a structural
determination to determine the role of conserved intein residues in promoting
splicing without an N-terminal nucleophile.

Broader Impacts: The project will provide high quality, inclusive training
opportunities to undergraduate students. Of the 23 research students from the
Mills lab, 15 were female. Of the lab alumni, six students are in medical school
or have medical degrees, two are applying to medical schools, one is an
intellectual property attorney, and five are in industry. In addition, four
female alumni of the lab are in PhD programs in biochemistry. The lab will
select its new students from the 222 first- and second-year biology and
chemistry majors, 53% of whom are female. The lab also will draw research
students from the NSF-funded Clavius Scholars program at Holy Cross, which
focuses on mentoring science students who are members of underrepresented
minorities or from lower income families, particularly from the Worcester area.
Once in the lab, each student will complete their own thesis project,
participate in weekly group meetings and seminars, present at the national ASBMB
meeting, participate in Holy Cross?s summer research program, and hopefully
publish their work as a co-author. The project will strengthen the mentoring
activities of the Holy Cross biochemistry concentration. Since 1995, 81 students
have participated in the program, 68% of them female. Many enter top medical and
graduate programs, including five young women in PhD programs from the past
three classes. It will also involve outreach programs to increase the scientific
literacy and enthusiasm for science of Worcester schoolchildren. In addition,
the study of non-canonical inteins will contribute to the understanding of
strategies used by enzymes to catalyze multi-step reactions at single active
sites.