* 0950892
* RUI: Analysis of the role of Wntless in regulating Wnt gradient formation
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2013
* Laura Burrus, San Francisco State University
* Continuing Grant
* Anthea Letsou
* 06/30/2013
* USD 353,939.00

The proper development of an embryo relies on the coordination and integration
of numerous signals. Wnt proteins represent one such class of signals and are
required for many different developmental processes including brain, spinal
cord, kidney, limb, lung, skin, bone, gonad, eye, ear, and muscle development.
When properly functioning, Wnt proteins are secreted from cells and form an
extracellular concentration gradient that is typified by a graded decline in
concentration over distance. The shape and the length of this gradient have
profound effects on the way that target cells respond to the Wnt signal. The
goal of this work is to define the role of Wntless, a protein that is known to
regulate the activity and distribution of Wnt proteins. In particular, this
project will examine the role of Wntless in establishing the shape and length of
the Wnt gradient. Upon the completion of these studies, a better understanding
of the molecular mechanisms by which gradients are formed will be gained. These
data will have relevance to our understanding of embryonic development and may
have broad implications for research pertaining to birth defects and other
diseases in which Wnt signaling is improperly regulated. Importantly, funding
for this research will provide research-training opportunities for up to 12
undergraduate and Masters students at San Francisco State University, which has
an unusually rich and diverse student population.