* 0950421
* RUI:  Functional Analysis of VTC3, a Novel Regulator of Ascorbate Biosynthesis in Plants.
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2014
* Patricia Conklin, SUNY College at Cortland
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 02/28/2014
* USD 345,184.00

Ascorbic acid is a small molecule that most people know as the antioxidant
Vitamin C, which is a critical component of the human diet. In plants, the
synthesis of ascorbic acid is a regulated process. For example, plants make
little ascorbic acid in the dark and very high levels in the light in large part
to detoxify oxygen free radicals produced as a by-product of photosynthesis. How
such regulation is controlled is not well understood. In the model plant species
Arabidopsis thaliana a gene has been identified (VTC3 for Vitamin C gene number
3) that encodes a protein likely involved in the regulation of ascorbic acid
biosynthesis. The VTC3 protein contains predicted domains known to be involved
in signal transduction pathways. Further, mutants lacking this protein are
ascorbic acid-deficient. Given the identity of these domains, the VTC3 protein
may be "dual purpose" and have a role in both the positive and negative
regulation of ascorbic acid biosynthesis. This project aims to define how VTC3
is involved in this regulation via an integrated molecular genetic, biochemical,
and proteomics-based approach. This approach will lead to an understanding of
the biochemical activity of the VTC3 protein domains and how these domains
(directly or indirectly via protein binding partners) impact the expression
and/or activity of plant ascorbic acid biosynthetic enzymes, and ultimately
ascorbic acid levels under differing environmental conditions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;This project is certain to
advance the understanding of signal transduction pathways in plants, in
particular with regards to the regulation of ascorbic acid biosynthesis in
plants. Applications in the field of agriculture are probable considering the
role of this small molecule in the protection of plants against environmentally
induced stresses. One of the strongest global impacts of this project will be
the effect that it has on the undergraduates that are involved. The
undergraduates and high school students working directly on this project during
the semester and the summer months will gain confidence in their ability to
conduct scientific research and the intellectual and hands-on tools to succeed
in the rapidly advancing field of biology. A subset will benefit from a multi-
week international research experience in the U.K. in the laboratory of a
collaborator at the University of Exeter. On a local level, the research and
educational capacities of the principal investigator's department and the
college as a whole will be enhanced through the purchase of new equipment and
the introduction of new technologies and techniques.