* 0950459
* Collaborative Research: Role of Arabidopsis CTD-Phosphatase-Like 1 in Gene Silencing Pathways
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2010,02/28/2015
* Hisashi Koiwa, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 02/28/2015
* USD 585,006.00

Gene expression is achieved through transcription of DNA into RNA transcripts,
known as messenger RNAs (mRNAs). Establishing the proper level of cellular
transcripts is achieved by balancing the activity of production and degradation
of mRNAs. Gene silencing is a process that regulates this balance both by
repressing production (transcriptional gene silencing) and by promoting
degradation (post-transcriptional gene silencing) of target transcripts. Some of
the central components of the gene silencing machinery are small double-stranded
RNA (dsRNA) and proteins that bind to cellular dsRNAs. The gene silencing
machinery of plants has both universal components and components only found in
the plant kingdom. Some of the unique components have been implicated not only
in normal plant growth and development but also in resistance to stress. This
project will determine the role of carboxyl-terminal domain (CTD) phosphatase-
like 1, CPL1, a unique plant protein phosphatase in the gene silencing pathway.
CPL1 is a repressor of multiple target genes. Preliminary data suggest that CPL1
can function both in transcriptional silencing and post-transcriptional
silencing, however, the mechanism for this observation has not been elucidated.
This study will use multiple approaches such as genetic, molecular, and
biochemical analyses to dissect novel components of gene silencing in plants.
The scientific discovery anticipated from this project will provide deeper
insight of gene expression mechanisms relevant not only in the plant biology but
also in broader biological science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will train
post-doctoral associates and one graduate student. The collaborative nature of
this project provides the participants multidisciplinary expertise in molecular
genetics and biochemistry as well as teaching opportunities through the lab
course described below. To train future scientists from diverse backgrounds, a
graduate-level laboratory module for the course Physiological and Molecular
Basis of Plant Stress Responses in which students will have hands-on experience,
will be established. Teaching materials will be shared between collaborating
institutions, and research materials generated in the project will be used in
the classroom/lab as well.