* 0950517
* Laboratory Study of Phase III SAFOD Core: Physical Properties and Mechanical Behavior of the Active San Andreas Fault Zone
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2013
* Chris Marone, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 03/31/2013
* USD 275,535.00

We are working to understand the physical properties of large-scale tectonic
faults in Earth's crust, with particular focus on the San Andreas Fault in
California. As part of the San Andreas Fault Observatory at Depth (SAFOD)
drilling recently penetrated the fault at a depth of ~ 2.5 km. We are studying
core recovered during this drilling (SAFOD phase III) along with synthetic fault
gouge, samples collected at the surface in the vicinity of the SAFOD borehole,
and cuttings from drilling in and around the fault. Only a small amount of core
was recovered from the active strand of the fault; therefore, we are using the
other materials to expand our data set and investigate physical processes within
the fault. Our work is focused on: 1) detailed measurements of frictional
properties and permeability of the samples, 2) development of process-based
models for controls on fault strength and stability, 3) development of
innovative methods to study the role of fault zone fabric on frictional
stability and physical properties, and 4) integration of laboratory results with
models for fluid flow and heat transport, which will allow critically evaluation
of hypotheses for apparent fault weakness. Outstanding questions that we are
addressing include: 1) What causes spatial variability in fault slip behavior
and seismicity? 2) Are elevated fluid pressures within the SAFOD 3-D volume
plausible? 3) How are geophysical observations such as low velocity or
resistivity linked to in situ conditions of stress and fluid pressure? 4) Does
the fault zone act as a barrier for regional and local fluid flow? 4) Does
significant fault healing occur in materials comprising the active SAF, and if
so, what is the acoustic (seismic) signature, if any? 5) How are fault zone
frictional, elastic, and transport properties linked with those of the
surrounding protolith (in other words, how does protolith composition influence
fault zone properties)?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our work complements studies by
other groups working on SAFOD samples as well as a substantial body of work at
Penn State focused on other fault zone drilling projects, such as NanTroSEIZE.
Results of the proposed experiments will have societal impact through improved
understanding of fault mechanics and earthquake physics, applied to the best-
studied and best-instrumented plate boundary fault on Earth. &lt;br/&gt;