* 0950955
* Genetic screen for genes affecting axon regeneration in C. elegans
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2010,02/28/2014
* Michael Bastiani, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Ann Asson-Batres
* 02/28/2014
* USD 527,386.00

Brain and spinal cord neurons in mammals, including humans, do not regenerate
when they are broken due to injury or disease. Yet, neurons have a tremendous
capacity for regeneration in mammalian embryos and in some adult animals. The
puzzle of why adult mammalian neurons lose their capacity to regenerate can be
solved by using the simple model organism, C. elegans. A genetic mutation was
discovered in C. elegans that causes axons to break spontaneously. In response
to these spontaneous axon breaks, the neurons successfully regrow new axons back
to their target muscles. This spontaneous axon break, followed by axon
regeneration, will be used to test the function of each gene in the C. elegans
genome for its effect on axon regeneration. This would be the first genetic
screen to identify all genes involved in axon regeneration in any organism and
should lead to a comprehensive and fundamental understanding of the signaling
pathways controlling axon regeneration. It should also allow identification of
the signaling changes that occur with age that prevent axon regeneration in most
adult mammalian neurons. The similarity between genes in C. elegans and humans
means that any knowledge gained from the screen should be applicable to human
nerve cell regeneration and provide rational targets for new drug therapies.
This research will also provide training in cutting edge research technologies
for graduate students and undergraduates, and will provide research
opportunities for high school students through the University of Utah Bio-
Sciences program that places students in laboratories for 7 weeks each summer.