* 0950796
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Emergence of Complex Society in the Peruvian South Central Highlands: Perspectives on the Frontier of the Chavin Sphere of Interaction
* SBE,BCS
* 11/15/2009,08/31/2011
* Richard Burger, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2011
* USD 20,000.00

Under the direction of Dr. Richard Burger Mr. Yuichi Matsumoto will collect data
for his doctoral dissertation. He will analyze archaeological materials from the
site of Campanayuq Rumi in Vilcashuaman, Department of Ayacucho, Peru. Mr.
Matsumoto conducted archaeological excavations at the site for two field seasons
from 2007 to 2008. These excavations revealed that Campanayuq Rumi was one of
the most important ceremonial centers in the central highlands of Peru during
the Formative Period (1800-200 B.C.). Preliminary analysis of the materials
obtained from his research suggests that Campanayuq Rumi functioned as a large
ceremonial center under the strong religious influence of Chavín de Huántar, the
most important ceremonial and pilgrimage center of the period, located 600km to
the North. It also served as an important node of interregional interaction.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It has been hypothesized that the central Andes witnessed
the emergence of complex societies under the impetus of an expansion of
religious ideology from Chavín de Huántar during the late Initial and Early
Horizon Periods. While large ceremonial centers and social stratification
emerged during this period along the coast and northern highlands, the south
central highlands had been regarded as a "backwater" because of the lack of
large civic-ceremonial centers. However Mr. Matsumoto's research at Campanayuq
Rumi suggests the need to radically alter this position. The new evidence
indicates that Campanayuq Rumi probably emerged as the focus of the first
complex society of the region through the interaction with the more complex
society of Chavín de Huántar and that it collapsed in accordance with the
latter's decline. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Emergence and transformation of complex
societies remains as an important theoretical topic of anthropology and
archaeology. Campanayuq Rumi provides an excellent setting to evaluate this
process at a regional level and thus this project will help to consider the
following broad theoretical issues: 1) How and why did a relatively egalitarian
society based on corporate social groups develop complex hierarchical social
arrangements by directly interacting with a distant more complex society? 2) How
did the new complex system transform through time? 3) How did the interaction
between these societies change diachronically? Accelerator Mass Spectrometry
radiocarbon dating of the organic samples will provide a fine-grained
chronological framework to consider these issues diachronically. X-ray
fluorescence analysis of obsidian artifacts will help to enhance understanding
of long distance exchange patterns during the Formative, which is necessary to
understand interregional interaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond research
questions of interest to archaeologists and anthropologists, this project will
also contribute to local community identity by sharing the information of
Campanayuq Rumi with them. The site has become crucial to the identity of local
people in Vilcashuaman. Several educational institutions now visit the site to
teach how the history of Vilcashuaman was deeper than the textbooks report.
Because of the public attention paid to Campanayuq Rumi as a result of this
research, the regional government of Ayacucho is trying to utilize Campanayuq
Rumi as a tourist attraction to provide an economic benefit to the region. The
new data from this project will help the plan by providing a strong academic
foundation for these activities. Furthermore, Mr. Matsumoto will gain training
as a graduate student in the method of analysis mentioned above.