* 0950252
* CAREER: Magnitude Biases in Mathematical Cognition, Learning, and Development
* EHR,DRL
* 07/01/2010,09/30/2016
* Hilary Barth, Wesleyan University
* Continuing Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 09/30/2016
* USD 761,005.00

This project will investigate the role of magnitude biases in mathematical
cognition, learning, and development. Magnitude bias refers to the idea that
psychological magnitudes are often different from their corresponding actual
magnitudes. This proposal lays out evidence for these biases in oft-used
research paradigms in numerical cognition that are applicable to math education,
describes two sets of studies to investigate these further, and sets the stage
for a future career that will investigate educational implications by developing
partnerships with educational researchers and practitioners.

The first set of experiments investigates the role of abstract magnitude bias in
children's learning to integrate their intuitive understanding of quantity with
linguistic systems. This work has important theoretical implications for
mathematical cognition and learning, and it has demonstrated applications to
math education: the developmental changes in question are correlated with
changes in school-based math achievement.

The second set investigates the role of perceptual magnitude bias in nonverbal
quantitative thinking. This work has important theoretical implications for the
nature of the representational foundations of children's math knowledge, and it
holds promise for educational applications because perceptual biases affect our
thinking about the magnitudes of observed items. To the extent that
instructional materials such as manipulatives and visualization tools are meant
to convey meaningful magnitude information, these biases are likely to affect
math concept learning.