* 0950411
* CAREER:  Live cell imaging of Salmonella effector proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2016
* Amy Palmer, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 08/31/2016
* USD 815,640.00

Intellectual merit. This project will develop a powerful, novel approach to
illuminate how disease-causing (pathogenic) bacteria invade host organisms. A
wide range of bacterial pathogens use a set of proteins, called effectors, to
invade and infect host cells. Upon entry, these effector proteins work
cooperatively to hijack cellular signaling and to reprogram the host cell to
enable bacterial survival. Over 60 effector proteins have been identified that
are injected into the host cell through a complex macromolecular machine known
as the Type Three Secretion System (T3SS). Although these effector proteins are
essential for mediating invasion and manipulating host cell biology, it is not
fully understood how they work because there are no methods to visualize their
movements in real-time during cellular invasion. This project will develop a new
method that will directly tag the broad spectrum of effector proteins with
fluorescent molecules in order to visualize their movements during infection of
a host cell. The focus of this project is Salmonella enterica, but the method
that will be developed could potentially transform the understanding of the
mechanism of infection for a wide variety of other pathogens that utilize a T3SS
to infect host organisms and will further contribute to the scientific
understanding of protein secretion by bacteria.

Broader impacts. This project will contribute to a campus-wide effort to reform
undergraduate science education by strengthening interdisciplinary, hands-on
tutorials that will promote student engagement and transform student learning.
These materials will have a direct and powerful impact on the way physical and
biophysical chemistry are taught. Biological applications (such as visualization
of bacterial invasion) will be used as case studies to inspire students to
appreciate the diversity of physical chemistry applications. One of the greatest
impacts will be to train, mentor, and motivate the next generation of
scientists. The scientific and educational research will be performed entirely
by graduate and undergraduate students and will provide fertile ground for
training students to see fundamental connections between different scientific
disciplines and to create novel tools that help address fundamental
biological/educational questions. Moreover, this project aims to transform
undergraduate biology and physical chemistry curricula, which will affect
hundreds of students at the University of Colorado, Boulder, and many more
across the country since the materials developed will be made widely available
online for the educational community.