* 0950323
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:: Documenting Bih, An Austronesian Language of Vietnam In A Comparative Perspective: A Bih/Rade/English/Vietnamese Dictionary
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2010,08/31/2012
* Scott DeLancey, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Shobhana Chelliah
* 08/31/2012
* USD 13,592.00

Doctoral Dissertation Research: Documenting Bih, an Austronesian language of
Vietnam in a comparative perspective: a Bih/Rade/English/Vietnamese Dictionary

Bih is a Chamic language spoken in the Southern highlands of Vietnam. Around 500
people in Buon Trap town consider themselves as Bih ethnically, but fewer than
30 people are fluent in Bih. This supports the fear that the generation of
elderly adults is the last generation speaking Bih. This doctoral dissertation
project will contribute toward the preservation of the language by providing the
first-ever orthography of Bih. Co-PI Tam Nguyen of the University of Oregon will
undertake significant onsite work with the language. The co-PI will record
natural language data in the form of conversations, folklore, songs and other
forms of discourse. These oral texts supplemented with word-by-word elicitation
when appropriate will contribute vocabulary toward the development of a
Bih/Rade/English/Vietnamese dictionary.

A Bih/Rade/English/Vietnamese dictionary promises to offer a significant
contribution to linguistics and related fields as there are no grammars,
dictionaries or scholarly publications available on the language to date. A
detailed documentation of the Bih lexicon contributes to the field of
Austronesian historical linguistics, particularly to Vietnamese scholars
interested in the reconstruction of proto-history, such as anthropology,
archaeology, folklore, art-history and population genetics. First and foremost,
the project will be of use to the Bih people who exhibit the fear of their
language loss and wish to have written forms of their lexicon for language
preservation. As collaboration with the University of Tay Nguyen and the Center
of Daklak Ethnic Research is included, the proposed project is carefully
designed to meet the needs of the speaking community as well as those of the
academic communities.