* 0950726
* Collaborative Research: Regulation of CpNifS/CpSufE1-Mediated Iron-Sulfur Cluster Synthesis in Plant Plastids.  Implications for Sulfur and Iron Metabolism and Selenium Tolerance
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2014
* Marinus Pilon, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 03/31/2014
* USD 489,647.00

Intellectual Merit:

Photosynthesis, the production of sugars from water and carbon dioxide, takes
place in plant chloroplasts and drives all life on our planet. The chloroplasts
are also needed for the production of the oxygen that we breathe and,
additionally, make nitrogen and sulfur compounds necessary for plant growth and
a healthy plant-based diet. Iron deficiency limits plant growth because iron is
available only at very low levels in soils and iron is essential for
photosynthesis. Photosynthesis requires numerous proteins, many of which are
dependent upon iron-sulfur clusters for proper protein function. This project
aims to study how the machinery that assembles iron-sulfur clusters in
chloroplasts is regulated. The integration of (1) sulfur and iron metabolism and
their regulation and (2) iron-sulfur cluster assembly will get special attention
in this project. The regulatory roles of plant-specific proteins that function
in iron-sulfur cluster assembly will be delineated. This collaborative research
additionally seeks to explore how selenium, which is similar to sulfur yet
toxic, interferes with essential sulfur metabolism in chloroplasts. Moreover,
the role of specific iron-sulfur cluster-related proteins in selenium metabolism
will be analyzed. An interdisciplinary approach involving a combination of
biochemistry, genetics and plant physiology in the model plant Arabidopsis will
be employed. New analysis methods for the assembly of iron-sulfur clusters in
vivo will be developed. These collaborative studies will provide much-needed
insights into the mechanisms and regulation of assembly of the photosynthetic
machinery in plants.

Broader impacts:

This research involves collaboration between Coastal Carolina University, a
primarily undergraduate institution with 18% minority enrollment, and Colorado
State University. The project will train several undergraduate students, a
graduate student, and a post-doctoral fellow. Undergraduate students at CCU will
be engaged and trained in cutting edge research methods. The project directly
involves students in a larger undergraduate course in the excitement of
hypothesis-driven research in a unique and innovative part of the project, which
integrates classroom teaching and research, thereby increasing scientific
understanding of a large group of students. Iron is limiting to crop growth in
many environments; selenium contamination is increasingly problematic.
Therefore, the results of the collaborative project will also have direct
implications for agriculture, biomass production, the production of fortified
foods, and the environment.