* 0950086
* ETBC: Teleconnections in the earth system: Nutrient subsidies and fire prone ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2010,03/31/2012
* William Parton, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 03/31/2012
* USD 135,000.00

African savannas burn more frequently than any other biome worldwide, with
average annual carbon emissions from fires representing ~38% of the global
total. Of the many elements emitted in biomass burning, two of the most
interesting are nitrogen and phosphorus because of their important role in
ecosystem biogeochemical cycles. However, their fate following fires is poorly
understood. This research will examine patterns of pyrogenic (fire-related)
nutrient emissions, atmospheric transport and nutrient deposition across Africa
to explore the extent to which fires and transport move nutrients among
spatially remote regions of the continent. Field measurements in Mali, West
Africa of nitrogen and phosphorous deposition during a full annual cycle will
provide initial validation of an atmospheric transport model, and will be used
to explore potential chemical markers for pyrogenic nitrogen and phosphorous
deposition in African savanna ecosystems. Complementary measurements of
vegetation and soil nutrient limitation status will also be made.

More than in most places around the world, the human populations of Africa are
expected to experience deleterious effects from global climate change. This
research will explore interactions between ecosystems, land-cover changes and
biogeochemical cycles that may impact ecosystem sustainability and agricultural
productivity now, and into the future. Further, the results of this research
will provide new insights on fire-mediated nutrient cycling for other fire-prone
ecosystems worldwide. The project will also foster new collaborative
relationships with international partners in Mali.