* 0950720
* Collaborative Research:  Costs and Advantages of a Novel Sodium Channel Mutation in Copepods
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2013
* Peter A. V. Anderson, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 02/28/2013
* USD 105,944.00

Toxic algal blooms pose a threat to fisheries and public health. A key issue for
understanding the effects of toxic algae on aquatic ecosystems is how grazers
evolve adaptations to algal toxins. Adaptation of copepods (the most abundant
multicellular animals in the sea) to microalgae that produce potent neurotoxins
(called saxitoxins, STX) has been previously demonstrated. STX blocks sodium
(Na+) channels and interrupts nerve transmission signals. A novel mutation that
is located in the inner portion of the Na+ channel, and leads to persistent
electrical currents when the channel is inactivated (i.e., a leaky channel), has
been identified. Leaky channels result in unintended nerve transmission signals
and cell hypersensitivity; hence, they are considered to be very costly to
individuals. However, it is hypothesized that in the presence of STX, the leaky
channel mutation is advantageous because STX blockage of leaky channels reduces
the likelihood of unintended nerve transmission signals and cell
hypersensitivity. This project represents an interdisciplinary collaboration
between labs at University of Connecticut and the University of Florida with
expertise in molecular techniques, neurobiology, and zooplankton ecology and
evolution. Expected results are: 1) Development of genetic markers for
specifically detecting wild and mutant Na+ channels in individual copepods, 2)
Neurophysiological characterization of the functional properties of the mutant
Na+ channel and its responses to STX, 3) Quantification of the costs and
benefits to individuals bearing the mutation responsible for the leaky Na+
channel. This research can potentially lead to the demonstration of a new
molecular mechanism of neurotoxin adaptation, and inform a variety of fields of
research from neurobiology to ecology and evolution. The broader impacts of this
research are: 1) New key information for predicting whether grazers can control
toxic blooms and toxin transfer to fish and shellfish. 2) Collaboration with
professional educators to translate results from this study and the toxin
adaptation literature into prepared curricular materials that meet national
science standards. The material will be made widely available via a website and
workshops presented at conference meetings of scientists and secondary
educators. 3) Presentations in lecture series aimed at lay audiences. 4)
Training of undergraduate and graduate students in an interdisciplinary
environment.