* 0950582
* RUI: Examining Non-Canonical Interactions in Small RNA Motifs
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2010,02/28/2014
* Neena Grover, Colorado College
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 02/28/2014
* USD 268,361.00

Intellectual Merit: RNA molecules play important roles in all aspects of gene
expression as well as many other cellular processes. Inside the cell, RNA
molecules form distinct structures to interact with DNA, proteins, other RNAs
and with various metabolites to carry out these functions. RNA molecules contain
various recurrent structural features or motifs. This project aims to increase
understanding of the details of bonding within recurrent RNA motifs and to
elucidate rules for RNA structure formation. Colorado College undergraduates
will measure the stabilities of small RNA structures using thermodynamic
methods, including thermal denaturation and isothermal calorimetry. Particular
regions of RNA will then be modified, and RNA stabilities before and after the
modification will be compared to identify key contributors to bonding for each
structural motif. Improved understanding of the general rules for structure
formation will improve our ability to get greater information from the genome
databases, to predict the structures formed by RNA in the cell and to elucidate
their functions and mechanisms of action. Detailed thermodynamic parameters for
recurrent RNA structures that guide and stabilize the folding of RNA as it is
transcribed will improve our understanding of RNA folding, as these structures
may serve as nucleation sites for the formation of higher-order structures.

Broader Impact: Broader impacts of this work include the scientific impact of
improved knowledge of RNA structural motifs and recruitment and training of
undergraduates in current research methods both inside and outside of the
classroom. The laboratories in biochemistry courses are being modified to
introduce research methodology to the students in the classroom. In nucleic
acids biochemistry course, students will design an RNA-based project and apply
their thermodynamic knowledge to understanding RNA structures. This project will
strengthen their understanding of thermodynamics and RNA structure and function
along introducing them to RNA research. Undergraduate students will be presented
with an option to do research starting in their introductory classes. Up to
eight undergraduate students will work in the research laboratory and
participate in developing and testing hypotheses on small RNA structure and
function. Women and minority students from biochemistry classes will be given
priority to do research in the laboratory. In addition, undergraduate students
will be provided opportunities to participate in outreach work with Longfellow
and Audubon Elementary Schools. Elementary school students will learn the basic
principles of science by testing hypothesis on concepts such as solubility and
density. Students will make a positive contribution to the society by using
their scientific knowledge to provide information about RNA to the general
public on topics such as HIV's life cycle and its treatment; this in turn makes
science relevant to their lives. The science outreach projects to the community
are specifically designed to raise the scientific literacy of the general
public. Sharing of equipment and expertise with University of Colorado, Colorado
Springs will build bridges locally and will benefit all involved. High school
students and teachers from Pine Creek High School will also participate in RNA
research during the summer. Quantitative methods will be introduced into biology
courses at Pine Creek High School.