* 0950631
* Accretion in the Kuiper Belt: The Deep Ecliptic Survey
* MPS,AST
* 05/15/2009,08/31/2010
* David Trilling, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas S. Statler
* 08/31/2010
* USD 63,193.00

AST 0407232&lt;br/&gt;Trilling&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Kuiper Belt, a ring of
debris and dust outside the planetary realm of our Solar System,&lt;br/&gt;is
the last, most pristine record of the processes of planetary accretion in our
Solar System.&lt;br/&gt;Dr. David Trilling and his collaborator Dr. Marc Buie
will study the Kuiper Belt and its residents, Kuiper Belt Objects (KBOs), to
constrain the timescale of accretion in the outer Solar System. Trilling and
Buie both participate in the ongoing, large-scale Deep Ecliptic Survey (DES) for
KBOs and will use the DES database as the backbone of their science endeavors.
The tasks to be carried out are as follows. Trilling will make new observations
in the DES program. Trilling and Buie will also carry out a comprehensive
photometry program that will be used to calibrate the DES catalog. Both of these
observing tasks will make extensive use of telescopes in Arizona and Chile.
Lastly, Trilling and Buie will carry out completeness experiments on the DES
catalog. These three tasks prepare the way for scientific analysis of the Kuiper
Belt using the 500 DES KBOs. The first step of the science analysis will be to
carry out a statistical study of the DES data in combination with other surveys'
data to derive, with strong confidence, the differential sky density of KBOs.
This mathematical expression can be directly related to accretion timescales
through theoretical models to provide a tight constraint on the duration of
accretion in the Kuiper Belt. Lastly, combining the DES dataset with newly
available KBO albedo information from the Space Infrared Telescope Facility
allows a true KBO size distribution to be derived for the first time.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of these technical tasks and
science goals lies in the quest to understand&lt;br/&gt;how the outer Solar
System formed and evolved. The results derived here will be crucially important
in constraining and driving the next generation of outer Solar System accretion
models. These models have impact beyond the Kuiper Belt, as planets in the Solar
System (and beyond) underwent accretion as part of their formation processes.
This program will have a broader impact in the community primarily through
participation in the University of Arizona Space Grant program. Through the
Space Grant program, Trilling will recruit one undergraduate research intern per
year from among the diverse pool of applications. This series of students will
have specific research tasks, including participating in observing runs.
Trilling will also participate in Space Grant's Science Speakers program to
present science results in classrooms and to the general public. Such a program
uniquely allows bringing knowledge to communities of racial, ethnic, and
economic diversity. Lastly, in addition to public outreach, this research
program will produce an extensive photometric catalog, which will be widely
available, and will calibrate the large DES archive, which will also be
available for use in various other scientific projects from Solar System science
to cosmology.&lt;br/&gt;