* 0950231
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  EAGER:  Evolution of Plant Defense:  A Multigenerational Selection Experiment in the Field
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Anurag Agrawal, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 09/30/2012
* USD 255,675.00

Plants, being at the base of almost all food chains, are responsible for feeding
the world. In other words, plants provide the necessary energy to sustain all
animal life either directly (through herbivory) or indirectly (because
carnivores eat herbivores). Because of this tremendous pressure on plants, they
have evolved a remarkable diversity of strategies to defend against being
consumed. For example, plants possess a variety of heritable physical (e.g.,
thorns, spines) and chemical (e.g., toxins such as cyanide) traits that ward off
herbivores. Theory, observations, and experiments have all implicated insect
herbivores as key agents shaping the evolution of plant traits. How plant
populations respond to this selection in real time over multiple generations,
however, is virtually unknown. This project will address this major gap in
current scientific understanding with newly developed molecular techniques to
fingerprint genetic individuals of the common evening primrose (Oenothera
biennis). Because this project will be conducted in field plots containing
plants of known genetic identity either subjected to or protected from insect
herbivory, the investigators will gain new insight into both the evolutionary
process in general and the specific traits that evolve in response to insect
herbivore attack under natural environmental conditions. This project will be
one of the most rigorous investigations of the evolution of plant defense
performed to date, and will assess the impact of herbivores on changes in plant
chemical defenses and genetic composition of the population. In addition,
responses of the insect community to changes in the genetic make-up of the plant
populations will be determined.

Broader impacts of this study include educational efforts directed to K-12
students, undergraduates, graduate students, and the general public. Because the
work proposed examines evolutionary changes over relatively short time scales,
engaging teachers and the general public can be readily accomplished through
outreach efforts and field trips. The message of evolution by natural selection
and plant-herbivore interactions will be taken into K-12 classrooms via an
established program at Cornell University (Cornell Institute for Biology
Teachers).