* 0950866
* RUI:   Lateral Root Initiation
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2015
* Marta Laskowski, Oberlin College
* Continuing Grant
* Ben Holt
* 01/31/2015
* USD 315,000.00

Marta Laskowski&lt;br/&gt;IOS-0950866&lt;br/&gt;RUI: Lateral root initiation
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The ability to grow robust plants improves economic
output, the ability to feed the world, and the ability to deal with the threat
of climate change. The growth of a plant is in turn affected by its root system.
Unlike animals, which are typically born with a set number of legs, the number
and location of branches that a plant will form is not pre-determined. The
architecture of any individual plant depends on the environment it is grown in.
This project will improve understanding of the processes occurring within cells
that control where and when new lateral roots form. It is already known that
lateral root formation is induced on curved sections of roots in one plant
species, Arabidopsis thaliana, but the details of why this occurs are still
unclear. The project will use molecular genetic tools to test a current model
for how lateral roots are induced. Specifically, the idea that induction of
lateral root initiation results from increases in cell length, leading to
changes in transport of the plant growth regulator auxin, will be tested. The
project also will determine the extent to which the formation of lateral roots
on curved regions of the root applies to a wide range of plants including some
crop plants and commercially grown forest trees. Completing this project will
further understanding of how roots grow.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The knowledge
gained from this project may inform genetic engineering of economically
important plants in the future. It will also create opportunities for about 12
undergraduate students a year to participate in the research, through a
combination of honors and independent study positions and through an
investigative laboratory course. As the project is part of an international
collaboration, these undergraduate students will be actively involved in the
global research community, training that will enhance their development as
scientists. &lt;br/&gt;