* 0950349
* A Reappraisal of Petterssen's Type A and Type B Cyclogenesis - A Dynamical Process Study
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2014
* Jonathan Martin, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Milne
* 07/31/2014
* USD 581,941.00

Cyclogenesis is overarching term for the development or strengthening of a
closed, low pressure, circular motion of the atmosphere driven by inward
spiraling winds rotating in the same direction as the planet. Extratropical
cyclones form along weather fronts (baroclinic zones) and mature into cold core
cyclones. This is distinct from tropical cylcones which are driven by the latent
heat associated with intense convection and are warm, central core systems. The
notion that extratropical cyclones evolve through a predictable sequence as they
pass along the frontal boundary has led to the development of a variety of
classification and diagnostic schemes. One such scheme, due to Petterssen and
Smebye (1950's), adopts two broad developmental paths, Type A (directed by low
level processes) and Type B (directed by upper level processes). These differ as
to the forcing terms responsible for upward vertical motion and development of
the kinetic energy in the systems. Despite the widespread use of this
classification, details of the dynamical processes in extratropical cyclones
remains unclear. This project, analyzing a number of cyclogenesis events
observed during FASTEX (the Fronts and Atlantic Storms Experiment, 1997) and
along with other selected data sets, seeks to employ two different methodologies
to better diagnose and interpret the two category types. These methodologies are
respectively conventional quasigesotrophic analyses based on Q vector analysis,
and an adjoint model derived sensitivity analysis, both identifying atmospheric
parameters (e.g. shearwise and transverse vertical motions) that relate to mid
latitude cyclone development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of these
studies include the furtherance of undergraduate and graduate education of
University of Wisconsin students, development of community resources and the
investigation of new methodologies in weather predictability research on the
topic of extratropical cyclone development. The economic impact of extratropical
cyclones such as the 2009-2010 US winter storms were significant examples
thereof.