* 0950016
* RUI: Collaborative Research: Nitrogen fixers in a western river network:  constraints and consequences
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2012
* Jill Welter, St. Catherine University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 04/30/2012
* USD 135,000.00

Biological nitrogen fixation is the process through which organisms convert
nitrogen gas in the atmosphere to a form that can be used in other biological
processes. Because biologically available nitrogen often limits plant growth,
nitrogen fixation is a critical process that can influence ecosystem
productivity, species composition, and food web interactions. The importance of
nitrogen fixation has been studied in many terrestrial ecosystems, however this
process has been relatively little studied in streams, which have often been
thought to be limited by the availability of phosphorus rather than nitrogen.
Topography, stream flow, and species composition and interactions will be
examined as potential factors that limit nitrogen fixation in stream networks in
the western United States; high resolution digital elevation data will be tested
as a source of topographic information for these analyses. The results of this
work, in combination with parallel efforts linking light and hydraulic regimes
to digital topographic models, will facilitate the development of predictive
maps that place the controls and consequences of biological nitrogen fixation
into the physical and rapidly changing environmental context of river networks.

Research opportunities and training will be provided to science and science
education undergraduate students at the lead liberal arts institution, a women's
college, by combining the liberal arts learning environment with access to the
philosophies and lab facilities of large research groups. The opportunity to
work with an interdisciplinary team of scientists will provide a diverse group
of women first-hand experience in field ecology and the scientific process,
encouraging many to pursue professional opportunities in science and science
education.