* 0950964
* Molecular mechanisms contributing evolutionary morphological diversity
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2015
* Yoshinori Tomoyasu, Miami University
* Continuing Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 08/31/2015
* USD 460,000.00

One of the important concepts that modern developmental biology studies have
uncovered is that the structure and function of genes important for development
are often very similar among animals, even in those as different as insects and
mammals. How then do these same apparently well-conserved genes produce the
great diversity of animal forms? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The insect wing is a
fascinating developmental system to study this question, because of the
impressive range of existing structures. The proposed research will compare wing
development of two different insects, a flour beetle (Tribolium) and a fruit fly
(Drosophila). These powerful insect genetic model systems differ dramatically in
wing morphology. The regulatory basis of fly wing development is well described.
In the proposed research, Dr. Tomoyasu will use a combination of genetic and
developmental approaches to study wing development in beetles, and compare it
with that of flies to understand the molecular basis of morphological evolution.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Tomoyasu's research has previously shown that changes
in the function of a Hox gene (a class of genes that has many critical functions
during development) may have contributed significantly to the diversity of
insect wing forms. The current research is focused on studying the mode of Hox
action in beetle wings, which will lead to a better understanding of how changes
in Hox function have contributed to morphological
evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will enhance undergraduate
science education through active participation of undergraduate students in the
project. Exposure of students to an on-going research project will allow them to
learn how to apply their knowledge to a scientific project, which will
complement their classroom education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Tomoyasu is a
participant in the Undergraduate Research and Mentoring (URM) program at Miami
University, an NSF-funded program to encourage underrepresented students to
consider a career in science. Dr. Tomoyasu will actively recruit students to the
proposed research through the URM program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, Dr.
Tomoyasu will work to popularize the use of Tribolium in genetics teaching
laboratories at the secondary and undergraduate levels. Tribolium has several
traits that make it an excellent model organism in teaching laboratories (ease
of culture, available genetic tools, etc.). Through the proposed project, Dr.
Tomoyasu will develop several Tribolium research protocols suitable for teaching
laboratories.