* 0950849
* Integration of planar cell polarity and membrane trafficking during zebrafish gastrulation
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2010,07/31/2013
* Jason Jessen, Vanderbilt University Medical Center
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 07/31/2013
* USD 429,000.00

Animal development requires a diverse array of cell movement events to shape the
body plan and generate an embryo with three distinct tissue layers. Significant
among these movements is the process of collective migration whereby groups of
polarized cells move in a directional manner while maintaining some level of
contact with each other. However, the fundamental question of how this process
is coordinated to promote the directional movement of large cell populations
remains unanswered. This research project will address this question by
utilizing the zebrafish as a genetic and embryological model system that can be
manipulated using a variety of molecular techniques. In addition, the optical
clarity of the zebrafish embryo affords the opportunity to perform microscopic
imaging of cell migration in a live vertebrate animal. This project will
determine (at both the cellular and biochemical levels) how specific proteins
shown to be important for establishing cell polarity function to regulate
collective or group cell migration events. This project is significant for the
following reasons: (1) it will benefit society by providing novel insight into
the complex process of collective cell migration, a process that is important
for normal animal development and (2) it provides a unique training opportunity
for post-doctoral scholars and undergraduate students to learn how to collect
and analyze data from an animal model system.