* 0950233
* Coiled-coil Modules for Molecular Engineering and Synthetic Biology
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2015
* Amy Keating, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 02/28/2015
* USD 860,000.00

Intellectual Merit: Understanding how amino-acid sequences determine the
structure and function of proteins provides an opportunity to engineer molecular
tools at the nanoscale level. The alpha helical coiled coil is a simple protein
structure made up of two or more chains that associate into a rod-like super-
helix. Several decades of research have provided insights into the principles
that determine whether two protein chains can associate to form a coiled coil.
This process can now be controlled, to a certain extent, by manipulating protein
sequence using rational molecular design techniques. This project aims to
exploit current understanding of coiled-coil sequence-structure relationships,
along with powerful molecular engineering techniques, to develop reagents
suitable for building new materials and re-engineering cellular circuits using
coiled coil motifs. The goal is to generate a list of fully described molecular
parts that will allow other scientists to use these as modular units in
bioengineering projects. The research builds on the prior identification of 23
synthetic proteins that participate in a variety of complex interaction
patterns. Goals for the project are to (1) test whether these peptides,
previously characterized in solution in the laboratory, maintain their
interaction properties inside bacteria and yeast, (2) refine and tune the
interaction strengths and specificities of these 23 proteins through rational
molecular design, (3) explore how the modular coiled-coil units can be used to
alter information processing in laboratory yeast, specifically by modifying MAP-
kinase signaling, and (4) explore the use of modular coiled-coil proteins for
constructing artificial DNA-binding proteins. Success in these areas will pave
the way for broad use of synthetic coiled coils in molecular engineering
applications. As modular design blocks adapted from the natural world, coiled
coils have the potential to advance materials science, provide new capabilities
for engineering microbial cells, and interface with nanoscale inorganic
materials, enabling advanced information processing and smart devices.

Broader Impacts: Beyond the scientific impact, this project will enhance
integrated educational/research opportunities for a diverse group of young
scientists. The proposed work will be carried out in the Keating laboratory in
the MIT biology department, where education and research activities are tightly
coupled. The Keating research group of 12 individuals is composed of graduate
students, postdoctoral scientists and undergraduate students. Laboratory members
with diverse scientific, economic, ethnic and cultural backgrounds are involved
in all group activities, and Dr. Keating additionally participates in mentoring
activities for women and under-represented students in science. Undergraduate
students will be recruited to work on this project, with summer invitations
extended particularly to individuals not likely otherwise to be exposed to
modern research. Protein engineering and synthetic biology are appealing
research subjects for undergraduates, because these provide the opportunity to
rationally construct something entirely new in the molecular world. This will
enhance the spirit of exploration and discovery that is critical for engaging
and retaining young scientists.