* 0950347
* Collaborative Research: Linking models to data to investigate patterns and process in savannas
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2010,08/31/2016
* Brian Beckage, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 08/31/2016
* USD 355,000.00

Savannas are ecological communities comprised of scattered trees in a grassland
matrix. The mechanisms leading to the coexistence of grasses and trees and the
persistence of savanna communities over long time periods are unclear. Opposing
ecological theories have predicted either equilibrium savanna communities that
result from niche partitioning or non-equilibrium savannas that result from
repeated disturbances such as fire. This project will consider an alternative
model to explain the structure of savannas, in which stability results from
feedbacks between fire disturbance and vegetation. It will test the hypothesis
that flammable savanna plants result in more frequent or intense fires and that
these fires, in turn, promote the growth and establishment of savanna
vegetation. Such positive feedbacks between savanna vegetation and fire could
maintain the density of trees between the extremes of treeless prairies and the
closed canopy of forests. The project will further explore whether less
frequent, periodic disturbances such as hurricanes could have interactive
effects with fire that could initiate vegetation-fire feedbacks and rescue
savannas from a forest state. The underlying assumptions and predictions of a
disturbance-feedback model will be tested using empirical and experimental data
collected from sites that have been studied for the past 30 years in southern
Florida, southwestern Georgia, and eastern Louisiana, and that broadly represent
pine savannas in the southeastern United States. Demographic and spatial
patterns predicted by a disturbance-feedback model will be compared to field
observations and experimental data to ascertain the validity of the
model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This alternative model of savanna dynamics will
contribute to a general understanding of the processes that structure savannas
across a wide range of environments worldwide, and will facilitate predictions
of savanna responses to disturbances such as climate warming and landscape
fragmentation. Understanding savanna responses to perturbations is of broad
significance as savannas comprise an eighth of the global land surface, provide
essential ecological services, and are important reservoirs of biodiversity.
Results from this project will also be broadly applicable to ecological
restoration and management of ecosystems across the United States. This project
will support a postdoctoral scholar and provide research training for graduate
and undergraduate students, and Girl Scouts at a camp near the study site in
Louisiana.