* 0950857
* Exploring the Biochemical Links between Arabidopsis Roots and Natural Soil Microbial Communities
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2014
* Jorge Vivanco, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 02/28/2014
* USD 740,707.00

Intellectual Merit:

Plants initiate interactions with soil microbiota through root exudation. Thus,
manipulating root exudation of plants presents a unique opportunity to influence
soil microbial communities in a manner that will ultimately benefit plant/crop
health. This project will provide such tools by characterizing a mutant (Atpdr2)
of the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana coding for an ATP-binding cassette (ABC)
transporter in which the ratio of sugars to secondary metabolites in the root
exudates is altered compared to the wild-type (wt). We found that when Atpdr2 is
grown in native Arabidopsis soils, a complete overhaul of the microbial
community compared with wild-type Arabidopsis roots is seen. The Atpdr2 mutant
promotes the growth of beneficial bacteria, such as plant growth and promoting
rhizobacteria (PGPRs), nitrogen fixers and bacteria involved in heavy metal
remediation. First, the project will address the influence of root-secreted
chemical compounds and families from Atpdr2 and wt plants on the growth of
beneficial soil microbes within the native microbial community. The second
objective of the project is to characterize the Atpdr2 mutant to determine
mechanisms used by the mutant to alter the ratio of sugars and secondary
metabolites exuded by roots. These studies are transformative because they will
provide mechanistic knowledge to develop new approaches by which crops can be
genetically manipulated to culture soil microbes for beneficial purposes.

Broader Impacts:

This project will provide training for undergraduate and graduate students, and
a post-doctoral trainee in research activities. These activities will be
complemented with career development and mentoring workshops particularly
targeted to graduate students and postdocs. In addition, the project will
provide summer research and training activities for minority undergraduate
students from the John Jay College of Criminal Justice of the City University of
New York and educational activities for elementary students in Fort Collins. In
the third year of the project, a colloquium will be conducted to discuss
science, energy issues, third-world country involvement in energy topics,
intellectual property, and international treaties related to microbial
diversity.