* 0950474
* Expanding the Genetic Code with Phosphothreonine and Phosphotyrosine
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/2010,01/31/2014
* Dieter Soll, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 01/31/2014
* USD 567,397.00

Synthesis of proteins containing amino acids outside of the genetic code has
recently resurfaced as a topic of much interest and presents a great challenge
intellectually and technically. Reprogramming the genetic code requires two key
events: (i) The creation of a new efficient 'orthogonal' aminoacyl tRNA
synthetase:tRNA pair able to generate solely a non-canonical aminoacyl tRNA.
(ii) The ability to specify the position in which this amino acid will be
inserted in the protein by recoding a particular mRNA codon. Based on the
natural existence of two archaeal aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase-like proteins
(O-phosphoseryl tRNA synthetase with its cognate tRNACys and pyrrolysyl-tRNA
synthetase with its cognate tRNAPyl) research will be initiated to develop an
Escherichia coli system for the in vivo co translational insertion of
phosphothreonine and phosphotyrosine at pre-determined positions in a
polypeptide based on the nonsense codons UGA and UAG in a messenger RNA. Given
the importance of phosphothreonine and phosphotyrosine in eukaryotic proteins
essential for cell proliferation, cellular signaling, and cell death, a robust
method of making proteins containing phospho-amino acids will have wide
application and great significance. &lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts resulting
from this project are: (i) The experimental tools to be developed will be widely
employed in the future by other researchers in the life sciences. (ii)
Development of a viable patent will contribute to commercial technology. (iii)
This project will provide interdisciplinary training for undergraduate and
postdoctoral students.