* 0950983
* Integration Mechanism of Site Specific Non-LTR Retrotransposons
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2015
* Shawn Christensen, University of Texas at Arlington
* Continuing Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 01/31/2015
* USD 677,961.00

Retrotransposons are ubiquitous genomic parasites found in nearly all eukaryotes
and constitute a major component of these genomes. Replication of
retrotransposons results in chromosomal aberrations including insertions,
deletions, and double stranded breaks. Upon integration into the genome,
retrotransposons can affect cellular gene expression and can act as a source of
new genes. Non-long terminal repeat retrotransposons (NLRs) in particular have
played a central role in this process. The integration machinery of these
elements is responsible for most of the reverse transcribed material in animal
genomes, including short interspersed nucleotide elements (SINEs), pseudogenes,
and retrogenes. For example, over 34% of the human genome is the direct result
of NLR activity. In addition, NLR elements' or their progenitors' played a role
in the origin of retroviruses. A detailed knowledge of the replication mechanism
of NLRs is essential to understanding how retrotransposons interact with the
genome. Certain aspects of element integration, especially target primed reverse
transcription (a process whereby an RNA transcript is copied into a DNA strand
at the site of insertion), are reasonably well understood; however, how the
integration process is completed (e.g., how double stranded DNA is made from the
products of target primed reverse transcription), and how NLRs can change their
integration site specificity is a mystery. A mechanistic understanding of full
integration has eluded study until now because of the complexity of the reaction
and the lack of the right tools to address the question. In vivo systems using
mutant NLR elements to the search for structure function relationships are often
hard to interpret when the mutant fails to integrate. In vitro models have been
missing a key RNA component that is required for complete integration to occur.
This research will explore the second half of the integration reaction by
restoring the missing RNA component - enabling full integration events to occur
in vitro as well as in vivo. How site specific NLRs interact with DNA and change
site specificity over time will also be addressed with the hopes of developing
NLRs into a site specific gene targeting vector. Both aims will provide
information on not only the integration mechanism of the elements used in this
study but also on the integration of all NLRs. The core mechanism of integration
is believed to be conserved for this class of retroelements and shares
mechanistic similarities to (and evolutionary connections with) telomere
elongation, group II homing introns, and
retroviruses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The biochemical study of
(NLRs) will be of interest to people in transposon biology, genome biology,
evolutionary biology, and to those in the retroviral and biomedical fields. The
University of Texas Arlington has high numbers of underrepresented groups in its
graduate and undergraduate programs. This diversity is reflected in the makeup
of the investigator's lab; the majority of the graduate and undergraduate
researchers in the investigator's lab are from underrepresented groups. This
research will be disseminated through peer reviewed journals and scientific
meetings. The investigator is a guest lecturer in continuing education classes
for local K-12 teachers where he talks about transposons, gene formation, and
genomics; topics central to this research. These topics are also covered in the
undergraduate and graduate courses the investigator teaches using research from
the investigators lab.