* 0950100
* LTREB:  Long-term studies of secondary succession and community assembly in the prairie-forest ecotone of eastern Kansas
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2016
* Bryan Foster, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 03/31/2016
* USD 267,524.00

Understanding how local and regional processes interact to regulate the
structure and functioning of ecological systems is crucial for predicting the
influence of human activity on biodiversity and ecosystem sustainability. This
project continues two long-term field experiments in Kansas grasslands
investigating effects of soil fertility and seed availability on grassland
community dynamics in response to disturbance. Both experiments manipulate soil
nutrients through fertilization and employ multi-species seed additions to
manipulate availability of species to sites undergoing succession. Experiment 1
involves manipulations of soil nitrogen and phosphorus to examine plant
community development on abandoned agricultural land. Experiment 2 parallels
Experiment 1 with manipulations of soil resources and seed availability, but
does so in the context of hay management and prairie hay meadow restoration.

Results from these long-term experiments will yield basic insights into the
assembly and functioning of plant communities while informing the conservation
and restoration of grasslands, particularly with respect to native hay meadows
which are important repositories of prairie diversity in eastern Kansas. The
project will contribute to the development of the University of Kansas Field
Station (KUFS), complement ongoing research at KUFS in grassland and restoration
ecology, and will support the education and training of graduate, undergraduate
and high school students.