* 0950005
* Meiotic Functions of Mps1
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2013
* Dean Dawson, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 02/28/2013
* USD 292,298.00

During the growth of somatic cells, mitotic divisions partition one copy of each
chromosome to each daughter cell. The production of gametes requires a special
form of chromosome partitioning, meiosis, in which two sequential rounds
chromosome segregation yield gametes with half the number of chromosomes of the
somatic cells. The meiotic process is accomplished in part by layering
specialized levels of meiosis-specific control upon the cellular machinery that
is used for mitosis. Identifying these meiosis-specific controls is central to
deciphering the mechanisms that are used to achieve high fidelity chromosome
segregation in meiosis. MPS1 encodes a conserved, essential, kinase that has
been shown be involved in several key steps in chromosome segregation in both
mitotic and meiotic cells in many species. Mps1 is involved in: 1) duplication
of the spindle pole body (in budding yeast), the structure that organizes the
assembly of microtubules into the spindle that will pull the segregating
chromosomes apart, 2) participation in the spindle assembly checkpoint mechanism
that signals to the cell that a chromosome is attached inappropriately to
microtubules, 3) mediating the release of these inappropriate attachments so
that new ones can form, and 4) (in budding yeast) promoting the proper assembly
of spore walls. Because of the multiple roles of Mps1 protein, MPS1 mutants
often have complex phenotypes that are not informative for genetic studies. The
recent discovery of a specific mutation, mps1-R170S has opened the door to
exploring meiosis-specific roles for Mps1. mps1-R170S mutants have very mild
defects in mitotic growth but catastrophic defects in chromosome segregation in
meiosis. msp1-R170S mutants exhibit very high levels of chromosome segregation
errors in both the first and second meiotic division. Thus the mps1-R170S
destroys only some functions of Mps1 (meiosis-specific functions) and provides
the opportunity to study those defects in ways that should reveal the role of
the Mps1 protein in meiosis. Preliminary data suggest two hypotheses for the
role of Mps1 in meiosis. This project will test these hypotheses. Either
hypothesis, or a combination of the two, would explain the observed meiotic
behavior mps1-R170S mutants. The first hypothesis is that Mps1 plays an
essential meiotic role in dissolving kinetochore-microtubule attachments. By
this hypothesis, kinetochores are attached early in both meiotic divisions to
microtubules from only one spindle pole body and Mps1 is required to release
these attachments so that attachments to both spindle pole bodies can be formed.
The second hypothesis is that Mps1 is required to release an association between
sister chromatids in meiosis. According to this hypothesis a persistent
association of sister chromatids locks homologous chromosomes together in
meiosis I, forcing them to move together to one spindle pole at meiosis I, and
forcing sister chromatids to move to one pole at meiosis II. A final objective
of this proposal is to use genetic approaches to identify the partners with
which Mps1 interacts in meiosis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Because
Mps1 is highly conserved, these studies of Mps1 in yeast meiosis may reveal
general principles of Mps1 function, and mitotic and meiotic chromosome
behavior, that are widely applicable to most eukaryotic organisms. The project
will provide a training opportunity for one post-doctoral researcher. In
addition, this project will be used to provide summer students, from a local
high school and undergraduate training program, with independent research
projects. In this program the students will learn fundamentals of genetics while
contributing to the analysis of genes that interact with Mps1 in meiosis. The
post-doctoral researcher will not only perform most of the experiments on the
project but will serve as comentor for the undergraduate/high school trainees.