* 0950374
* RUI: (LiT): Mitigation of Dehydration-Induced Nanomechanical Failure in Arabidopsis
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2014
* Ronald Balsamo, Villanova University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 02/28/2014
* USD 422,000.00

Names: Ronald A. Balsamo and Bradley E. Layton&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal
Number: 0950374 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Title: RUI: (LiT): Mitigation of
Dehydration-Induced Nanomechanical Failure in Arabidopsis
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this project is to investigate how
individual genes of a model organism, the plant Arabidopsis thaliana, contribute
to its ability to survive drought conditions. As the world's population
continues to climb and agricultural resources are at a premium, the need to
develop crops becomes paramount. Understanding the molecular mechanisms that
have evolved that enable plants to survive drought will prove to have increasing
importance as global weather patterns continue to become more uncertain.
Arabidopsis thaliana was selected for several reasons: 1) Its genome has been
fully sequenced; 2) There are well-established stocks of mutants with individual
genes knocked out or enhanced; 3) It has a rapid generation time (seed to seed);
4) Large quantities of plant materials can be grown under laboratory conditions;
5) There is a rich literature on its anatomy, physiology and its genetics; 6) It
represents a class of plants that may have formed a bridge between ancestral
desiccation-tolerant species and the C4 crops that are now largely responsible
for feeding the world's human population; and 7) The plant body is small enough
to allow the entire plant may be imaged inside an environmental scanning
electron microscope. In order to gain a deeper comprehension of how water loss
affects cell and cell wall deformation, the individual mechanical contributions
that specific cell wall components (lignin, cellulose, xylose, fucose,
arabinose, and rhamnose) make to plant survival under drought conditions will be
investigated. These findings have the potential to direct future efforts in
plant breeding and engineering of more drought-tolerant species.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The funding from this proposal will be used to mentor
undergraduate students from Villanova University and Drexel University, as well
as through a two-week summer program for local high school teachers.