* 0950342
* EAGER: Tackling Vulnerabilities in Cognitive Radio Networks:  A Game Theoretic Approach
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2009,02/29/2012
* Mainak Chatterjee, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 02/29/2012
* USD 100,000.00

Cognitive radio networks (CRNs) operate on secondary spectrum bands, where they
opportunistically access and use under-utilized spectrum bands. Though research
on CRNs is gaining momentum, there is still little or no understanding of how
these networks will fair in the face of attacks. Moreover, the addition of new
architectures and protocols bring more vulnerabilities that have not been seen
before.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will make use of game theoretic
techniques to develop pragmatic design methodologies that will lead to more
efficient algorithms and protocols for tackling vulnerabilities in cognitive
radio networks while maintaining high spectrum usage. The intellectual merit of
this project lies in the execution of four tasks. These are 1) devising and
solving malicious node detection games where malicious nodes(s) will be detected
and isolated by regular nodes, 2) devising mechanisms that will enforce
cooperation among cognitive radio nodes such that they use the commonly
available spectrum in a co-operative manner, 3) developing rules and policies
such that nodes belonging to different networks can co-exist, and 4) studying
the performance trade-offs on service guarantees when policies are set in a
dynamic manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact of this project will include
the dissemination of the research results by means of conference and journal
publications. Minority and women students will be recruited as research
assistants to assist the PI in his efforts. The PI will not only educate the
students at UCF about the vulnerabilities in CRNs but will also help the
academic and industrial efforts bring the cognitive radio technology to the
market place.&lt;br/&gt;