* 0950601
* How much input is required for infant language learning: Exploring the distribution of types and tokens
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2010,05/31/2015
* LouAnn Gerken, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Laura Namy
* 05/31/2015
* USD 394,149.00

Infants and children are remarkably adept at learning language, much more adept
in fact than their parents. Until recently, two theories competed to explain the
language learning skill of young children. In one view, infants and children are
like sponges, soaking up every detail of their environment, including the
linguistic environment. In a competing view, infants come into the world with
the range of human languages (or grammars) already "built-in." Their linguistic
environment serves only to allow them to select the particular grammar of their
native language, such as what speech sounds will be used, whether verbs come in
the middle or the end of sentences, etc. Recently, a third view has begun
gaining support. This view shares the position of the first view that infants
and children are highly sensitive to every detail of their environment. It
shares the position of the second view that infants and children have as their
goal determining the particular linguistic system or grammar of their community.
One way to discriminate among these three theories is the amount and kind of
input required for optimal language learning. The first "sponge" view (or
Associative theories) suggests that a great deal of input is needed and that it
does not matter much whether that input consists of many repetitions (tokens) of
the same example (type; e.g., hearing the word dogs as the plural of dog
multiple times) or different examples (e.g., hearing dogs, pigs, and mugs as the
plurals of their respective singulars). The second "built-in grammars" view (or
Innate Domain theories) suggests that extremely little input is needed and that
even a single repetition of a single example is sufficient for the infant or
child to learn a particular component of the native language. The third
"grammar-seeking sponge" view (or Hypothesis Selection theories) suggests that a
very small number (e.g., three) of different examples are needed for learning
and that different examples are much more helpful than repetitions of an
example. This project will compare these three theories by asking about the
amount of input needed for language learning. It also attempts to embed the
third theory in a more realistic model of human learners by asking if learning
always improves as the number of examples increases, or whether there is a
trade-off between the number of examples and the number of repetitions of each
example.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will contribute to our scientific
knowledge by asking whether humans are reflections of their environment, their
biology, or whether and how the mind is a product of a biological brain with a
primary goal of "making sense" of the environment. Moreover, because the
research draws on existing studies of infant vision and infant social
interaction, it places the study of language development in a broader
developmental context. Finally, the research explores the specific kinds of
input that maximize learning. Therefore, it has the potential to ultimately
inform how we present linguistic and other information to infants, school
children, and even adults in order to result in the best possible learning in
the shortest possible time.