* 0950385
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Mechanics of Empire and Integration -- the Role of Small-scale Inca Installations in the Colesuyo Region of Southern Peru
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2012
* Patrick Williams, Field Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2012
* USD 19,990.00

Under the direction of Dr. Patrick Ryan Williams, Sofia Chacaltana will explore
how local economies were transformed under Inca imperial rule of the Colesuyo
region in Southern Peru. Ms Chacaltana will excavate the coastal archaeological
site of Tacahuay that has evidence of Inca architecture and appears to be an
Inca way station (tambo). Tambos were installations systematically built along
the main and secondary roads of the empire. She will also excavate in houses
around the way station to see how the Inca presence affected the local
population. Data gathered from this excavation will be compared with the Inca
site of Camata Tambo, an Inca waystation and adjacent local peoples' houses
located in the highlands of the Colesuyo territory. Excavations will focus on
imperial central storage systems and nearby houses to better understand the
political and economic interests of the empire in the
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite what is known about Inca imperial
strategies of integration, little is understood about the way the empire
impacted local communities and regional interactions. Ms Chacaltana will conduct
small-scale excavations in the Tacahuay Inca storage structures, and in four
houses from Tacahuay Pueblo to detect the types and quantities of products kept
in these state-controlled and locally controlled spaces. This information will
help to understand the way local consumption and local storing technologies
changed from the pre-Inca to Inca period. In addition, this investigation
contributes to understanding how imperial actions impact local interests,
resources, and political and economic demands, a priority in today's global
economy. Based on archaeological and historical data from Colesuyo, three models
will be tested to observe the imperial impact in local communities of this
region. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ms Chacaltana will analyze plant and animal
remains as well as chemical composition of ceramic fragments to observe local
and regional exchange of goods during the Inca period. Preliminary
investigations conducted at Camata Tambo storehouses and nearby agricultural
facilities - located in the upper Moquegua Valley - showed that these imperial
storage systems kept goods from different ecological zones of Colesuyo and more
distance regions. It also showed an intensification of maize production and a
growing storage preference for potatoes. By focusing on storage patterns in two
small-scale Inca installations (tambos), this project will observe imperial
variability in two ecological settings of the Andes. Several lab methodologies
and lines of data will be used to observe how imperial presence in a region is
the dynamic result of both imperial and local
interests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this research rests on the
fact that it creates a multi-national research cooperation that will contribute
to strengthen the relationships between US and Peruvian investigators.
Ms&lt;br/&gt;Chacaltana works with the Contisuyo Program, an international
archaeological research institution located in the city of Moquegua, of which
she is an active member. The Contisuyo Program has a strong commitment to public
outreach and local education. Finally, Ms Chacaltana will closely work with
local governments to help create awareness of the importance of pre-Hispanic
site management and cultural heritage.