* 0950370
* Selection and generation of limb movements by a combination of multifunctional and specialized spinal interneurons
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2010,09/30/2014
* David Maxwell, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 09/30/2014
* USD 198,000.00

Ari Berkowitz&lt;br/&gt;Proposal #0950370&lt;br/&gt;Selection and generation of
limb movements by a combination of multifunctional and specialized spinal
interneurons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Animals and people must constantly decide how
to move their limbs. They often do so without conscious awareness. Their nervous
systems are responsible for making and implementing decisions about limb
movements that are appropriate for each situation. The turtle spinal cord is an
excellent model system to investigate how this is done. The turtle spinal cord
can appropriately produce several types of swimming, scratching, and limb
withdrawal movements, even without input from the brain, essentially using
programs that are stored within networks of spinal cord interneurons.
(Interneurons are the nerve cells in between sensory neurons and motor neurons;
motor neurons excite muscles to contract.) Turtles are also easier to study
physiologically than mammals because their tissues remain healthy in
physiologically challenging conditions. &lt;br/&gt;This project will use
electrophysiological, anatomical, immunocytochemical, and pharmacological
methods to study two types of spinal cord interneurons previously identified by
this group of researchers. Interneurons of one type, called transverse
interneurons, are active during several kinds of limb movements, and thus are
multifunctional. Interneurons of the other type, called scratch-specialized
interneurons, are activated during scratching but are often inhibited during
swimming. For each type of interneuron, this project will determine which
neurotransmitter(s) the interneurons use, and therefore whether they are
excitatory or inhibitory; the project will also determine which neurotransmitter
inhibits scratch-specialized interneurons during swimming. Finally, the project
will determine whether interneurons of each type directly contact motor neurons.
This project will thus test specific hypotheses about how neuronal networks
combine multifunctional and specialized interneurons to select and generate limb
movements. The project may reveal mechanisms that nervous systems use to make
and implement movement decisions, not only in turtles but in vertebrates
generally. &lt;br/&gt;This project will also provide training to two graduate
students and to undergraduates in electrophysiological, anatomical,
pharmacological, and general scientific approaches.