* 0950445
* Symposium S on Organic Materials &amp; Devices for Sustainable Energy Systems; Boston, MA; November 30 - December 4, 2009
* MPS,DMR
* 11/15/2009,10/31/2010
* Russell Holmes, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 10/31/2010
* USD 5,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SSMC program will support young
faculty to attend the MRS Fall Meeting Symposium S on Organic Materials &amp;
Devices for Sustainable Energy Systems. Organic semiconductors are attractive
for application in electronic devices due to their high performance, as well as
their compatibility with low-cost, high-throughput processing techniques. The
continued expansion of organic electronics is driven by the cross-disciplinary
expertise of both academic and industrial researchers. This partnership has led
to significant advances in the fundamental understanding of these materials, as
well as improvements in the efficiency and operational stability of organic
electronic and optoelectronic devices. Many of these systems are being actively
developed as part of next generation, energy efficient displays and solid-state
lighting fixtures, as well as in&lt;br/&gt;photovoltaics for low-cost solar
energy utilization. To fully capitalize on these unique devices, significant
gaps in fundamental understanding as well as non-trivial technological
challenges must be overcome. This symposium will include significant new
developments in the understanding and implementation of organic semiconductors
for sustainable energy applications including displays, lighting, and
photovoltaics. Other topics of interest include device physics, development and
characterization of new materials and device architectures, and novel processing
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Symposium S on Organic Materials &amp; Devices for
Sustainable Energy Systems at the Fall MRS Meeting is geared toward research
presentations regarding the use of organic semiconductors for the efficient
generation and use of energy. The confirmed invited speakers include many top
researchers in white organic light-emitting devices and in organic photovoltaic
cells. The grant will provide funds for junior faculty to attend this
meeting.&lt;br/&gt;