* 0950741
* Conference Support for Biofunctional Architectures - Reversible Interactions and Surface Recognition Symposium; San Francisco, CA; Spring 2010
* MPS,DMR
* 12/15/2009,11/30/2010
* Tonya Kuhl, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 11/30/2010
* USD 4,000.00

This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials Research to
University of California Davis is to provide partial support for the attendance
of graduate students, postdocs and young faculty members at a symposium on
"Biofunctional Architectures ? Reversible Interactions and Surface Recognition
Symposium." This symposium will be held as part of the American Chemical Society
Spring Meeting in San Francisco, California from March 22 to 24, 2010.
Scientific themes of the conference will include theoretical, computational
modeling and experimental aspects on: a) Biofunctional architectures for
targeting and nano-technology; b) Reversibly associating polymer thin-films; c)
Dynamics of tethered ligand-receptor interactions; and d) Biomolecular self-
assembly on surfaces. This symposium is expected to provide knowledge base for
the rapid advancement of computational and experimental work towards elucidating
the structures and interactions responsible for the functionality of biological
materials found in nature. A key challenge now is to utilize this knowledge
towards the development of bio-mimetic systems for technological applications
such as drug targeting, biosensing-arrays, biomolecule based devices, medical
nanotechnology, and the creation of new materials with ultra
functionalities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact of the conference is to
bring together students, junior scientists and leading researchers from USA and
abroad to advance the knowledge base for biofucntional architectures. In
addition, this conference is expected to create interactions and collaborations
among current and future researchers in the field. Towards this goal, wide
dissemination of the scientific information presented and discussed during the
symposium will be accomplished through a special issue of Biointerphases, an
open access online journal. Articles in this special issue "In Focus" will be
after the normal review process and criteria of Biointerphases.