* 0950373
* Measuring the Security Posture of Large Financial Enterprises: An EAGER Proposal to NSF CCF
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Salvatore Stolfo, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2012
* USD 300,000.00

To develop computer security as a science and engineering discipline, metrics
need to be defined to evaluate the safety and security of alternative system
designs. Security policies are often specified by large organizations but there
are no direct means to evaluate how well these policies are followed by human
users. The proposed project explores fundamental means of measuring the security
posture of large enterprises. Risk management and risk mitigation requires
measurement to assess alternative outcomes in any decision process. The project
is intended to devise metrics and measurement methods, and test and evaluate
these in a real institution, to evaluate how human users behave in a security
context. Financial institutions in particular require significant controls over
the handling of confidential financial information and employees must adhere to
these policies to protect assets, which are subject to continual adversarial
attack by thieves and fraudsters. Hence, financial institutions are the primary
focus of the measurement work. The technical means of measuring user actions
that may violate security policy is performed in a non-intrusive manner. The
measurement system uses specially crafted decoy documents and email messages
that signal when they have been opened or copied by a user in violation of
policy. The project will develop collaborations with financial experts to devise
risk models associated with users of information technology within large
enterprises. This line of work extends traditional research in computer security
by opening up a new area focused on the human aspect of security.