* 0950376
* How Words and Sounds Influence Category Formation in Infancy
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2014
* Susan Hespos, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2014
* USD 389,594.00

The research will clarify the effect of words on categorization in the first
months of life and trace the developmental trajectory of this effect over the
first year of life. The starting point for these studies is a recent
demonstration by the investigators that words promoted object categorization in
infants as young as 3 months, and do so in a way that carefully matched tones do
not. This result opens several new avenues for investigation, each of which will
bear on fundamental questions concerning the relation between language and
conceptual organization in the first year of life. The project will identify
what it is about speech stimuli that promote object categorization over and
above the effect of tone sequences in infants so young. The proposed experiments
test the hypothesis that human speech engenders in very young infants a
heightened attention to the surrounding objects, and that this very general
attentional effect later becomes more specific as infants become attuned to the
speech sounds of their own ambient language. Pursuing this hypothesis requires
an examination of 3- to 12-month-old infants' treatment of a broad range of
auditory stimuli. To discover whether the facilitative effect of words on
categorization is specific to linguistic stimuli or evident for other complex
stimuli as well, the proposed experiments use a preferential-looking task. In
this task, the infant is presented with a series of individual pictures followed
by a test trial in which the infant is presented with a novel and a familiar
picture side-by-side, and the investigators measure how much time the infant
spends looking at each picture. The project investigates the effects of auditory
stimuli including naturalistic speech from a range of languages, filtered
speech, backwards speech, mammal vocalizations, and bird calls. Another focus of
this project is to investigate the developmental trajectory for infants growing
up in bilingual homes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project, focused on typically-
developing infants, will have broad impact on theories of normative development
in monolingual and bilingual infants and will have implications for
interventions with atypically-developing infants and young children. The
research focuses on two uniquely human capacities -- language and conceptual
development -- and explores an emerging link between them. By mapping out the
development of this link, the proposed studies will put practitioners in a
better position to identify patterns that deviate from typical development.
Moreover, by considering infants growing up bilingual, this work will address
crucial questions about consequences of processing two languages in the first
years of life, and will advance efforts to promote positive developmental
outcomes for the ever-increasing number of bilingual infants and young children
in the United States. Finally, this basic research can also serve as a
springboard for developing targeted interventions for young children diagnosed
with language delay and impairments, as well as those diagnosed with autistic
spectrum disorders.