* 0950410
* Describing the Operating System for Accurate User-mode Simulation
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* J. Eliot Moss, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Krishna Kant
* 08/31/2012
* USD 216,000.00

This is an EAGER project that addresses a highly exploratory investigation into
key elements needed to specify the characteristics of an operating system (OS)
in a way that permits an architectural model to be created that interacts fully
with a suite of simulation tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The suite of tools,
CoGenT (CoGeneration of Tools), include specification languages to allow
researchers to express novel instruction sets and micro-architectures and the
infrastructure for automatic generation of corresponding functional and timing
co-simulators, compilers, linkers, loaders, debuggers, assemblers,
disassemblers, and a fully integrated instrumentation facility to enable
meaningful experimentation within this new design space. CoGenT?s ability to
automatically generate a functional simulator from a specification, and other
related elements, will be released this year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EAGER
addresses the problem that, in simulating complex architectures, it is important
to be able to specify OS support, not just as a set of external calls, but as a
specific model that integrates with the rest of the architecture. Current
architectures rely on the services and policies of the operating system, and the
operating system itself needs to evolve with the radical shifts in architecture
and applications that are anticipated in the next
decade.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this project, this team develops an approach
that enables simultaneous research into novel hardware and software paradigms,
with great flexibility, and without the heretofore prohibitive cost of manually
building a complete hardware and software simulation infrastructure with a
tailored OS implementation. Traditional system simulation approaches either
ignored OS impact on performance or resorted to costly and inflexible full
system simulation where an actual OS implementation is executed directly. The
former provides unrealistic results, and the latter does not admit the kind of
exploration needed for transformative paradigm shifts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this project is to extend the relatively recent approach of functional
and timing co-simulation for hardware architectures into "pseudo-full system
simulation", where the OS becomes a first-class element in the simulation
modeling and instrumentation framework. Simulating an OS model derived from a
specification will also enable sensitivity and significance analyses, often
neglected in current simulation-based research even though they are essential to
understanding the real impact of new approaches.