* 0950285
* The Interaction of Calcium and Chloride at the Oxygen Evolving Complex of Photosystem II
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2014
* Alice Haddy, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Continuing Grant
* Michele McGuirl
* 02/28/2014
* USD 522,998.00

Intellectual Merit In the utilization of energy on earth, photosynthesis by
higher plants has a profound effect. It is the source of hydrocarbon energy for
nearly all life forms through the capture of the sun's light energy and it is
almost the sole source of dioxygen for respiration. A thorough understanding of
the photosynthetic process is central to our ability to provide for our own
energy needs in the future. Photosystem II is one of the two major light
absorbing reaction centers of higher plants and cyanobacteria. It also contains
the site of oxygen evolution, an unusual Mn4Ca catalytic center. The mechanism
of the multiple step conversion of water into dioxygen is still not well
understood. Both calcium and chloride are important participants in this process
and they appear to interact with each other during oxygen production. As a part
of the Mn4Ca cluster, calcium probably has a direct role in oxygen formation.
Although chloride is not directly coordinated to the Mn4Ca cluster, it is
required for transitions to higher oxidation states and appears to stabilize the
calcium ion. This project is intended to help clarify the role of calcium in
photosystem II of higher plants and its relationship to activation by chloride.
The approach used will be to characterize the effects of calcium depletion or
disruption at the Mn4Ca catalytic center. Two methods for biochemically
disturbing the function of calcium will be used: treatment with mildly reduced
pH and moderately high sodium chloride concentration; and treatment with
fluoride, a competitive inhibitor of chloride activation. The results of these
treatments will be examined using electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR)
spectroscopy, a technique that is used to study molecules with unpaired
electrons. A major objective of this project is to clarify the effects of
calcium and chloride on the EPR signals from the oxygen evolving complex. To
complement these studies, a second major objective is to use enzyme kinetics to
characterize the interdependence of calcium and chloride in the activation of
oxygen evolution.

Broader Impact This project will be carried out in a department that has a major
focus on involving undergraduate and Master's level graduate students in
research. The university is a mid-sized public institution with a student
population that is ethnically diverse and a traditional emphasis on
undergraduate education. The university has recently experienced a growth in
graduate programs, including a new PhD program in the department housing the
project. The Principle Investigator has previously trained numerous beginning
researchers, who have gone on to further graduate study or careers in industry,
and the current project is designed to continue this type of training. The
project involves a range of biochemical and biophysical techniques appropriate
for various levels of experience. Beginning researchers can work fairly
independently on experiments involving enzyme kinetics analyses and participate
in the preparation and work-up of samples intended for EPR spectroscopy. Those
more interested in the physical aspects of the research can participate directly
in spectroscopic measurements and analysis. Overall, students gain exposure to
both commonly used biochemical methods and more specialized spectroscopic
techniques. Because of the great importance that photosynthetic processes have
for supporting life in general, the presence on campus of a project that is
focused on light energy conversion and oxygen production will help to raise
awareness about energy utilization issues.