* 0950976
* Coordinating Developmental Gene Expression in Myxococcus xanthus
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2014
* Anthony Garza, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Ben Holt
* 07/31/2014
* USD 428,816.00

Anthony G. Garza&lt;br/&gt;IOS-0950976&lt;br/&gt;Coordinating Developmental Gene
Expression in Myxococcus xanthus &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most bacteria
live in organized multicellular communities called biofilms. Biofilms have been
linked to a variety of problems important to humans: biofilms contaminate water
supplies, medical equipment, and industrial machinery, and biofilms cause many
persistent infections. A fundamental goal in microbiology is to understand how
these interesting and important bacterial communities develop. Recently, it has
become apparent that bacteria use a number of conserved design principles to
build a biofilm. Namely, cells produce extracellular signals to communicate
information about cell density and cell position and this information is used to
regulate the temporal and spatial expression of developmental genes. This
project focuses on the regulation of developmental genes in Myxococcus xanthus.
When starving, M. xanthus forms a biofilm containing a thin mat of cells and
multicellular fruiting body structures. A cascade of enhancer binding proteins
(EBPs), which is designed to respond to a variety of extracellular signals, is
used to regulate many developmental genes. The long-term goal of this project is
to understand how this regulatory network coordinates developmental gene
expression and, ultimately, how it promotes the assembly of a biofim. The EBP
Nla4 functions at the front end of the cascade, regulating the entry into
development. The aim of this project is to understand how Nla4 helps cells
navigate through this critical juncture in development. Specifically, this
project aims to find Nla4 target genes, to understand how Nla4 recognizes target
promoters and to determine whether these target genes are important for
development. It seems likely that regulatory networks analogous to the EBP
cascade will be a common theme in bacteria that make biofilms, since they must
also process a variety of signal information to properly regulate their
developmental genes. Therefore, we believe that this project will lead to a
model for gene regulation that is pertinent to many bacterial systems.