* 0950550
* Evolutionary Diversification of Photosynthesis and the Anoxygenic to Oxygenic Transition
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Ferran Garcia-Pichel, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 08/31/2014
* USD 867,133.00

Drs. J. Touchman (Arizona State Univ), R. Blankenship (Washinton State Univ) and
M. Madigan (Southern Illinois Univ.) are carrying out the genome sequencing and
metabolic analysis of five photosynthetic prokaryotes. Organisms for this
project were chosen to provide significantly wider coverage of genomes of
phototrophic taxa than is now available. The broad goals of the project are to
use the genomic data to understand the origin and evolution of photosynthesis
and to explore mechanisms of the anoxygenic to oxygenic transition. The
organisms being sequenced include species that live at low temperature
(psychrophilic), high temperature (thermophilic), high pH (alkaliphilic), in
environments subject to periodic drying, and environments high in sulfide. The
organisms chosen include two heliobacteria, Heliorestis convoluta and
Heliophilum fasciatum; four proteobacteria, Rhodoferax antarcticus, Rhodopila
globiformis, Blastochloris viridis, and Thermochromatium tepidum; and one
cyanobacterium, Leptolyngbya (a.k.a. Oscillatoria) amphigranulata. The
proteobacteria include members from the beta and gamma divisions and one that
contains bacteriochlorophyll b as its principal photopigment. The finished,
annotated genome sequences are being used to fill large gaps in the available
genomic data for photosynthetic prokaryotes. The metabolic capabilities of these
organisms are also being analyzed using pathway analysis software tools. Each
organism has individual characteristics that justify its inclusion in a genome-
sequencing project, including evolutionary relationships, agricultural
applications and environmental aspects.&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Touchman is involved in
the Be a Biologist program at ASU. All of the investigators are involving
undergraduate and high school students in sequence analysis and annotation
activities in their labs.