* 0950447
* Collaborative Research: Plant heat tolerance through cross-kingdom interactions
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2014
* Russell Rodriguez, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 03/31/2014
* USD 520,000.00

Most plants cannot grow when soil temperatures reach levels that are above 100
°F. However, in Yellowstone National Park soil temperatures can be much higher
in the geothermal areas, and occasionally plants can be found growing in soils
in temperatures up to 125 °F. These plants have a fungus, called Curvularia
protuberata that grows in them, and they cannot grow in these soil temperatures
without the fungus. The fungus itself is infected with a virus, and the virus
also is required for the whole thermal tolerant system of plant, fungus and
virus (called a symbiosis) to survive. However, the interactions between the
virus and fungus in this system and other microbe-interacting systems in the
environment are very poorly understood. A crucial key to the understanding of
adaptive changes in response to environmental stress is missing. In addition,
very few beneficial viruses have been described or studied.

The long-term goal of the research is to understand how plants and mutualistic
microorganisms interact with one another and their surrounding environments to
acquire stress tolerance. This project will study the physiology and genetics
that define the mechanism of this interaction. Its goals are to:

1) Identify and characterize additional plant-fungus-virus symbionts that are
thermotolerant;

2) Identify the genetic expression and metabolite changes of plants and fungi
involved in the three way symbiosis during heat stress;

3) Study how the proteins from each organism interact; and

4) Test the genes discovered for their effects on tolerance to heat.

With changes in the Earth's climate and the need to produce more and more food
for the increasing human population, learning how plants adapt naturally to
environmental changes such as are seen in Yellowstone National Park will provide
tools will potential application to agriculture.