* 0950957
* RUI: Exceptionally Short Telomeres in Filamentous Fungi and the RNA that Makes Them
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2010,02/29/2016
* Karen Kirk, Lake Forest College
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 02/29/2016
* USD 270,830.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt; Telomeres are the very tips of chromosomes and
have been studied intensely for their role in the replicative capacity of cancer
and stem cells. In higher organisms, the telomeres of sperm and egg are longer
than those of other cells, which have led to the hypothesis that lengthening of
telomeres in germ cells is needed to reset the biological clock with every
generation. Microbes that have a variety of different cell types provide a
tractable means to address the question of telomere length in sex cells.
Furthermore, such a group of microbes, the filamentous fungi, are among the
species with the shortest telomeres known. One limitation of further studying
these fungi is that one of the fundamental genes in telomere synthesis has yet
to be identified. This gene encodes the telomerase RNA, which provides the
template for synthesizing telomeres and is therefore crucial for life. Since
telomerase RNA genes are highly divergent, with almost no sequence identity
between organisms, they are much harder to identify than other genes in a new
group of organisms. This project describes experiments to identify the first
telomerase RNA in a group of microbes, the filamentous fungi. The experiments
will take advantage of a long telomere repeat sequence, fortuitously present in
a filamentous fungus of food microbiology, to devise a cross-disciplinary
approach utilizing bioinformatics and molecular genetics. The length of the
telomere repeat sequence means that the number of possible gene candidates will
be reduced. Identifying the first telomerase RNA gene sequence within a diverse
group of filamentous fungi will ultimately lead to a better understanding of
telomere length regulation in sex cells and other cells, interactions between
the telomerase RNA and essential proteins, and the evolution of this highly
divergent gene.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;Although this
project is focused on gaining a better understanding of the role of telomeres in
cell development, there are many outcomes that will benefit the broader
scientific community. First, undergraduates will develop new tools, such as a
novel telomere diagnostic assay, providing scientists in other laboratories with
an easier way to study telomere length. This assay will be disseminated to the
scientific community in the form of a peer-reviewed publication with
undergraduate coauthors. Second, undergraduates will collaborate with scientists
from around the world. Finally, the results of the research extend well beyond
the molecular scope of this laboratory. For example, identification of the
telomerase RNA gene from a new group of organisms, the filamentous fungi, will
provide data that is of interest to evolutionary biologists and other
scientists. Thus, undergraduates who have had such a broad exposure to research
will continue in their careers by making more educated decisions.