* 0950102
* A Workshop on the Development of Fluid Mechanics Community Software and Data Resources
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2009,10/31/2010
* Robert Moser, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Horst Henning Winter
* 10/31/2010
* USD 61,465.00

0950102&lt;br/&gt;Moser&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One outcome of the NSF-sponsored
workshop 'NSF Workshop on Cyber-Fluid Dynamics: New Frontiers in Research and
Education' held July 19-20, 2007 was a recommendation that the fluid mechanics
community move toward consolidating computational fluid dynamics (CFD) tools as
well as libraries of reference numerical solutions and experimental data
(http://www.nsfcyberfluids. gatech.edu/). A number of communities have benefited
from such a software consolidation. These include the biological molecular
dynamics community with NAMD (http://www/ks.uiuc.edu/Research/namd) and GROMACS
(http://www.gromacs.org), the weather modeling community with WRF (3www.wrf-
model.org), and the geodynamics community with CIG
(http://www.geodynamics.org/). Among the benefits of such a consolidation would
be: lowering barriers to innovation in modeling and numerical methods by
providing a software platform for such innovation, increasing productivity of
CFD-based research by providing well characterized and well established tools
for such research, enabling fluid dynamics research through access to a wide
array of reliable experimental and computational data, and improving standards
for verification and validation to improve reliability of CFD solutions. To
further pursue the possibility and potential processes for developing community
software and data resources, a follow-up workshop specifically focused on the
development and consolidation of such community resources is planned. The
objectives of this workshop are three fold: 1. To explore the likely value and
practical issues associated with development of fluid dynamics community
software and data resources. 2. To develop a set of recommendations regarding
whether and how to move forward to develop such resources. 3. To identify a
group of fluid dynamics researchers who will participate in whatever development
process is recommended. This award is primarily for participant support costs
and will be used to attract a diverse workshop
particiation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workhop grant is cofunded by the ENG,
OCI, and CISE Directorates.