* 0950171
* Ecological and evolutionary dynamics of range limits in the scarlet monkeyflower
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2010,02/28/2015
* Amy Angert, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 02/28/2015
* USD 628,248.00

Although some species range widely across continents while others are found in
only a handful of locations, every species on earth has a geographic
distribution that is circumscribed by range boundaries. The ecological and
evolutionary factors that give rise to range boundaries remain poorly understood
for most species, yet they are of direct relevance for understanding potential
biological responses to climate change. Range boundaries are hypothesized to be
set by the combined action of spatial variation in habitat suitability,
dispersal and gene flow (the movement of individuals and their genes between
populations), and demography (aspects of individual performance and population
growth). Depending on the relative balance of these factors, range margins may
represent stable areas where species have failed to adapt to particular climatic
conditions, or they may represent areas that are the forefront of range shifts
under changing climatic regimes. In this study, factors that limit the
geographic range of the scarlet monkeyflower (Mimulus cardinalis) in western
North America will be investigated using field surveys, population modeling, and
population genetic assays. The goal is to understand how spatial variation in
habitat suitability, gene flow and demography give rise to stable or transient
range boundaries.

An existing partnership with Yosemite National Park will be used to enhance
public dissemination of results of this research. An education ranger will
present information on the biological effects of climate change in national
parks. A postdoctoral researcher, a female doctoral student, and a minority
undergraduate will be trained as part of this project. Undergraduates will
participate in a summer program at Colorado State University that enhances the
undergraduate research experience through independent projects and professional
development seminars.