* 0950391
* Analysis of Regional Phase Data from USArray
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2014
* Peter Shearer, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 04/30/2014
* USD 251,137.00

Scientists from Scripps Institution of Oceanography (SIO), University of
California, San Diego (UCSD), are analyzing seismograms from the USArray project
(part of NSF's Earthscope program) from earthquakes and explosions recorded at
regional distances (200 to 2000 km). These data provide new constraints on crust
and upper-mantle structure in the western United States. In particular,
researchers are studying the upper-mantle seismic phases Pn and Sn and the
crustal phases Pg and Lg. The project involves performing Pn tomography using
USArray phase picks, producing maps of crustal thickness and both isotropic and
anisotropic variations in uppermost mantle P velocity that agree with previous
results in their large-scale features but show more detail in many regions.
Preliminary results suggest that Sn data in USArray are of comparable quality,
enabling joint Pn/Sn inversions to constrain uppermost mantle structure and
anisotropy. In many cases, crustal phases such as Lg can be observed to long
distances in the USArray dataset, making possible a comprehensive analysis of Pg
and Lg times and amplitudes to resolve lower crustal velocities and attenuation.
These results complement shear-wave splitting and surface- and body-wave
tomography studies by providing superior resolution for structures at lower
crustal and uppermost mantle depths. This research will lead to improved models
of crust and upper-mantle structure in the western United States, which will be
of interest to the geology, tectonics, and geodynamics communities. The project
supports the educational program at SIO and UCSD by providing funds for a
graduate student. Results will be widely disseminated through publications,
conference presentations, and material provided to SIO's education and outreach
programs.