* 0950873
* Xenorhabdus Mutualsim and Pathogenesis: Temporal Regulation and Function of Symbiosis Factors
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2010,06/30/2014
* Heidi Goodrich-Blair, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Liliana Jaso-Friedmann
* 06/30/2014
* USD 535,224.00

In symbiotic associations animals, including humans, interact with bacteria that
can be either beneficial or harmful. Currently there is limited knowledge of how
bacterial adaptation to different host environments dictates whether a
particular microbe will cause benefit or harm, despite the important
implications of such knowledge in preventing or promoting specific bacterial
interactions. This research focuses on understanding how bacteria sense and
respond to different host environments to initiate expression of either
beneficial or harmful traits. The bacterium being studied expresses beneficial
traits when it is associated with a small soil-dwelling roundworm (nematode),
and expresses virulence traits when it is associated with insect larvae. As part
of its natural life cycle, the nematode transmits (vectors) the bacterium into
the insect larva. In this new environment, the bacterium expresses virulence
traits, and kills the insect. The insect cadaver then serves as a nutrient
source for reproduction and further dissemination of both the nematode and
bacteria. This research will examine the complex molecular circuitries that
coordinate and regulate the expression of beneficial and harmful traits as the
bacteria move between different animal hosts. The paradigms revealed by this
research will provide broad insights into such questions as: how does bacterial
adaptation to new environments alter symbiotic behavior, and how do vector-borne
disease-causing bacteria adapt during transmission by the vector?

The results of this research will be published and disseminated to the public
through community seminars and high school outreach programs. Undergraduate,
graduate, and post-doctoral students will be trained in areas of molecular
biology, nematology, entomology, and bacteriology through direct scientific
inquiry. Thus, this project will provide fundamental knowledge of bacterial
interactions with animal hosts, and will train future scientists with the
expertise to further apply this knowledge.