* 0950217
* Functional Genomics of D-Amino Acid Metabolism in Pseudomonas Aeruginosa
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2010,12/31/2015
* Chung-Dar Lu, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 12/31/2015
* USD 640,000.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;D-amino acids are naturally synthesized
in all living organisms to serve in a variety of specific functions. Examples
include the well-known D-Ala and D-Glu as essential components of bacterial cell
wall to the latest discovery of D-Ser as neurotransmitter in humans. The level
of D-amino acids inside the cells is subjected to tight regulation to prevent
any potential harmful effects. Up to date, the biochemistry of D-amino acid
catabolism has not been intensively studied in comparison to those of L-amino
acids, and therefore, the information is still fragmentary. Famous for its
enormous catabolic capacity, P. aeruginosa is able to utilize many D-amino acids
as nutrient, and hence serves as an excellent model organism to explore novel
pathways and enzymes for D-amino acid metabolism. It is best evidenced by a
recent report of a new type of D-to-L arginine racemization by coupled catabolic
and anabolic dehydrogenases discovered by the PI's group on a previous NSF-
funded project. The results of preliminary studies also uncovered several
important features in D-amino acid utilization. D-amino acids have two potential
physiological functions - inversion to L-amino acids for peptide synthesis or
degradation to serve as nitrogen or carbon source. How each of these D-amino
acids can be utilized depends on the presence as well as the induction level of
specific racemases or catabolic enzymes/pathways. The goal of this research is
to continue efforts in exploration of metabolic pathways for D-amino acids with
a systemic approach. The specific aims of this project are: (i) to elucidate
physiological functions and biochemical properties of DadAX and DauAB in D-amino
acid deamination and racemization; and (ii) to explore catabolic pathways for
D-glutamate/glutamine/asparagine and D-proline/hydroxyproline. Experiments will
be conducted to test the proposed physiological and biochemical functions of
thus identified genes and their encoding enzymes. Meanwhile, a more systemic
transcriptome analysis will be conducted to have a better understanding of
cellular responses to the presence of these D-amino acids. Genes and encoding
enzymes thus identified from this study will be subjected to further
characterization accordingly regarding physiological functions, genetic
regulation, and biochemical properties in D-amino acid catabolism. Up till now,
only limited effort has been devoted systemically to explore the biochemical
diversity toward D-amino acids. Findings from this research are anticipated to
further extend the current knowledge of amino acid
metabolism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI
plans to continue the effort in maintaining an active research environment
composed of post-doc associates, MS and PhD graduate students, and undergraduate
students. In addition, the PI will extend the effort for recruiting promising
minority students to research by serving as faculty mentor for the McNair
Program in the summers. Scientifically, the PI lab will provide unique training
opportunities with a combination of modern genomics/proteomics and conventional
genetics/biochemistry approaches in the area of bacterial physiology and
biochemistry. In addition, the ongoing collaborations between PI and colleagues
in protein crystallography and mechanistic enzymology will be fostered to
benefit trainees of different disciplines, by way of regular joint group
meetings and encouragement of students taking courses offered by collaborating
colleagues. The success of this proposed research will have broader impacts in
training competitive researchers with multi-disciplinary coverage and in
recruiting under-representative minority students into careers of biological
research. All members of the Lu laboratory will participate in local, national,
and international research symposia to disseminate the research and educational
activities of the laboratory to a broader scientific community.