* 0950219
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Acceptability Judgments and Laryngeal Phonotactics
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2010,02/29/2012
* Adam Albright, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 02/29/2012
* USD 4,160.00

Languages form words by combining the sounds of the language. In many languages,
however, certain combinations of sounds systematically do not occur, contrary to
what is expected if the sounds of a language combined by chance. In Bolivian
Quechua certain sounds may not co-occur in a root. While there are roots in
Bolivian Quechua with a single ejective or aspirated sound, there are not roots
with two ejectives or aspirates (for example, "k'ap'a", "thaqha" would be
impossible roots). This project investigates native speakers' awareness of such
combinatorial restrictions on laryngeal features in the lexicon of Bolivian
Quechua. The goal of the research is to determine whether speakers of Bolivian
Quechua are aware of these particular restrictions and, moreover, whether the
systematic restrictions have a different status than "accidental gaps" in the
lexicon. These questions are investigated by asking native speakers for
acceptability ratings of nonce words (made up words). The experiments will
contribute to an informed typology of co-occurrence restrictions and inform two
broad questions in phonological research. First, the study will ascertain
whether laryngeal restrictions have a synchronic status in the grammar. Some co-
occurrence restrictions, and particularly laryngeal co-occurrence restrictions,
are static generalizations about the shape of roots in a language and may not
require a synchronic analysis. Previous studies of the psychological reality of
root restrictions have not tested the kinds of laryngeal restrictions found in
Quechua. Second, the comparison of laryngeal restrictions with accidental gaps
will reveal whether speakers form generalizations about classes of segments in
their language, or learn the attestation of individual combinations of segments.
An additional component of the study is documentation and acoustic analysis of
the laryngeal system of Bolivian Quechua, which contrasts voiceless unaspirated,
aspirated and ejective stops. Ejectives are both relatively rare and
understudied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will contribute to the Quechua
community by further documenting the phonetic properties of the sounds of
Quechua. There are many aspects of the Quechua language that are rare among the
world's languages, and differ from Spanish, the second language of most Quechua
speakers. This project is linguistically and culturally important in
contributing a detailed description of the acoustics of laryngeal contrasts in
Quechua. No comprehensive phonetic description is available for Quechua.
Accurate and thorough phonetic description is valuable both for future
generations of Quechua speakers who may face language loss and endangerment and
for any linguist who seeks to understand the phonology of this language.