* 0950095
* ETBC; Temperature sensitivity of substrate decomposition from enzymes to microbial communities
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2010,07/31/2014
* Sharon Billings, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 07/31/2014
* USD 595,998.00

Soils contain more than 1.5 times the amount of carbon in vegetation and the
atmosphere combined, much of it residing in compounds that turnover relatively
slowly. Chemical theory predicts that decomposition of slow turnover compounds
will be far more sensitive to a warming climate than compounds with faster
turnover rates. The release of CO2 to the atmosphere from these compounds as
they decompose would serve as a positive feedback to global warming. However,
recent research suggests that microorganisms responsible for decomposing soil
carbon may adapt or acclimate to warmer environments. Such adaptation or
acclimation may mitigate the temperature sensitivity of soil organic carbon
decomposition currently predicted by chemical theory. To date, acclimation and
adaptation have yet to be incorporated into a predictive framework for the
temperature sensitivity of soil organic carbon decomposition, because the
influence of microbial acclimation and adaptation to a new temperature regime
is, as yet, unknown. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For this project then, investigators
will determine: i) the influence of microbial acclimation and adaptation on
carbon and nitrogen fluxes through microbes and on temperature sensitivities of
decomposition for multiple types of carbon compounds; and ii) the influence of
interactions between functionally different microbial populations on the
temperature sensitivity of soil organic carbon decomposition. Data
characterizing responses of microbial decomposition to warming will be
incorporated into a theoretical framework to understand the influence of
microbial acclimation and adaptation on the temperature sensitivity of soil
organic carbon decomposition. Incubations will be performed across a range of
complexity, including: simple, sterile mixtures of enzymes and substrates; soil-
like media containing substrates of specified structure and isotopic
composition, and inoculated with microbial populations representing a range of
biogeochemical functions; and real soils with both introduced and natural
microbial communities. The flow of carbon and nitrogen into microbes from soil
compounds and subsequent release of CO2, shifts in substrate use, and changes in
microbial community structure with temperature will be assessed.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Models used to predict how soil organic carbon
decomposition rates change with temperature are important because they can help
predict future atmospheric CO2 concentrations. Currently, most models are based
purely on the characteristics of soil organic carbon. Efforts to examine the
acclimation and adaptation of the microorganisms that transform soil carbon into
biomass and CO2 with changing temperature typically are thwarted due to the
challenges associated with identifying microbial use of distinct soil carbon
compounds. By conducting experiments across incremental levels of experimental
complexity and integrating measurements of carbon and nitrogen flow through
microorganisms into a new theoretical framework, this research will directly
address these shortcomings. The work will support one post-doctoral scholar, one
graduate student, and four undergraduates. Research results will be integrated
into seven undergraduate and graduate courses, and educational outreach efforts
will include dissemination of soil ecology and climate warming information via
laboratory websites, and to middle school students and teachers from rural
Kansan populations.