* 0950519
* A MAP kinase cascade downstream of ERECTA and ERECTA-like receptors in regulating plant development
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2014
* Shuqun Zhang, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 01/31/2014
* USD 552,729.00

Intellectual merit: Besides cell differentiation, stage-specific and localized
cell division is also critical to the formation of normal tissues, organs, and
organisms. The highly coordinated cell differentiation and proliferation events
during growth and development illustrate the importance of cell-cell
communication, which is carried out by cell surface receptors/sensors and
intracellular signaling components. In Arabidopsis, ERECTA (ER), a receptor-like
kinase, and its homologs (ERL1 and ERL2) play important roles in these
processes. Their mutation alters both the architecture and the reproduction of
the plant. Similar to er or er/erl1/erl2 mutant plants, loss-of-function of MPK3
and MPK6, two Arabidopsis mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs), or their
upstream MAPKKs (MKK4/MKK5) also resulted in similar phenotypes. Genetic
analysis demonstrated that the gain-of-function MAPKK transgene can rescue the
loss-of-function er or er/erl1/erl2 mutants, suggesting that MPK3/MPK6 function
downstream of ER/ERL1/ERL2 receptors. The goal of this project is to understand
the molecular mechanism underlying the function of MPK3/MPK6 in the regulation
of localized cell division. In addition, the MAPKK kinase(s) upstream of the
MKK4/MKK5-MPK3/MPK6 module will be identified. A combinatory approach will be
employed to reach these goals. Defining a specific MAPK cascade downstream of
the well-characterized ER/ERL1/ERL2 receptor-like kinases is important to our
understanding of cell-cell communication. The identification of new components
downstream of MPK3/MPK6 in the ER/ERL1/ERL2 pathway will reveal the molecular
mechanism underlying their role in the localized cell division. The research
will also reveal the functional diversity and signaling specificity of MPK3 and
MPK6. The tools generated in this project will have broad applications and will
be shared with other groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: This project
will use an integrative approach to understand the roles of a MAPK cascade and
its upstream receptor-like kinases in coordinating plant development, which will
serve as an excellent training environment for students and postdoctoral
fellows. Training in use of integrative approaches to the study of biological
phenomena is critical to the advancement of post-genome biology. In addition to
scientific methodology, students/post-docs will also receive training in ethics
and career development. Students (both graduate and undergraduate) and post-docs
from under-represented groups will be actively recruited by participating in
institutional programs that reach out to minorities. Post-docs involved in the
project will follow a career development plan supported by the research training
in the lab, student mentoring experiences, and professional development
training. Understanding the signal transduction pathways and the identification
of important regulators of plant growth and development could positively impact
food/feed/biofuel production, which is important to sustain the increasing world
population. &lt;br/&gt;