* 0950503
* Symposium S on Organic Materials and Devices for Sustainable Energy Systems: Nov. 30 - Dec. 4, 2009 in Boston, MA
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2009,04/30/2010
* Russell Holmes, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 04/30/2010
* USD 1,500.00

0950503&lt;br/&gt;Mammarella&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;O
rganic semiconductors are attractive for application in electronic devices due
to their high performance, as well as their compatibility with low-cost, high-
throughput processing techniques. The continued expansion of organic electronics
is driven by the cross-disciplinary expertise of both academic and industrial
researchers. This partnership has led to significant advances in the fundamental
understanding of these materials, as well as improvements in the efficiency and
operational stability of organic electronic and optoelectronic devices. Many of
these systems are being actively developed as part of next generation, energy
efficient displays and solid-state lighting fixtures, as well as in
photovoltaics for low-cost solar energy
utilization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: To fully capitalize on
these unique devices, significant gaps in fundamental understanding as well as
non-trivial technological challenges must be overcome. This symposium invites
abstracts describing significant new developments in the understanding and
implementation of organic semiconductors for sustainable energy applications
including displays, lighting, and photovoltaics. Topics of interest include
device physics, development and characterization of new materials and device
architectures, and novel processing methods. Materials Research Society (MRS)
symposia related to organic electronic materials and devices have been among the
most highly attended at recent MRS meetings. However, it has proven very
difficult to include all electronic and optoelectronic device applications as
well as materials studies in the same symposium because of the rapidly expanding
research community and the overwhelming volume of abstract submission to such
MRS symposia. As such, the proposed symposium emphasizes the materials, devices,
and processing of organic materials for sustainable energy systems, which
include organic photovoltaics, light-emitting devices for displays and lighting,
and other novel optoelectronic devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: In
order to maximize the educational impact of the proposed symposium, abstracts
contributed by graduate students will be given priority in awarding oral or
poster presentations. In this way, graduate students will gain valuable
experience in presenting and defending their research, as well as exposure to
the organic electronics community. Results of the symposium will be disseminated
through a conference proceeding that will be edited by the co-organizers of the
symposium and published by MRS. Finally, a full-day tutorial is planned in order
to educate the materials community on the application of organic semiconductors
in energy efficient systems. This tutorial is entitled: Fundamentals of Organic
Optoelectronic Materials and Devices, and will be taught by Profs. Jiangeng Xue
at the University of Florida and Russell Holmes at the University of Minnesota.