* 0950183
* Denitrification Linked to Methanol Oxidation in Methylotenera Mobilis: a New Paradigm of Methylotrophy
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2014
* Ludmila Chistoserdova, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 02/28/2014
* USD 539,868.00

Intellectual Merit:

Methylotenera mobilis is a recently described bacterium that is a prominent
member of the active methylotroph community in Lake Washington sediment. More
recent experiments suggested that M. mobilis and related bacteria carry out
denitrification linked to methanol oxidation, in the presence of oxygen,
resulting in emission of N2O. This is a novel process that may be an important
part of the nitrogen cycle in lakes. Genomic analysis of M. mobilis identified
few traditional components of the classic denitrification pathway, suggesting
involvement of alternative enzymes. The bacterium also lacks a traditional
methanol dehydrogenase. This phenomenon is interesting for a number of reasons.
First, this is the first case of denitrification by a member of the
Methylophilaceae family; second, oxygen-dependent denitrification is unusual in
the microbial world; third, denitrification by Methylotenera and related
organisms may represent an important biogeochemical process that has been
overlooked, accounting for a portion of N2O released into the atmosphere from
the environments active in C1 metabolism, such as freshwater lakes. The major
goal of this project is to understand the biochemistry and the physiology of
denitrification by Methylotenera and to uncover the specific nature of coupling
of denitrification to methanol oxidation. This work will present new paradigms
of both methylotrophy and denitrification and will provide new insights into the
connection between the global cycles of carbon and nitrogen. M. mobilis will be
the model system. The specific objectives are 1) identification of genes,
enzymes and pathways involved in denitrification and methanol oxidation, 2)
testing the functions of the genes predicted to be involved in both methanol
oxidation and denitrification, via mutation, and 3) purification and
characterization of one or more key enzymes involved in denitrification by M.
mobilis, the primary candidate being a novel periplasmic nitrate reductase. The
intellectual merit of this proposal is in obtaining biochemical insights into
methylotrophy linked to denitrification, transforming the paradigms of both
processes and broadening the knowledge on energy-generating pathways in microbes
in general.

Broader Impacts:

This project will involve graduate, undergraduate and high school students, with
special emphasis on the members of underrepresented groups. Established
partnerships with local schools and colleges will provide the public outreach.
The data will be broadly disseminated via educational materials, conference
presentations, scientific and popular publications and the dedicated web site.
The societal impact will be in providing biochemical and genomic insights into a
novel, previously overlooked biogeochemical process that potentially contributes
to climate change.