* 0950579
* Collaborative Research: Plant Heat Tolerance through Cross-kingdom Interactions
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2010,10/31/2011
* Marilyn Roossinck, Noble Research Institute, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 10/31/2011
* USD 758,000.00

Most plants cannot grow when soil temperatures reach levels that are above 100
°F. However, in Yellowstone National Park soil temperatures can be much higher
in the geothermal areas, and occasionally plants can be found growing in soils
in temperatures up to 125 °F. These plants have a fungus, called Curvularia
protuberata that grows in them, and they cannot grow in these soil temperatures
without the fungus. The fungus itself is infected with a virus, and the virus
also is required for the whole thermal tolerant system of plant, fungus and
virus (called a symbiosis) to survive. However, the interactions between the
virus and fungus in this system and other microbe-interacting systems in the
environment are very poorly understood. A crucial key to the understanding of
adaptive changes in response to environmental stress is missing. In addition,
very few beneficial viruses have been described or studied.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal of the research is to understand how
plants and mutualistic microorganisms interact with one another and their
surrounding environments to acquire stress tolerance. This project will study
the physiology and genetics that define the mechanism of this interaction. Its
goals are to: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Identify and characterize additional
plant-fungus-virus symbionts that are thermotolerant; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2)
Identify the genetic expression and metabolite changes of plants and fungi
involved in the three way symbiosis during heat stress; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3)
Study how the proteins from each organism interact; and &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4)
Test the genes discovered for their effects on tolerance to heat.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With changes in the Earth's climate and the need to
produce more and more food for the increasing human population, learning how
plants adapt naturally to environmental changes such as are seen in Yellowstone
National Park will provide tools with potential application to agriculture.