* 0950574
* Function and Regulation of Isoprene Synthesis in Leaves
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2010,01/31/2014
* Thomas Sharkey, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 01/31/2014
* USD 590,000.00

Isoprene is emitted from many plants, especially trees such as oaks and aspens.
The amount emitted is very large and has significant effects on atmospheric
chemistry. On the other hand, isoprene can serve as a chemical feedstock and is
already being exploited commercially. To understand the function and regulation
of isoprene emission from plants, experiments will be undertaken to test and
determine how plants that emit isoprene are affected by this emission. Novel
optical methods will be used to measure leakiness of photosynthetic membranes
and determine how isoprene affects this leakiness. The effect of isoprene on
other membrane functions, such as formation of lipid drops and possible cell
death signals will also be measured. Experiments to test the regulation will
focus on measuring enzyme activity with and without possible inhibitors and
measuring changes in enzyme activities in relation to changes in isoprene
emission rate. The results of the work will be useful for understanding isoprene
emission, one of the most important chemical interactions between the biosphere
and atmosphere. This information may aid decisions such as whether to alter what
trees are planted and will aid in predicting when air pollution episodes are
likely to be exacerbated by isoprene. The work may also be useful in engineering
other organisms to make isoprene so that it can be used as a replacement for
petroleum. This research will involve many students including undergraduates
recruited to a summer program designed to increase participation in science by
members of underrepresented groups.