* 0950225
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Herbivory-Boosted Photosynthesis:  Elicitors from Tupiocoris notatus Saliva Induce Changes in Plant Metabolism
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2014
* Andre Kessler, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 03/31/2014
* USD 456,690.00

Contrary to conventional wisdom, not all insect herbivores impose negative
fitness consequences on their plant hosts and not all induced plant responses
affect the attacking insects negatively. This project hypothesizes that the
underlying recognition and signaling mechanisms of the plant are subject to a
co-evolutionary arms race between plants and insects, so that specifically
induced plant responses could be to the benefit/disadvantage of both sides; the
responding plant and the herbivore manipulating the plant. Previous studies
suggest the existence of compensatory regulation mechanisms that may
specifically influence both primary and secondary metabolism to increase plant
defense without decreasing photosynthesis and growth. This project will
elucidate the function of induced changes in plant primary and secondary
metabolism of the wild tobacco Nicotiana attenuata when attacked by the mirid
bug Tupiocoris notatus, evaluating fitness consequences for the plant and the
insect and uncovering the underlying physiological mechanisms of those
responses. Integrative functional analysis of plant responses to herbivory are
used to understand the ecological mechanisms that drive plant-insect co-
evolution. The manipulation of such a plant defense mechanism in crop and
horticultural plants would allow the development of more sustainable, yet cost
efficient methods of pest control. Moreover, identifying mechanisms that
increase photosynthetic activity is a major opportunity to increase agricultural
productivity.

Broader Impacts The project's broader impacts involve the professional
development of two young scientists and combine research foci of both
laboratories, one of which focuses on the analysis of plant photosynthesis
processes and the other on herbivore-induced plant defenses. Undergraduate
students will be involved in all stages of the project and will be able to gain
academic credit for their involvement in practical research courses in both
academic institutions. The geographic proximity of Cornell and Ithaca College
allows the students to take advantage of the research environments of both
institutions. Under the framework and guidance of the new Molecular and Chemical
Ecology Initiative of Cornell aspects of this project will be used to develop
undergraduate and graduate educational curriculum. In addition to undergraduate
education this project will include the training of a postdoctoral associate and
a graduate student.