* 0951444
* EAGER:  Improving Pedestrian Safety Using Pervious Concrete to Reduce Slip-Related Falls
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2010
* John Kevern, University of Missouri-Kansas City
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 12/31/2010
* USD 40,000.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this project
is to evaluate pedestrian biomechanics of safely walking on pervious concrete,
compared to traditional concrete pavement, in normal and adverse weather
conditions. The high permeability of this pavement makes melting snow and ice
much less likely to refreeze and form surface ice. Less surface water, coupled
with its open surface texture, may result in a much safer pavement under adverse
winter conditions. Slipping and falling is a concern both for actual and
perceived mobility, particularly among older adults. The objective of the
proposed work is to determine pervious concrete pavement?s impact on fall
protection as compared to traditional impervious pavement. The specific aims
include: 1. Measure the material surface properties of pervious concrete and
compare with those of traditional concrete. 2. Quantify the biomechanics
associated with walking on pervious concrete and compare with those of walking
on traditional concrete in both dry and icy
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pervious concrete has the potential to improve
traction and reduce instances of slipping and falling under adverse conditions.
Creating a safer walking surface may decrease medical and insurance costs, while
maintaining the mobility and independence of older adults. Characterizing
movement on pervious concrete surfaces and comparing with traditional concrete
will help identify important slipping-related attributes of the pavement
surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;