* 0951639
* Development of Native Language Preference: Behavioral and Physiological Indices
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2010,01/31/2015
* Megha Sundara, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 01/31/2015
* USD 402,640.00

Previous research shows that within the first year of life infants are able to
distinguish their native language from a language they have never heard before.
In fact, they prefer to listen to their native language over an unfamiliar
language. In the first component of this research, native language preference--
measured using listening time or heart rate measures--will be used to capture
how much and how well each infant takes in linguistic input that is available to
her. In addition, by following infants with and without a preference for their
native language longitudinally, the project aims to determine whether a
preference measure can be used to index speech and language development later in
life. The relationship between native language preference and speech and
language development later in life will be investigated for English- as well as
Spanish-learning infants. The final component of the research will determine
what information infants rely on to distinguish their native language from a
similar, yet unfamiliar language. Infants' listening time to re-synthesized
native and non-native language when different elements of the speech--consonants
and vowels, or the rhythm and intonation--are removed will help address this
question. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work seeks to apply basic research on the
abilities infants in the first year of life towards developing a tool for early
identification of children with speech and language delays. By tracing the
relationship of native language preference that can be measured anytime within
the first 15-months of life and later language development, this research may
provide insight into why some children seem to have difficulties with language
acquisition. Further, by testing Spanish-learning infants as well we are laying
the foundation for future research with bilingual infants learning Spanish and
English. This is critical given that Spanish is spoken in about 40-50% of the
homes in certain parts of the US. Finally, the research undertaken in this
project will provide educational opportunities for a graduate student and
several undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;