* 0951264
* Computational and Experimental Studies of Microtubule Dynamics and Regulation by Binding Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2010,02/28/2014
* Mark Alber, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 02/28/2014
* USD 640,058.00

Intellectual merit. Microtubules (MTs) are the primary components of crucial
subcellular structures including the intracellular transport network and the
mitotic spindle that separates the chromosomes during cell division. A central
problem in cell biology is to understand how these MT-based structures form, are
dynamically maintained, and drive the organization of the rest of the cell.
Classically, these questions have been addressed by identifying and
characterizing the proteins that regulate MT dynamics. While this approach has
been powerful, it is not sufficient: the MT cytoskeleton is a complex system
that exhibits behaviors ("emergent properties") not straightforwardly
predictable from analysis of the individual components. Such a system level
problem requires system level approaches: mathematical and computational
modeling. The goals of this project are to develop, utilize, and experimentally
test two computational models of MT dynamics, and to use these models to
investigate the function and mechanism of MT binding proteins. These models will
be built at two scales: a mesoscopic (medium scale) model that will be used to
investigate the intrinsic properties of a system of dynamic MTs in a cell-like
environment, and a molecular scale model that will be used to develop hypotheses
about the mechanisms of dynamic instability and its alteration by MT binding
proteins. The long-term goal of this work is to develop a predictive and
quantitative understanding of the MT cytoskeleton and its regulation by MT
binding proteins, which will impact fields ranging from systems biology to
nanotechnology. &lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. An important part of this project is
to develop a freely disseminated software suite "MT Toolbox" (MTT), which will
include analysis tools and instructional electronic tutorials. MTT will have two
implementations: 1) a web-based interface that will allow scientists and
students at remote sites to submit jobs for running the models and their
analysis tools on our server; 2) a freely disseminated software suite containing
all programs with online tutorials, user, and programmer's guides. The flexible
models and tutorials produced through this project will allow researchers to
develop and test specific hypotheses about the mechanisms of MT dynamics, which
will in turn help design and direct future experiments. More broadly, it will
help students and researchers at all levels gain an intuitive understanding of
dynamic MT systems. The project will educate three graduate students and two
undergraduates who will benefit from interdisciplinary training in biology and
computational modeling. Projects related to the proposed research will be
incorporated in The Research Experience for Teachers at Notre Dame (RET@ND)
program as well as the Notre Dame McNair Program, which promotes graduate and
doctoral studies for minority students.