* 0951277
* Genetic Heritability and Spatiotemporal Transcriptional Mapping of the Vocal Learning Process Using a Minimal Song-training Paradigm
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2015
* Thomas McKnight, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 03/31/2015
* USD 800,000.00

Thierry Lints Proposal# 0951277 Genetic Heritability and Spatiotemporal
Transcriptional Mapping of the Vocal Learning Process Using a Minimal Song-
training Paradigm

The vocal learning process forms the foundation of infant speech development and
language. This process is best understood at the molecular and
electrophysiological level in songbirds, particularly the zebra finch. During
their formative first months, juvenile male zebra finches learn to produce a
complex stereotyped song, typically based on their father?s song. Using
computer-based training of juvenile zebra finch males to song playbacks, the
proposed research sets out to provide a systematic exploration of the opening
moments of the vocal imitation process. As a memory of the tutor song model can
be acquired during the first training session, the underlying neural events that
initiate vocal imitation can be time locked to a single morning of juvenile
life. This song training approach may illuminate the fundamental molecular
processes that guide developmental learning and constrain it as a consequence of
previous experiences or maturational age. Whole-brain 3-dimensional
reconstructions of dynamic gene expression patterns will reveal how neuronal
activity and experience-dependent neural plasticity rapidly evolve over the
first few days of vocal learning. This research serves as an excellent vehicle
to train undergraduate and graduate students in the quantitative analysis of
behavior, molecular biology, brain image analysis and nervous system structure
and function. Moreover, a collaborative effort is ongoing to introduce zebra
finches into high school classrooms and develop a web-based virtual learning
environment involving live-feeds from birds undergoing training in the lab,
providing school students the opportunity to work on real life science problems
using quantitative approaches to the acoustic analysis of birdsong.