* 0951209
* Biophysical Aspects of Cotranslational Protein Folding
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2010,08/31/2014
* Silvia Cavagnero, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 08/31/2014
* USD 821,068.00

Intellectual Merit. The folding of pure proteins in solution, starting from
chemically or thermally generated unfolded states, has been studied intensively
for almost 50 years. However, these unfolded states rarely occur in living cells
and therefore we still know very little about how proteins actually fold in
their native environments to achieve their active conformations. Proteins in all
living cells are synthesized by ribosomes, complex molecular machines found in
all living organisms. In living cells, a number of factors, including helper
proteins called "chaperones," crowding by thousands of other molecules, as well
as the ribosome itself, can profoundly affect how and whether a protein folds
correctly once it is made. Least understood are the earliest stages of folding,
when the protein first emerges from the ribosome where it is made.

This project explores the structural and dynamic differences between ribosome-
bound and ribosome-released nascent proteins, and proposes to compare the
timecourse leading to release of full-length protein chains from the ribosome
("protein birth"), in the presence and absence of chaperone proteins ("folding
helpers"). Synergistic computational and experimental investigations will also
be carried out on model nascent protein chains to assess the ability the
ribosome's surface to spatially confine the nascent protein and promote folding.
The following research objectives will be pursued:

#1: Equilibrium analysis of the conformation and dynamics of nascent single-
domain proteins as they emerge from the ribosomal tunnel, before and after their
release by the ribosome. These investigations will identify the most stable and
most structured regions of nascent proteins by studying their degree of solvent
exposure via H/D exchange followed by MALDI mass spectrometry.

#2: Kinetic measurements of the release of newly synthesized, single-domain
proteins from the ribosome to follow the formation of protein 3D structure in
real time.

#3: Equilibrium and kinetic analysis of incomplete and full-length nascent
chains derived by multidomain proteins. The experiments described in specific
aims #1 and 2 will be repeated for the simple multi-domain model protein Hmp. In
addition, real-time translation studies will probe the effect of mRNA silent
mutations on protein conformation.

#4: Computational analysis of ribosome-bound and ribosome-released nascent
proteins. Synergistic computational and experimental studies will be carried out
to assess the effect of the ribosome's surface on the nascent protein's
conformation and spatial confinement.

BROADER IMPACTS. The project includes the pursuit of the following broader
impacts: #1: Recruitment of underrepresented students to participate in research
activities. The proposed studies will involve the mentoring and training of
graduate and undergraduate students, especially women and students belonging to
underrepresented minorities. Undergraduate students will routinely participate
to advanced research in the PI's group. The PI will also participate as a
lecturer to the Summer Course in Biophysics for Minority Students organized by
the Biophysical Society and will serve as a mentor, recruiter and judge at the
SACNAS conference, fostering participation of Chicanos and Latino Americans in
science.

#2: Development of novel lecture demonstrations on protein folding and the
effect of cell-relevant components on protein folding and stability. The PI will
develop a number of classroom demos aimed at illustrating, with direct visual
readouts, the reversibility of protein folding, its pH dependence, and the
effect of osmolytes on protein stability. #3: Presentation of lectures, videos
and demonstrations on protein folding at the Middleton High School. This project
will be done in collaboration with Kathryn Eilert, Teacher of Molecular Biology
and Biotechnology at the Middleton (WI) High School.