* 0951232
* Behavioral types, social plasticity and the effects of variation in social situations on sexual selection
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2014
* Andrew Sih, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 04/30/2014
* USD 149,402.00

A major issue in modern ecology, evolution and behavior for all organisms,
including humans, is to understand factors that explain why some individuals
have higher mating and reproductive success than others. What traits (e.g.,
behaviors or morphological characters) make some individuals more successful
than others, and how might these key traits differ depending on the social
situation? This project provides a new framework for quantifying how differences
among individuals in behavioral type (or personality; e.g. boldness,
aggressiveness, social flexibility) interacts with variations in social
situation (e.g., group size, sex ratio, mix of personalities and patterns of
social interaction within the group) to determine individual behaviors, group
social dynamics and mating patterns. To exemplify and refine the new framework a
model system that is ideal for studies of mating patterns is used, namely the
stream water strider, Aquarius remigis. These animals mate frequently and are
unusually easy to observe. The experimental approach involves repeated
observations of the behavior of male and female water striders in semi-natural
streams in a range of experimentally determined social situations. Based on
preliminary work, the results are expected to show that individual variation in
'social skill' (the ability to choose good social situations, appropriate mating
partners and the ability to respond effectively to those partners) will have
major impacts on mating success. Although anecdotes suggest that social skill is
crucial for success in humans and other animals, this project will provide a
new, statistically sophisticated, quantitative framework to scientifically study
this hypothesis in animals in general, including humans. Previous work conducted
by the investigator on this basic topic has been widely cited in scientific
journals, and widely covered by popular and scientific media (newspapers,
magazines, radio). The project will train several Ph. D. students and
undergraduates (including women and minorities) in modern behavioral,
experimental and statistical methods.