* 0951302
* Role of phloem-mobile sucrose and auxin in the development of the root system
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2013
* Jocelyn Malamy, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Amy Litt
* 02/28/2013
* USD 395,999.00

Plant growth relies on the activity of stem cells clustered at shoot tips, leaf
margins, and root tips, and also stem cell clusters that are quiescent and await
activation. The activity of these so-called meristems determines whether plants
are tall with few branches, short and bushy, etc. Similarly, the architecture of
the root system is determined by the activity of meristems at the tips of
primary and lateral roots, and the initial activation of these meristems in root
primordia. It is essential that the activity of the plant's many meristems is
coordinated to produce a plant whose morphology is optimized for its habitat.
Indeed, root and shoot system growth is known to be coordinated, but how this
coordination occurs is poorly understood. Previous studies clearly demonstrated
that artificially increasing sucrose within a physiological range in the leaves
dramatically stimulates lateral root formation, suggesting that the sucrose
normally produced by leaves through photosynthesis is regulating root system
development. This implicates a long distance mechanism that communicates the
sucrose status of the aerial tissues to the root system. Sucrose moves from
shoot to root system via the phloem, where it is unloaded at root meristems
based on the steep concentration gradient. Interestingly, the plant hormone
auxin is also produced in the leaves and moved to the root system via the
phloem, This project will investigate how photosynthate from aerial tissues
drives phloem allocation to root meristems, delivering auxin and thereby
regulating their activity. This project will use transgenic plants that alter
the levels of sucrose and auxin translocated in the phloem, together with
fluorescent dyes that allow direct visualization of phloem movement and
delivery, to test this model. If successful, the results from this project will
1) demonstrate that phloem acts to integrate plant organ development at
different locations; and 2) determine the molecular signal that is carried in
the phloem. This would be one of very few examples in which coordinated
development in the whole-plant is understood mechanistically at the
physiological and molecular levels. The broader impacts of this project include
training of students at all levels and scientific outreach to the community.