* 0951620
* Workshop on Rich Grammars From Poor Inputs
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/2009,11/30/2010
* Robert Berwick, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 11/30/2010
* USD 20,000.00

Input-constrained children, including the blind and deaf, still learn language,
and this process continues beyond the age of five. Children are also remarkably
creative in how they learn to read and write. What accounts for this robustness?
For more than forty years, two distinct views have dominated the field. The
first emphasizes that infant and young-child learning is qualitatively different
from other novice learning, i.e., it is driven by maturation or changing brain
organization. The second view emphasizes the syntax-semantics link in the
acquisition of vocabulary, which seems to indicate that there is also learning
machinery that is information-driven in the sense that anyone (young, old,
mentally handicapped, environmentally deprived) who learns a language has to
acquire elements in a certain order, e.g., "doggie" before "jump" and "jump"
before "think". More recently, work in genetics and the biology of language has
begun to illuminate the distinction as well as the synergy between these two
views. The goal of this three-day workshop, Rich Languages from Poor Inputs, is
to bridge the gap between recent theory and educational practice. It will bring
together language scientists who probe these recent theoretical developments
with educational practitioners so as to see how these results might inform
classroom activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will directly inform
educators as to how they can develop effective new techniques for teaching
reading, writing, and interacting with the profoundly impaired. It will
illustrate how educators can incorporate research on language development for
children who can not learn to read easily, taking our understanding of language
science into practical classroom activities. The goal is to build on children's
natural talents with language, despite children's differences in abilities. This
is a matter of prime importance given society's emphasis on language and reading
skill attainment for all segments of the population--a true sense of no child
left behind.