* 0951406
* OPUS: Stopover Biology of Intercontinental Migratory Birds:
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2013
* Frank Moore, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 01/31/2013
* USD 139,008.00

Migration is a fundamental characteristic of the life history of many
organisms. Over two-thirds of all the songbirds that breed in temperate North
America move long distances to non-breeding areas in Mexico, Central and South
America, and the islands of the Caribbean. This project will support a critical
synthesis of field and laboratory research since the early 1980s on the biology
of migrating birds. The foci of the work will be the challenges migrants face
when they stop over during migration, how migrants contend with those
challenges, and the consequences of their response to en route challenges, the
sum of which determine the success of migrations. Two synthetic products will be
created: a book and a complementary set of audio-visual (A-V), internet-
accessible presentations designed for educational use and outreach. Synthesis of
this large body of research is especially important now, as changing global
climate may challenge organismal adaptations that have been successful in the
past. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This project will advance understanding of
migration and will reach beyond the scientific community by way of informal
science education. The biology of migrating birds us attractive for science
education and for making connections with nature. The two, related products will
be widely accessible to students and the scientific community, and the set of
internet-accessible, downloadable A-V presentations will be designed to be
accessible by and attractive to a broader public audience. The A-V presentations
will focus on how migratory birds respond to the challenges that arise during
stopover, will be made available through a web interface, and will be freely
available for educational purposes. &lt;br/&gt;