* 0951409
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Cusco Quechua Impulsatives
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2012
* Benjamin Bruening, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 04/30/2012
* USD 9,500.00

The Quechua languages have a construction that is known in the literature as a
desiderative; however, it has different properties from typical desideratives
found in other languages. For example, in contrast to typical desideratives, the
subject of Quechua desideratives is non-volitional and marked with an oblique
case, instead of the nominative case that characterizes subjects generally. In
addition, the verb does not agree with the subject, as it normally would in
desideratives. Because of these differences, this research proposes that the
Quechua desiderative is not a desiderative at all, but a previously unrecognized
linguistic category, called an "impulsative". This construction shares
properties with constructions in other languages, specifically Albanian, South
Slavic, and Finnish, which have subjects that lack volition, have oblique case-
marking, and do not trigger agreement on the verb. There is one striking
difference, however. These languages lack dedicated verbal morphology that
indicates the impulsative meaning. The hypothesis of this dissertation research
is that the impulsative morpheme in Quechua is an overt instantiation of a
covert impulsative element in Albanian, South Slavic, and Finnish. In order to
test this hypothesis, the PhD student will make two trips to Cusco, Peru to
conduct fieldwork with native speakers of Cusco Quechua. She will collect data
and will compare the Quechua impulsative with the impulsatives in the other
languages. The goal is to determine whether or not impulsatives should be
recognized as a new linguistic category. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will
benefit both Quechua speakers and the linguistic community. This project will
help document Quechua and will employ Quechua speakers in using their native
language. The domains of usage of Quechua are limited and Spanish is becoming
increasingly dominant in countries where Quechua is spoken. Furthermore, this
study will bring Quechua data to a linguistic audience. The Quechua languages
are underrepresented in the syntactic literature, where the focus has primarily
been on European languages.&lt;br/&gt;