* 0951160
* Acoustic Aposematism, Mimicry, and Sonar Jamming: Efficacy in the Field
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2010,06/30/2015
* William Conner, Wake Forest University
* Continuing Grant
* emilia martins
* 06/30/2015
* USD 320,000.00

The interactions between insect-eating bats and their prey are a classic example
of an evolutionary arms race. Bats began the race with the evolution of
sophisticated biosonar to track insects in complete darkness. Night-flying
insects, including moths, countered with the evolution of sonar detection
devices (ears) and erratic evasive maneuvers. Impressive aerobatic 'dog fights'
ensue. Tiger moths (Lepidoptera: Arctiidae) added a new twist to the fray - they
answer bats with ultrasonic clicks produced by specialized structures called
tymbals. Laboratory experiments by this research group over the past decade have
demonstrated an impressive array of functions for the clicks. Some moth species
use them to warn bats that they are poisonous. Other palatable tiger moths mimic
the sounds of noxious species. And, perhaps most impressively, some species make
a cacophony of ultrasound to jam bat sonar.

The project delves into this exquisite predator-prey system using state-of-the-
art technologies in the first comprehensive study of bat-tiger moth warfare
under natural conditions. First, using thermal infrared videography and voice
recognition software, the investigators will test the effectiveness of acoustic
warning, acoustic mimicry, and sonar jamming against natural foraging bats that
differ in echolocation strategies and foraging capabilities. The work will also
reveal details of aerial battles that have thus far remained hidden. Second, the
investigators will use species-specific molecular probes to quantify the DNA of
specific moth species naturally occurring in bat guano. The results will be used
to determine the utility of each of the tiger moth acoustic defenses in evading
predation. The bat-moth story has shaped the field of animal behavior and is one
of the most sophisticated predator-prey interactions known. An understanding of
these processes will not only explain the fascinating details of bat-tiger moth
evolution, it will also illustrate how fundamental behavioral interactions have
shaped the acoustic world.

The most exciting educational aspect of this project is a partnership with
SciWorks in Forsyth County, North Carolina. SciWorks is a science center and
environmental park visited by over 30,000 K-12 students per year. The research
group will assist in the development of interactive exhibits for SciWorks based
on our bat-moth research.