* 0951077
* Microbial Systems in the Biosphere:   Unraveling the Lifestyles of Dominant Freshwater Fe-oxidizing Bacteria
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2010,02/28/2015
* David Emerson, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 02/28/2015
* USD 635,893.00

IOS 0951077 - Microbial Systems in the Biosphere: Unraveling the Lifestyles
of&lt;br/&gt;Dominant Freshwater Fe-oxidizing Bacteria&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI:
David Emerson, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean
Sciences&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bacteria are remarkable for their metabolic
diversity and ability to utilize seemingly unpalatable food sources. The Fe-
oxidizing bacteria (FeOB) are a prime example, since they gain energy for growth
by oxidizing ferrous iron to ferric iron (rust). These bacteria are prolific and
easily recognized by abundant rust-colored precipitates that form whereever
ferrous iron is present in natural waters, or in domestic and industrial water
distribution systems. The work funded by this proposal will investigate the
systematics, ecology, and physiology of a particular group of freshwater FeOB.
The systematics are important because we do not know the true identity of some
of the most important FeOB; without knowing who they are it is impossible to
reliably identify them. The ecology is important because we know different types
of FeOB have very specific habitat requirements. Figuring out those requirements
may provide an easy way to determine aspects of water quality that are specific
for a given group of FeOB. This could be a good diagnostic tool for assessing
water quality. The physiology studies are important because we actually know
very little about how, or even why, bacteria oxidize iron. By answering these
questions we can learn about an important fundamental biological process. This
may allow better control over it, or allow us to harness it for beneficial
purposes. To investigate these questions we will employ a host of modern
microbiological and chemical techniques that allow us to study cells in their
natural environments at the microscale, as well as reproduce those controlled
conditions in the laboratory. Ultimately this work will improve our
understanding of a long recognized, but poorly understood group of microbes, of
significant environmental importance, both as nuisance organisms that cause
biofouling and corrosion, and as beneficial organisms that can remove metals and
other pollutants from water.