* 0951039
* Mechanisms Controlling Conformational Transitions of Flexible Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2010,10/31/2014
* John Portman, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 10/31/2014
* USD 296,671.00

Conformational flexibility and dynamics underlie the most essential property
that makes proteins unique molecular machines. The objective of this research is
to develop general analytic and computational approaches to characterize
mechanisms controlling conformational transitions involving flexible proteins.
This research focuses on two important classes of conformational transitions:
(a) allosteric transitions between two distinct conformational ensembles; and
(b) coupled folding and binding. A central issue uniting these two different
kinds of transitions is the role that flexibility has in reducing free energy
barriers and enhancing transition rates. For both kinds of transitions, the
structural and spatial properties of transition state ensembles will be
characterized at the residue level resolution. This allows identification of
kinetically important residues controlling conformational transitions. The
analytic theory and simulations developed in this research are complementary:
the simulations will help evaluate ideas and predictions obtained from the
analytic model, and the natural structural parameters of the analytic model will
influence how the simulated trajectories are analyzed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Educational goals center around increasing exposure of
undergraduate students to interdisciplinary research areas. This includes
continued development of an undergraduate biological physics course which gives
students experience and familiarity with interdisciplinary topics otherwise
lacking in our physics curriculum. This project also provides an opportunity of
early research experience for undergraduate students. This opportunity
complements two funded scholarship programs at KSU aimed at recruitment,
retention, and support of science students to ensure a successful transition
into scientific or high-technology careers. Lastly, this project will guide
development of computer learning modules aimed at helping undergraduate students
in chemistry, material science, biology, and physics connect molecular-level
physical concepts with macroscopic observations.&lt;br/&gt;