* 0951549
* Mechanisms Controlling the Function and Development of Neuronal Nicotinic Synapses
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2010,02/29/2016
* Joseph Margiotta, University of Toledo Health Science Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 02/29/2016
* USD 600,000.00

Synapses are specialized cell junctions that link neurons into functional
networks, thereby providing the basis of all integrative neural signaling.
Synaptic transmission involves release of neurotransmitter from presynaptic
neuron terminals and capture by specific postsynaptic receptors that transit
ions to alter the target cell's excitability. Nicotinic acetylcholine (ACh)
receptors (nAChRs) bind ACh to mediate excitatory synaptic transmission in
autonomic ganglia controlling homeostasis and modulating the output of brain
circuits that control coordinated movement and behaviors underlying pleasure and
reward. Despite their broad relevance, the molecular mechanisms regulating
function and development of nicotinic synapses remain poorly understood. This
project will explore changes triggered by a neuropeptide (PACAP) released from
the pituitary at nicotinic synapses on autonomic ciliary ganglion (CG) neurons.
Recent findings indicate that PACAP rapidly regulates synapses on CG neurons in
culture. Electrophysiological, imaging, and biochemical approaches will be used
to identify altered synaptic properties and determine the protein-protein
interactions that mediate this regulation. Since PACAP levels are
developmentally regulated, and exogenous PACAP enhances neuronal survival in an
activity dependent fashion, the possibility that PACAP persistently influences
synapse formation and function will also be explored. It is expected that PACAP-
triggered signaling will be critical both for building nicotinic synapses and
controlling their function. Lastly, outreach programs administered through the
University of Toledo will be used to train visiting undergraduates, high school
students, and high school teachers. Thus, this project will further elucidate
molecular mechanisms relevant to homeostatic regulation, behavior, and
development while simultaneously fostering the scientific literacy and training
of underrepresented groups.