* 0951622
* Wavefield Imaging of the Mantle of North America with 3D, Plane-wave Migration
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2014
* Gary Pavlis, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 06/30/2014
* USD 242,351.00

This project is applying a recently developed, three-dimensional, direct
wavefield imaging method to Earthscope Transportable Array (TA) data. The
approach applies a series of algorithms that implement a form of three-
dimensional, migration inversion. Three-component waveforms of body waves
recorded by the TA are manipulated in a manner similar to seismic reflection
processing to produce a three-dimensional image volume of P to S scattering
strength beneath the continent. The method is being used to produce high-
resolution images of the subducting lithosphere of the Juan de Fuca/Farallon
system and to develop a 3D model of the geometry of that system. As the array
moves eastward the method will be used to image lithospheric scale boundaries
that can be applied to test models of how the Precambrian core of the continent
was assembled. Technical problems being attacked to improve the capabilities of
this new method are: (1) extension of the method to image S to P conversions,
(2) new methods for estimating the impulse response of the medium
(deconvolution), (3) improved handling of irregular data that are the norm for
passive arrays, (4) improved error appraisal metrics, and (5) multiple removal.
Broader impacts include support for a PhD student's research and plans to make
3D image volumes available via the web.