* 0951816
* Collaborative Research: Origin and Evolution of the X and Y Chromosomes in Stalk-eyed Flies
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2015
* Robert DeSalle, American Museum Natural History
* Continuing Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 02/28/2015
* USD 501,187.00

The distribution and organization of genes on chromosomes varies widely among
animals. Chromosomes can change in number and size, as well as gene composition,
over short evolutionary time scales. Furthermore, chromosome location can
influence how genes are expressed. The aims of this project are to test
alternative hypotheses for the origin and evolution of chromosome organization
using diopsid flies as a model system. The research will focus on the genetic
composition of the X and Y chromosomes. These chromosomes are responsible for
much of the behavioral and physiological differences between males and females
and are dynamic with respect to gene content. Also, preliminary research
indicates that the X chromosome of diopsid flies is an autosome in other flies
and, therefore, provides an opportunity to study how gene content and expression
evolves on a newly derived X chromosome. The project will utilize advanced next-
generation technology to identify a complete catalog of genes located on these
chromosomes and their movements between species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project represents a collaboration between the University of Maryland, College
Park (UMD) and the American Museum of Natural History (AMNH). The project will
substantially enhance our understanding of the origin and evolution of new
chromosomes and will influence scientific infrastructure by generating
substantial genomic resources that will be made available through online
databases. Training opportunities will be provided for students at all levels at
both institutions. Finally, outreach will involve high school student interns at
the AMNH and a high school teacher seminar series offered at UMD.