* 0951998
* Collaborative Research: Examining the Evolution of Biospheric Oxygenation in Late Archean to Middle Proterozoic Oceans Through High-Resolution Trace Metal Chemostratigraphy
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2013
* Timothy Lyons, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 06/30/2013
* USD 105,600.00

Intellectual merit: The PIs propose to obtain high-resolution trace metal
geochemical profiles from organic-rich sedimentary rocks to examine the
evolution of climate and biospheric oxygenation in the Late Archean to Middle
Proterozoic. The connections between climate and oxygenation are manifold.
Oxygen levels in the deep sea are affected by the rate at which organic carbon
is exported from productive surface waters, and hence ultimately from
atmospheric CO2. In turn, enhanced burial of organic carbon in marine sediments
can increase the O2 content of the atmosphere, with climatic consequences on an
Archean Earth dependent on CH4 as a greenhouse gas. Oxygen levels also affect
the ocean concentrations of trace nutrients such as Fe and Mo, potentially
altering the vigor of marine surface biota and the efficiency of surface-to-deep
carbon pumping. Earlier work by the PIs discovered traces of oxygenic
photosynthesis and surface ocean oxygenation at least 50-100 M.y. before the
first major rise of atmospheric O2 (2.45-2.32 Ga Great Oxidation Event; GOE).
Their chemostratigraphic approach revealed an otherwise unrecognized history of
biospheric oxygenation that is more complex than previously realized. Therefore,
detailed investigation of this history allows them to test fundamental concepts
that relate O2, carbon, micronutrients and climate. For example, can the same
basic concepts developed to explain Holocene climate and carbon cycling explain
conditions in the Archean and Proterozoic? The PIs propose to refine the
timeline of biospheric oxygenation by developing an extensive compilation of
trace metal concentrations for Late Archean to Middle Proterozoic rocks
emphasizing key intervals straddling the GOE: the 2.7 Ga Joy Lake Sequence
(Minnesota, U.S.A.), the 2.3 Ga Rooihoogte and Timeball Hill Formations (South
Africa), and the 1.8-1.7 Ga Chuanlinggou Formation (North China). Trace metal
geochemical profiles, when combined with sedimentary Fe geochemistry, can
constrain the nature of local sedimentary conditions (e.g., bottom water redox
state and basin restriction). Bottom water Mo concentrations in ancient oceans
can be estimated by comparing Mo/TOC of these rock samples with sediment Mo/TOC
and seawater concentrations in modern anoxic basins. For other trace metals
whose marine geochemistry is less well understood, broad differences in metal
marine budgets between time intervals can be made by comparison with Mo. The Mo
isotope paleoredox proxy will be used to procure independent constraints on the
extent of regional/global water column euxinia and assess the impact on trace
metal abundances in seawater. Re-Os geochronology may provide precise
depositional ages. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will address four main
questions: &lt;br/&gt;1. How long is the time lag between the development of
pervasive surface ocean oxygenation (and by inference oxygenic photosynthesis)
and the GOE? &lt;br/&gt;2. What is the response of early Paleoproterozoic metal
marine budgets to the GOE? &lt;br/&gt;3. Do metal marine budgets show temporal
trends in the Middle Proterozoic related to increasing biospheric O2 and/or
expansion of ocean euxinia?&lt;br/&gt;4. What implications do such trends have
for climate during the early Earth and how was microbial and eukaryotic ecology
and evolution affected?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This
proposal promotes the early career development of Co-PI Kendall. Additionally,
as a component of their project activities, the PIs plan to establish a pilot
project that will provide laboratory research experience for ASU undergraduates
with physical disabilities (i.e., vision, hearing, speech, or motor
impairments). The ultimate goal of the pilot is to increase access to science
laboratories for postsecondary students with disabilities. It will also leverage
the experiences of Kendall as a successful young laboratory scientist with
severe hearing and mild speech impairments. Specific programs will be crafted
for each student in collaboration with the ASU Disability Resource Center (DRC).
The DRC will provide classroom aids and assistive technologies to facilitate
direct student participation in laboratory research activities, including sample
preparation, analysis, data reduction, and preparation of undergraduate theses.