* 0951919
* QoLT Foundry - New Business Development Generating from an ERC's Research
* ENG,EEC
* 12/01/2009,11/30/2012
* James Osborn, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 11/30/2012
* USD 1,500,260.00

The QoLT Engineering Research Center (ERC) is devoted to carrying out research
needed to advance technology needed to improve the quality of life of the aging
and disabled. This ERC has been experimenting with a Foundry to identify and
assist small start-up firms working on technology arising from the ERC's
research. This proposed effort will expand the Foundry as a broader base for
regional economic development and achieve three objectives: 1) ensure that spin-
off companies emerge from the QoLT Center more speedily and on a sounder footing
than might otherwise be possible for start-up firms, 2) make the QoLT Foundry a
permanent feature of the QoLT ERC and 3) refine and codify the ERC's technology
transfer processes. The effort is a partnership between the ERC, Carnegie Mellon
University and the University of Pittsburgh, industry, local foundations, and
regional economic development organizations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: This project will improve a methodology for commercialization in the ERC
that is already showing signs of promise. That methodology injects non-
technical, market-based considerations into technology and product development
at a much earlier stage than traditional academic research, and parallelizes a
number of the analyses so that the conventionally linear process is accelerated.
Over the next three years it will be refined by tracking and analyzing each
product definition and company formation to develop an understanding of the
various development cycles for appropriate intervention, thereby generating a
model and set of criteria for optimizing resource application in subsequent
efforts. The proposed effort will implement and evaluate a strategy for
narrowing the funding gap (commonly referred to as the "Valley of Death") that
nascent technology based companies experience while transitioning from
university to private sector. Students from Carnegie Mellon and University of
Pittsburgh in engineering, computer science, business, innovation management,
and law are involved. The augmented Foundry effort will develop a better
understanding of how to draw non-technical students into technology
commercialization, and formally assess participation of all types of
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The broader impacts are strongly
focused on generating new business entities that will create new jobs and
economic activity. The strong commercialization imperative has attracted
additional industrial members. The expanded Foundry will improve the probability
of success of QoLT Center spin-off companies, thereby reducing the time-to-
market for QoLT-generated technology. There will be measurable economic impact
in the Pittsburgh region; well over 100 jobs should be created within five
years. The QoLT Foundry will very likely become a model for commercialization of
ERC and other academic research, increasing their value as economic engines. The
impact to society could be substantial as this program will serve as an
integrated research / education / technology commercialization model that can be
scaled across the host campuses and beyond. This activity broadens the
participation of those with disabilities through the nature of QOL technology
development.