* 0951179
* Length Matters: The History and the Philosophy of the Notion of a Fundamental Length in Modern Physics
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2013
* Amit Hagar, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 06/30/2013
* USD 221,660.00

This project will develop a history of the notion a fundamental length in modern
physics and it will explore the philosophical problems associated with that
notion. The eventual aim is to produce an extended monograph. Currently, there
is no comprehensive study of this notion. The proposed study will consider the
diverse scientific and philosophical motivations for introducing this notion
into modern physical theories this notion, including epistemic grounds for a
finite spatial resolution or ontological grounds for spatial discreteness. The
discussion will focus on the instantiations of this notion in the 20th century,
and it will characterize and then analyze its philosophical and the
phenomenological consequences of this notion, which are currently at the center
of heated debates in the high energy physics community in struggling to unify
the theories of relativity with quantum mechanics. The PI has already published
two chapter-length journal articles on the subject, and aims to produce six more
chapters for the monograph in a period of three years. These chapters will
discus the history of the idea of fundamental length, the rationale for
introducing it into modern theoretical physics, and both the methodological and
philosophical problems this notion generates (particularly within quantum field
theory and quantum gravity). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project offers an outlook
on the notion of fundamental length that spans two different research programs,
namely the unification of quantum theory with each of the two theories of
relativity. Based on written and oral sources, it builds on earlier historical
studies of the notion of fundamental length in quantum field theory. It will
draw methodological conclusions from the (partly-documented) historical episode,
and applying them to the current attempts to construct quantum theories of
gravity that introduce finite resolution or spatial discreteness. By combining
the methodological analysis with an analysis of the philosophical issues that
surround the notion of fundamental length, the project will bring to light some
of the most pressing methodological problems in modern theoretical physics,
first and foremost of which is the attempt to distinguish itself from pure
mathematics at a time when empirical tests in the regimes it purports to
describe are almost nonexistent.&lt;br/&gt;