* 0951094
* From Comparative Genomics to Photosynthetic Function
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2010,09/30/2016
* Arthur Grossman, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 09/30/2016
* USD 732,909.00

Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Photosynthesis is an astoundingly
dynamic process that can be rapidly tuned to environmental change and the
development of cells. The tuning of photosynthetic activity is critical for
coordinating cellular growth, developmental processes, and environmental
conditions with the photosynthetic production of energy, reductants, and fixed
carbon (e.g. sugars). Dynamic features of photosynthesis include protein and
pigment modifications and conformational adjustments that can take milliseconds,
to more extensive remodeling of the photosynthetic machinery that can take from
minutes to hours. There are still large gaps in our knowledge concerning
mechanisms that coordinate photosynthetic activity with environmental change and
developmental processes. This project is focused on identifying and
characterizing mutants in a relatively small set of proteins that have been
associated with the green plant/algal lineages, but are not present in organisms
that do not perform photosynthesis. Many members of this protein set, which is
designated the "GreenCut"(Merchant et al., Science 2007), appear to be critical
for activities that occur in chloroplasts, but have no established function.
Experiments will be performed with pre-existing Chlamydomonas (green,
unicellular alga) mutants defective for GreenCut proteins, followed by the
generation of additional GreenCut mutant strains; these strains will be
thoroughly characterized at the biophysical and biochemical levels. This work
will have significant intellectual impact with respect to a number of research
areas: It will (1) confer functionality on proteins that have no known function
but that are associated with the plant and algal green lineages, and that most
likely have some activity associated with chloroplast function (directly or
indirectly); (2) allow for a better understanding of photosynthetic dynamics and
how they are regulated; (3) generate an initial view of the evolution of
photosynthetic components and the ways in which they have diverged in the
different algal and plant groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding photosynthetic dynamics is likely to provide
new insights into ecosystem biology, many of which are suffering severe
degradation (e.g. the demise of coral reefs is linked to the deterioration of
photosynthetic electron transport in the algae that lives inside the animal
component of the coral and provides it with fixed carbon). In a broad sense, an
in-depth development of this project will generate a better understanding of the
interface of photosynthetic organisms with their environment, which in turn will
allow researchers to better manage the various ecosystems on the planet. This
line of research has also stimulated the development of an undergraduate course
called "Photosynthesis; From Basic Mechanisms to Biofuels", which is currently
being taught at Stanford University, and has led to the training of postdoctoral
fellows, undergraduate students and graduate students. Finally, this project has
facilitated both national and international collaborations; with prominent
laboratories.