* 0951200
* Collaborative Research: Epigenetic Gene Regulation in the Social Bee Apis Mellifera
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2015
* Christina Grozinger, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 02/28/2015
* USD 261,822.00

Intellectual Merit: Every cell in an organism carries the same sets of genes.
However different cells perform different functions because only subsets of
genes are activated in each cell. One way that cells activate specific sets of
genes is by chemically modifying particular pieces of DNA. This project
investigates how one such modification, DNA methylation, affects development in
the honeybee. Honeybees are well-known social insects and represent important
species for studying DNA methylation because of their ecological and economic
importance. In addition, the differentiation of honeybee castes represents one
of the most spectacular examples of developmental plasticity: queens and workers
arise from the same genes through differential gene activation mediated by DNA
methylation. Consequently, determining how DNA methylation affects development
in honeybees would help link specific molecular mechanisms to the production of
different developmental forms and provide insight into the factors affecting
social behavior.

Broader Impacts: This project will result in several broader impacts to society.
For example, undergraduate and graduate students will be trained in integrative
multidisciplinary research. Research findings will also be implemented in
university classes and laboratories. Moreover, research findings will be
disseminated through popular press and scientific meetings thereby increasing
scientific literacy. Finally, because honeybees are critical species for
pollinating crops, these studies will contribute to improving agricultural
outcomes in the United States.