* 0951831
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Temporal and Spatial Properties of Speech at the Intersection of Production and Perception
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2010,08/31/2012
* Adamantios Gafos, New York University
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 08/31/2012
* USD 4,778.00

This project will address fundamental questions about the nature of the link
between producing and perceiving speech. Existing experimental evidence points
to the automatic and involuntary activation of the speech production system
during speech perception. One goal of this project is to investigate what
properties of speech are important in the perception-production link, a question
that has not been systematically addressed. Speech production involves spatial
properties, which speech articulators make what constrictions where in the vocal
tract, and temporal properties, how those constrictions are arranged relative to
one another in time. A series of cue-distractor experiments will be conducted to
elucidate the conditions under which perception-production interactions occur in
speech. Such interactions will be detected by measuring participants' reaction
times to syllables produced (the cue) while another syllable is being perceived
(the distractor). Subjects' reaction times will be compared in cases where the
cue and distractor share spatial properties (for example, "pa" and "ba", which
both involve a closing of the upper and lower lips) or temporal properties (for
example, "ba" and "da", which both involve similar timing between the oral
closure and vowel voicing). By analyzing the reaction times in such tasks, we
will know if and how the involuntary activation resulting from the perceived
distractor combines with the intended response to the visual cue. A second goal
of the project is to develop a formal computational model of the perception-
production link to account for and unify existing and new evidence for this
link.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Action and perception are known to be closely linked
in behavior. This study investigates a specific instance of the link between
action and perception in speech, thereby sharpening our understanding of the
mechanisms underlying human communication. The project will provide an explicit
computational model of the link between speech perception and production in
specific experimental paradigms involving reaction time data. Such a model has
not been developed despite many years of work on the topic of production-
perception links. This model will be of value to the field because it will help
to refine further predictions, and thus to design new experiments for sharpening
our understanding of perceptuo-motor interactions in speech. A better
understanding of the relation between perception and production may shed light
on the ways in which disorders of one domain may be related to the disorders of
the other. For example, individuals with non-fluent aphasia have difficulty with
speech production but generally not with speech perception, and they have been
shown to improve on certain production tasks through multi-sensory speech
perception training. This research therefore has potential long-term benefits
for revealing clinically relevant insights into the mechanisms of new treatment
approaches. In addition, the methods used to collect and analyze response time
data along with the computational modeling component in this project will add
new important components in an existing training framework introducing
undergraduates to integrative methods in theoretical and experimental
linguistics.&lt;br/&gt;