* 0951147
* Dynamic Route Guidance and Coordinated Traffic Control Workshop
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Kaan Ozbay, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* michael fu
* 08/31/2010
* USD 49,271.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to organize a workshop
that will provide an opportunity to present the state-of-the-art in the area of
Dynamic Route Guidance and Coordinated Traffic Control. The workshop scope is to
determine the most important theoretical and implementation challenges and
opportunities by the most prominent researchers in this area. This two-day event
will be held on June 7th and 8th, 2010 at Rutgers University Busch Campus,
Piscataway, NJ. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dynamic route guidance and coordinated
traffic control and underlying techniques, such as dynamic traffic assignment,
are key to Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS). Although there has been
considerable interest in the development of theories and algorithms dealing with
dynamic route guidance and traffic control problems, both in the operations
research and transportation communities, there has not been a recent National
Science Foundation (NSF)-sponsored workshop dedicated to this important topic.
Given the diversity of approaches and researchers involved in this area, it has
become clear that collaboration between these researchers from different
backgrounds will be the best platform to advance the state-of-the art.
Discussions about challenges and opportunities as well as directions for future
research will be a very important part of this workshop along with the promise
of solving some of the most daunting aspects of this problem.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the ever increasing congestion problem and our
inability of building new capacity, the need for improving the efficiency and
reliability of our transportation infrastructure system is obvious. The findings
of this workshop will make it possible to develop transformational solutions to
take advantage of the emerging data collection and information dissemination
technologies that are already revolutionizing almost every aspect of our lives.
This workshop can then identify key research and educational issues to improve
the operations of our transportation system. The efficiency and reliability
gains that can be acquired as a result of the research in this area will have
major impacts on both commuter and commercial traffic, which will in turn have a
major society-wide impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;