* 0951460
* Arabidopsis TSO1 in Floral Organ Differentiation and Meristem Function
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2015
* Zhongchi Liu, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Ben Holt
* 02/28/2015
* USD 626,448.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;In order for multicellular organisms to grow into
their final size and shape, precise control mechanisms must regulate the number
of cell division cycles and coordinate growth with differentiation. This project
investigates how a gene named TSO1 controls and coordinates these processes in a
flowering plant, Arabidopsis thaliana. As animals and plants exhibit significant
differences in their development and ability to regenerate, they may possess
different mechanisms for regulating and coordinating growth with
differentiation. Investigation of TSO1 function will provide further insights
into these processes and the key differences between animals and plants. Based
on the tso1 mutant phenotype, TSO1 is hypothesized to be a key integrator of
cell cycle control with organogenesis and differentiation in plants. The
sequence similarity between TSO1 and the animal Mip120/LIN54 proteins suggests
that TSO1 may act in a chromatin complex to affect chromatin assembly, DNA
replication, and transcription programs. The project will first identify genes
directly regulated by TSO1 using genomic approaches. Genetic analysis will then
be used to characterize a selective set of target genes and pathways.
Additionally, three proteins, AtRBR, AtALY, and AtMSI1, whose counterparts are
known to act in similar processes in animals, will be tested for their direct
interactions with TSO1. A mutagenesis screen will be conducted to identify other
TSO1-interacting proteins. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts:&lt;br/&gt;In
addition to identifying novel mechanisms that may underlie the significant
plasticity in the growth and development of plants, the project provides
training in genomics and genetics to a postdoctoral fellow, a PhD student,
several undergraduate students from under-represented backgrounds, as well as
high school students. The postdoctoral fellow will follow a career development
plan that encourages independent thinking, development of communication skills,
and student mentoring. The scientists in the project will continue participating
in the "lunch with a scientist" program at a local elementary school. The
activities will impact students at multiple levels and from diverse backgrounds.
Finally, due to the conservation in genes and their regulatory mechanisms
between Arabidopsis and other plant species, knowledge gained from studying
Arabidopsis can be applied to other plant species including crop plants to
improve crop yields.