* 0951076
* Selective Breeding of a Genome-Scale Metabolic Network
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2014
* Ichiro Matsumura, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 02/28/2014
* USD 532,044.00

Intellectual Merit:

The metabolic pathways of any particular cell form a single interconnected
network. The Investigator's goal is to understand how this network evolves in
response to the changing needs of the organism. He and his team have developed a
model system that streamlines laboratory investigations of adaptive genome
evolution. They expressed the lux operon of Photorhabdus luminescens, which
encodes an anabolic pathway producing visible light, in Acinetobacter baylyi
ADP1, which naturally exchanges and recombines its chromosomal DNA as it grows.
The model system has an active natural recombination system that enables an
efficient microbial breeding strategy and at the same time, permits the
selection of gene-based metabolic traits that contribute to the production of
visible light. The Investigator proposes to direct the evolution of strains that
produce even more light, and to investigate the most hypermorphic strain by
genome sequencing, microarray analysis and biochemical studies of the evolved
proteins. This work will show how evolutionary tradeoffs can optimize the flux
through a model anabolic pathway. These lessons could be applied to increase the
biosynthetic yields of biofuels, materials, and other economically valuable
compounds.

Broader Impact:

Many prospective molecular biologists lack the financial resources to conduct
research. The cost of the basic equipment necessary to transform Escherichia
coli (centrifuge, 80° C freezer) imposes a formidable entry barrier. A. baylyi
is naturally competent, so it can be transformed without expensive hardware. The
Investigator's team has created a novel expression vector for this organism, and
has written software that shows users how to combine DNA fragments in overlap
PCR reactions. A determined high school student or hobbyist could use these
tools to create and express novel genes in minimally equipped home laboratories.
This study will inspire novice scientists to design and conduct their own
experiments, and eventually to seek formal training.