* 0951802
* Collaborative Proposal; Environment, Society, and Economy:  Modeling New Behaviors Emerging from Coupling Physical Coastal Processes and Coastal Economies
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2014
* Brad Murray, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 06/30/2014
* USD 460,036.00

Human activities increasingly influence landscape change in many environments,
both directly through construction and agricultural activities and indirectly
through changes to the natural processes that shape landscapes. In turn, the
processes that shape landscapes affect humans, often posing natural hazards. In
coastal environments these two-way interactions involve coastal erosion, which
threatens coastal communities, and shoreline-stabilization efforts, which affect
the evolution of the surrounding coastline. Previous numerical modeling has
shown that localized shoreline stabilization efforts, such as nourishing beaches
by adding sand, can alter shoreline erosion rates even in distant parts of a
coastline. Thus, a coastal community that chooses to stabilize its shoreline
inadvertently affects other communities, so that the economies and management of
coastal communities are linked. This research will use numerical modeling to
address the kinds of coupled environmental and economic patterns that emerge
under different decision-making regimes. An economic component to the numerical
modeling, based on an empirical relationship between property values and beach
width, determines the beach replenishment strategy that optimizes the net
benefits to an individual community. Coupling this model to a coastline-change
model reveals the unexpected ways that communities unwittingly interact with one
another, and the feedbacks that induce some communities to shoulder more of the
shoreline stabilization effort than others. In contrast, a different economic-
model approach will analyze what pattern of beach replenishment would maximize
the net benefits of a stretch of coastline more holistically. This project will
investigate the different patterns of coastline change and economic benefits
these approaches would produce under different scenarios for: 1) sea-level rise;
2) changing storm climate; 3) coastline physical and economic attributes; and 4)
diminishing common-pool sand resources and the associated increase in the price
of beach replenishment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Changes in coastal environments
can no longer be understood by considering either physical or economic processes
in isolation; this research provides a necessary step toward understanding the
dynamics of developed coastlines?what causes the patterns of shoreline erosion
and economic impacts under various possible futures (given uncertainties in
climate change and economic driving factors including sand resources). The
results of computer-model experiments testing how coordinated planning for
shoreline stabilization could increase net wealth will not only increase basic
knowledge about how coupled human/landscape systems work, but it could lead to
improvements in coastal management strategies.