* 0951493
* International Gender &amp; Language Association Group Travel to Japan
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2010,02/28/2011
* Victoria Bergvall, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 02/28/2011
* USD 20,000.00

This grant subsidizes international travel costs for approximately fifteen US
scholars to attend the sixth biennial conference of the International Gender and
Language Association (IGALA6), September 2010 at the Tsuda College-Kodaira
Campus, Tokyo, Japan. These NSF travel grants primarily target US graduate
students of historically under-represented groups, but may also include other
students, postdoctoral scholars, or untenured faculty. IGALA is the premier
international forum for researchers who study gender and language; its goal is
to internationalize the scope of language and gender research. This meeting, the
first in Asia, addresses a concern that language and gender research draws its
generalizations too heavily from white, middle-class American and western
European linguistic and social interactions and assumptions. IGALA6 offers the
setting of Japan with its particularly rich history of the formal study of
"women's language." Highlighted areas include language and gender in the Asia-
Pacific, negotiating multicultural/multilingual places/spaces, responding to
change(s) in language education, and gender, language and international
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF support enables the conference attendance
of Americans, particularly from traditionally under-represented groups, who
might not otherwise be able to participate. This brings diverse American
experience and perspectives to the attention of the international community. It
also enriches the outlook of American-based students and scholars who may have
had little or no direct contact with language scholars and situations in other
parts of the world, thus expanding their insight into the diversity of ways
language connects with gender and sexual identity. Past conferences have drawn
foremost scholars from around the world to share their data and theories on
language's role in revealing and constructing human gendered/sexual identities,
ideologies, and interactions across a wide range of cultural settings. Numerous
publications from past conferences include widely cited articles in top refereed
journals, edited collections, and proceedings volumes.