* 0951067
* RUI: COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH. Non-uniform distribution of muscle fiber strain in squid mantle muscle: implications for musculoskeletal system structure, function, and evolution.
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2010,08/31/2014
* William Kier, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 08/31/2014
* USD 272,000.00

RUI: COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH. Non-uniform distribution of muscle fiber strain in
squid mantle muscle: implications for musculoskeletal system structure,
function, and evolution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Joseph T. Thompson (Franklin
&amp; Marshall College) and William M. Kier (University of North Carolina), Co-
PIs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal #
IOS-0950827&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The hollow,
cylindrical shape of the bodies and muscular organs of soft-bodied invertebrate
animals is well suited to functions in skeletal support, movement and
locomotion. This ubiquitous shape, however, may incur a previously unrecognized
cost - large non-uniformities in shortening among the muscle cells arranged
circumferentially around the body. Such non-uniformities pose serious problems
for the muscles, connective tissues, and neural control systems of the muscular
organ, and may force muscle cells in some regions of the body wall to operate
with reduced mechanical efficiency during locomotion and movement. We have
identified a hollow cylindrical muscular organ, the mantle of squids, in which
circumferential muscle cells at different locations likely produce different
amounts of force, shorten at different velocities, and generate different
amounts of mechanical work during a single contraction of the tubular body. We
will use morphological, electromyographic, and biomechanical approaches to
investigate these potential problems and identify mechanisms in the skeletal
support system of the mantle that may mitigate them. The results of our work
promise to reveal new general principles of function for skeletal support
systems, not just for soft-bodied invertebrates but for all animals with
cylindrical muscular organs. Our research will provide opportunities for
undergraduate and graduate students from diverse ethnic backgrounds to learn
experimental techniques in kinematics, muscle physiology, and microscopy.
Furthermore, our student participants will gain experience in the collaborative
and integrative nature of science as they work in teams with peers from
different institutions to collect and analyze data, and present the results of
their work at national and local scientific conferences.