* 0951211
* EAGER:  A New Approach to Provide Effective Public Health Infrastructure in Resource Poor Settings
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Maura Borrego, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Konstantinos Triantis
* 08/31/2011
* USD 38,923.00

The objective of this EArly-Concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER)
project is to develop a new approach to provide effective public health
infrastructure in resource-poor settings by investigating how a highly
successful aid organization, Partners in Health (PIH), offers quality healthcare
services in some of the most challenging regions of the world. PIH was chosen
for a case study since it has implemented a successful framework for public
health interventions in the very regions of the world where engineering
interventions are failing. For instance, PIH has increased access to
reproductive health care by over 400 percent since 2000 for its patient
population. A rigorous investigation of PIH projects in Haiti, which is
underpinned by two alternative theories of international development -
modernization and world systems, will uncover how PIH overcomes similar project
barriers that currently prevent engineers from achieving similar levels of
effectiveness. Interviews with key stakeholders, complemented by analysis of
organizational procedures and reports, will provide the means to understand how
PIH successfully provides modern public-health related services in such a
demanding environment. The project will culminate by translating PIH's approach
into a general philosophy and incorporating it into an engineering
framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Five million people worldwide die every year
from water-related diseases even though technologies exist that could prevent
this from happening. Certainly, world leaders are aware of this problem, and the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), a program initiated by the United Nations
(UN) to end poverty, is an international effort to address, in part, this
epidemic. One goal is to halve the number of people without sustainable access
to clean drinking water and adequate sanitation by 2015 per 1990 baseline data.
While this is admirable, analysis of data from the World Health Organization
indicates that the UN?s measure of success does not ensure the elimination of
preventable water-related diseases, especially in the poorest countries. This
failure is not merely technical, but socio-technical. In other words, numerous
socioeconomic factors beyond the usefulness of the technology itself complicate
the issue. Many engineers have adopted the philosophy of appropriate technology
to address this problem. However, this limits the tools available to engineers
to combat water-related diseases, especially in resource-poor communities that
face a disproportionate number of project barriers compared to wealthy
communities. Thus, appropriate technology may not always be the most effective
technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has the potential to transform
the way engineers think about and solve socio-technical problems. A change in
philosophy will subsequently lead to changes in policy and practice that will
improve international assistance efforts of US-based NGOs and reduce the
associated risks taken by financial institutions when they finance engineering
interventions such as the improvement of a region?s drinking water supply. More
important, this initiative will define a pathway for engineers to: (a) provide a
preferential option for the poor by providing effective technology, as opposed
to appropriate technology, and (b) move towards the end of preventable water-
related diseases in developing countries, just as they no longer persist in
developed countries. Partnerships stemming from this work will open numerous
avenues for NSF to build their own long-term commitments with Haiti and other
international organizations working there. Additionally, this work responds
directly to numerous calls to action such as those proclaimed by the National
Academy of Engineers and American Society of Civil Engineers for engineers to
act as social leaders engaged in interdisciplinary work that enhances the
quality of life for all people, regardless of geography.