* 0951501
* Merging Agent-based Modeling Techniques and Ethnography:   A New Analytic Tool for Studying Illicit Drug Use Behaviors, Markets and Economies
* SBE,BCS
* 11/01/2008,03/31/2013
* Lee Hoffer, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 03/31/2013
* USD 188,160.00

Dr. Lee D. Hoffer, will undertake research on the simulation of the operation of
a local illegal drug market by synthesizing ethnographic decision tree and
Agent-Based Modeling (ABM) techniques as an innovative strategy for improving
ethnographic analysis and utilization. The specific aims of this research are
to: 1) conduct an ethnographic study of the local market that facilitates ABM
development, 2) enrich these data using Ecological Momentary Assessment (EMA)
technologies, and 3) construct a social / economic simulation computer
simulation that reproduces how the market operates.

Complexity Theory suggests social structures emerge from non-linear interactions
of heterogeneous actors changing, and being changed by, their environment.
Investigating the emergent and dynamic social structures of a local drug market
using ABM, the intellectual merits of this study involve the practical
application of Complexity Theory in social science. While theoretical
demonstrations of emergence using ABM are common, well articulated methods for
real-world research applications of social simulation in anthropology are
scarce. This project provides a framework for conducting experiments with
findings from ethnographic fieldwork enhancing both the analytic and descriptive
capabilities of the methodology. Constructing simulations representing results
also expands the utility of ethnography to policymakers interested in
understanding the outcomes of the environmentally embedded and socially
constructed interactive behaviors that anthropologists study.

This project has broad impacts on policy associated with both the illicit drug
economy, as well as future uses of ethnography as a research methodology.
Current knowledge about illicit drug markets is informed by two distinct
literatures. The majority of research involves large-scale studies using data
collected administratively from law enforcement, and other indirect
epidemiological indicators. This research focuses on understanding associations
and outcomes of the illicit drug economy. On the other hand, ethnographic
research has described roles within this economy, transactions, and how local
illicit drug markets and organizations operate. Both research perspectives are
informative; however, neither individually is equipped to link levels of
analysis. Researching the local drug market as a Complex Adaptive System using
ABM will allow research to scale-up results, conduct experiments, and generate
outcomes previously unavailable using other methods. This knowledge will provide
a new perspective for constructing and evaluating policies and interventions to
effectively reduce the impact of these activities.