* 0951462
* Cooperation and Self-Control
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2014
* Drew Fudenberg, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2014
* USD 309,204.00

This award funds research in game theory. The research answers two questions:
First, how robust is the finding that repeated play permits more cooperative
equilibrium outcomes than does one-shot play? And second, how can the standard
model of rational decision making be generalized to account for various ways
that real behavior deviates from that model while retaining much of the model's
parsimony and force?

Work on the first question builds on the large literature on repeated games. In
the earliest work on this topic, such as the familiar prisoner's dilemma,each
player observes the intended action of the others every period, so it is easy to
tell if someone has cheated on an implicit agreement to cooperate. In many
settings, though, players observe only imperfect signals of one another's
actions. One classis example is a repeated partnership game, where the
probability that the period' task is done well, or completed at all, depends on
both the effort of the players and on random factors, and neither player
directly observes the effort of the other. With typical parameters, the
efficient arrangement is for both partners to work, but if the game is played a
single time with an unfamiliar opponent, the equilibrium outcome is for the
partners to act selfishly and shirk. Past work has shown that there can
nevertheless be cooperative equilibria in these games if the players interact
repeatedly and are sufficiently patient. Roughly speaking,in these equilibria
the players cooperate so long as the track record of the partnership is
sufficiently good; they have an incentive to do so because they know that a
series of bad outcomes will lead to a breakdown of cooperation.

The PI analyzes two extensions of this idea. In the first, players do not know
e.g. the productivity of effort, so that they do not know how likely a good
outcome is even if both partners work. The research question is to determine
whether and when the partners will still be able to use the 'shadow of the
future' to cooperate even though initially the causes of the observed outcomes
are initially unclear. In the second extension, players will observe a noisy
signal of other players actions (such as group output so far) at privately known
times. In this case when a player audits the current performance of the group he
is uncertain of just when others last observed it and of what they saw, which
typically makes it harder for players to coordinate on cooperative play. Once
again, the focus will be on finding conditions that allow self-interested
players to cooperate in their common interest.

As a counterpoint to these theoretical analyses, the investigator also conducts
laboratory experiments on repeated games with noisy signals. A pilot study done
shows that subjects can and do cooperate despite the increased complexity of the
noisy environment; the project studies just what sorts of strategies subjects
actually use and which strategies would be most successful.

The second project is based on the dual-self model of self-control, which gives
a precise mathematical formalization of the idea that some observed individual
decisions are the result of a within-subject game between a short-run impulsive
self and a cooler, more rational long run self. The dual-self model has already
been shown to provide a unified explanation of a range of empirical facts which
had previously been explained with separate models, such as a desire for self-
commitment (e.g. not buying Scotch for fear it will be consumed too quickly, or
locking up savings in illiquid and hard-to-access securities), time-inconsistent
choice (preferring $100 today to $110 tomorrow, but preferring $110 in 366 days
to $100 in 365 days) and the Allais paradox of decision theory. The project will
further expand the model to better fit the heterogeneity of real-world risk
preferences, and to provide a unified treatment of small-stakes risk aversion
and the decreasing marginal utility of winnings that is implicit in most
experiments on social preferences. Preliminary work has calibrated the model to
several data sets, the project will use the model to explore an even broader
range of behavior.

The broader impacts of this award include important interdisciplinary
contributions and training graduate students in a number of scientific
disciplines. The project?s work spans several subfields of economics and also
connects to other disciplines. It will help strengthen ties between economic
theorists and experimenters interested in behavioral economics, between
economists working on repeated games and their counterparts in mathematics, and
between economists working on interactive learning and their counterparts in
computer science. The grant will also provide support for graduate students
doing research on related topics. Taking a longer term view, we are hopeful that
the proposed research will enhance our understanding of how and when reciprocal
altruism leads to cooperation; this is of fundamental importance in many
branches of social science and is also a key issue in evolutionary biology.