* 0951432
* US-Mexico Dissertation Enhancement:  Changes in Community Structure and Ecosystem Processes in Response to Armored Catfish Invasion
* O/D,OISE
* 01/15/2010,06/30/2011
* Krista Capps, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 06/30/2011
* USD 13,925.00

Although invasive grazing organisms have been introduced throughout the globe,
little is understood about the effects of exotic grazers on nutrient cycling and
other key ecosystem processes. The major objectives of this doctoral
dissertation enhancement project are to examine whether exotic armored catfish
alter nutrient cycling and primary productivity, decrease food quality and
quantity for native species, and reduce native biodiversity of invertebrates and
fishes in invaded tropical ecosystems. Graduate student Krista Capps, under the
mentorship of Dr. Alexander Flecker, will study the impacts of armored catfishes
on rivers systems in the Grijalva-Usumacinta watershed, a biologically and
culturally diverse region in southern Mexico. The research will be done in
collaboration with Dr. Rocío Rodiles-Hernández of the Colegio de la Frontera Sur
(ECOSUR) in San Cristobal de las Casas, Mexico. The products generated by this
study will include: 1) an experimental framework to assess the effects of
invasive grazing organisms, 2) an understanding of how exotic armored catfish
retain and process nutrients, 3) biological and chemical surveys of armored
catfish invasion sites, and 4) enhanced biodiversity knowledge of the Grijalva-
Usumacinta watershed through the creation and enhancement of biological
collections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The introduction of non-native species is one
of the greatest threats to species diversity and ecosystem function throughout
the world. This study will directly contribute to the general understanding of
exotic grazing organisms and their effects on ecosystem health. Since armored
catfish invasion has been linked to the collapse of freshwater fisheries in the
Usumacinta watershed region, knowledge derived from this study will also have
extensive management implications. The research team will collaborate with the
Mexican National Institute of Anthropology and History to promote management of
exotic armored catfish populations, and will enhance the biodiversity knowledge
of freshwater organisms in and around Palenque National Park, a UNESCO World
Heritage Site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;