* 0951611
* Doctoral Dissertation Research. Generating Alternatives: Processing Focus Structure in Discourse
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2013
* Jeffrey Runner, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 01/31/2013
* USD 7,467.00

This dissertation research is an experimental investigation of the processing
strategies people use to understand utterances containing focus particles. The
meaning contribution of the focus-sensitive particle "only" in a sentence like
"Natalie only met LUCY" has two components under standard assumptions. First,
there is the meaning of the sentence without "only", Natalie's meeting of Lucy.
Second, there is the restriction due to the focus particle that no alternative
to the focus value associated with "only" makes the sentence true, Natalie did
not meet anyone other than Lucy. As is well known, the meanings of such
sentences are highly context-dependent. The context determines which
alternatives the sentence is interpreted with respect to. This research
investigates the contextual factors that influence a listener's consideration of
alternatives in real time, in other words, how comprehenders figure out which
alternatives are most likely, given the various information sources available to
them. The experiments will use a lightweight head-mounted eye tracker to monitor
eye movements as participants identify an object in a scene while listening to
sentences containing focus-sensitive elements (e.g., "Natalie only bought an
APPLE"). Which objects participants look at, and when they look at them,
provides evidence about which referents they are considering as likely
alternatives as they interpret the sentence. By manipulating the availability of
different information types available in the visual or linguistic context, one
can ask to what extent each of these potential information sources helps the
listener restrict the domain of alternatives to the point that the single
intended referent can be picked out. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
described here is notably interdisciplinary: the questions are motivated by
theoretical linguistics and studied using methodologies from experimental
psychology. This research in particular will be informative to both cognitive
scientists, in that it extends the accumulating body of work on incremental
language processing and the contextual sources of linguistic expectations, and
theoretical linguists, by addressing and providing experimental data regarding
the very general problem of domain restriction. The research will actively
involve undergraduates in scientific research, increasing the likelihood that
they will pursue graduate training in the sciences.