* 0951254
* The molecular basis for epigenetic inheritance of trichome patterning in Mimulus
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2010,07/31/2014
* John Kelly, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ben Holt
* 07/31/2014
* USD 560,502.00

PI: John Kelly&lt;br/&gt;coPIs: Lena Hileman, Alison
Scoville&lt;br/&gt;IOS-0951254 &lt;br/&gt;The Molecular Basis for Epigenetic
Inheritance of Trichome Patterning in Mimulus&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will advance our understanding of epigenetic inheritance. Epigenetic inheritance
refers to the transmission of environmental effects to offspring, distinctly and
in addition to genetic inheritance. There is a critical need to study epigenetic
transmission because this phenomenon has been implicated in both agricultural
genetics and human disease. Epigenetic markers play a crucial role in the
differentiation of stem cells during normal human development, the disruption of
development, the propensity to develop obesity or cancer, and the virulence of
microbes. In many cases, these markers are induced by environmental factors such
as diet, temperature, chemical exposure, and maternal care. The objective of
this project is to investigate the epigenetics of a model trait in a model
species: trichome number in Mimulus guttatus (yellow monkeyflower). Trichomes
are leaf hairs that help to defend the plant from natural enemies. They are
easily scored and provide a repeatable response to environmental stimulus that
is epigenetically transmitted to progeny. Extensive prior work makes this system
well suited to the mechanistic study of epigenetic inheritance. In particular,
the researchers will determine whether DNA methylation is responsible for
epigenetic transmission of trichome patterning. This project represents
integrative research that crosses the boundaries of ecology, evolution,
development, genomics, and molecular biology. There is also a substantial
educational component to the project with a particular focus on the recruitment
of Native American students into scientific research