* 0951775
* A Prospective Investigation of Representation, Regulation, and the Transition to Formal Schooling
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2010,01/31/2014
* Tuppett Yates, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Namy
* 01/31/2014
* USD 384,999.00

Developmental and learning scientists increasingly acknowledge that early school
success is as much about what children know as it is about how they come to know
it. Yet scientists' appreciation for the processes that underlie early learning
and educational adaptation has outpaced our understanding of these mechanisms.
As a result, efforts to foster early school success for all children have been
hampered. Children's mental representations (i.e., beliefs about self and other)
and self-regulatory functioning (i.e., abilities to control emotions, behaviors,
and physiology in accordance with contextual demands) are central mechanisms of
both positive and problematic development. However, the individual and
interactive contributions of representational and regulatory processes to early
school success warrant further clarification. Children's self- and other-
representations and their abilities to self-regulate are essential to their
successful navigation of the worlds of peers, teachers, and learning. Moreover,
representational and regulatory systems constitute core mechanisms by which
experiential learning in the family transfers to the school setting. This
investigation will trace the development and organization of representational
and regulatory systems across the preschool period to clarify their individual
and interactive contributions to early learning and school adjustment. Employing
annual observations of parents, children, and parent-child interaction along
with concurrent reports from children's teachers, this study will follow 240
4-year-old children from diverse backgrounds (i.e., 50% poverty; 50% Hispanic,
30% Black, and 15% White; variable exposure to stress and adversity) across the
transition into second grade. Measures will assess representational and
regulatory processes across multiple systems, including cognitive, emotional,
behavioral, and physiological levels of analysis, to 1) trace the development of
representational and regulatory processes across the early school years, 2)
evaluate their individual and interactive contribution to educational
adaptation, and 3) clarify if and how contextual factors, such as parenting,
ethnicity, income and adversity, influence expected relations between
representation, regulation, and the transition to formal
schooling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This investigation will refine and expand our
understanding of children's early learning and adaptation by tracing patterns of
continuity and change within and across representational and regulatory systems
across the early school years. In so doing, this research will contribute to our
understanding of how children learn and, by extension, to innovative efforts
that foster early learning and educational competence, particularly among
children who are at disproportionate risk for school failure as a function of
poverty, ethnicity, or adversity exposure. The transition to school constitutes
a unique period of vulnerability to developmental influence, for better or
worse, with powerful implications for youths' long term learning and success. By
clarifying the interactions among context, representation, regulation and
educational adjustment, this investigation will elucidate pathways of
educational risk and resilience that will inform culturally and contextually
sensitive efforts to facilitate children's safe passage across this critically
important developmental transition.