* 0951259
* Pollen-pistil interactions and reproductive isolation in maize and teosinte
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2013
* Matthew Evans, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Amy Litt
* 03/31/2013
* USD 249,998.00

Reproductive isolation is critical for speciation. This can be achieved by
geographic isolation or by having plants that grow together to prevent
fertilization by pollen from foreign populations of plants. Some plants prevent
fertilization by foreign pollen by using a species-specific pollinator, such as
a single insect species, to deliver only the correct pollen to the female parts
of the flower, called the pistil. However, in wind-pollinated species in which
many types of pollen can land on the pistil, reproductive isolation is achieved
in other ways, including the physiological rejection of foreign pollen grains by
the pistil. This type of reproductive isolation is poorly understood because of
the simple fact that plants of different types cannot be crossed together. An
example of this second strategy occurs between some strains of teosinte, the
wild progenitor of maize, and cultivated maize. It is postulated that selection
for teosintes that can reject maize pollen has occurred during maize
cultivation. Because hybrids can be made in controlled conditions by pollinating
maize plants with teosinte, this situation provides a model system for the study
of physiological, reproductive isolation in a wind-pollinated crop plant. By
crossing maize females by teosinte pollen this trait has been conferred to some
maize lines, and in many cases the trait is controlled by a single locus,
Teosinte crossing barrier1 (Tcb1). The Tcb1 gene has been located to a small
region of chromosome 4. In this project, the Tcb1 gene is to be cloned and its
DNA sequence determined. With the DNA sequence of the gene known, the manner in
which the protein encoded by Tcb1 creates a barrier to maize pollen can be
studied, and studies of the role of Tcb1 like genes in reproductive isolation
and speciation of wind-pollinated plant families will be possible. The broader
impacts of this project include a greater understanding of the molecular basis
for speciation, which has implications far beyond this study system. This
project also provides training opportunities for high school students,
undergraduate students and a postdoctoral researchers.