* 0951410
* Symposium PP: Materials Education-Marni Goldman Memorial Symposium; Boston, MA; November 30 - December 4, 2009
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2010
* Eric Marshall, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* Carmen I. Huber
* 09/30/2010
* USD 17,700.00

This award provides support for Symposium PP: Materials Education and a special
tribute session to Marni Goldman at the Fall Materials Research Society (MRS)
Meeting, Nov. 30 ? Dec. 4, 2009. Materials Research Society will use NSF support
to defray travel expenses of participants who might not ordinarily attend such a
meeting, such as students and education and outreach staff.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MRS education symposium will address three major
topics: Crosscutting Issues, which will include panel sessions on evaluation and
assessment, inquiry based learning, and grant development; Curriculum
Development and Pedagogy - Public outreach, K-12, undergraduate, and graduate
levels; and, the Marni Goldman Memorial Session which will focus on persons with
disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The Materials
Education symposium is expected to advance knowledge and understanding on cross-
cutting issues critical to all levels of materials education. This symposium
will benefit from concomitant events around the MRS: the annual meeting of MRSEC
and NSEC Education Coordinators, Nanoscale Informal Science Education Network
(NISE Net), and MRS Public Outreach Committee
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;A primary objective of
the meeting is to increase capacity of the materials research community to
broaden the impact of their research. This symposium will focus on broadening
participation of underrepresented groups, in particular those with disabilities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;