* 0951463
* The Motivated Origins of the Cross Race Effect
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2014
* Kurt Hugenberg, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Sally Dickerson
* 09/30/2014
* USD 199,999.00

This project investigates the mechanisms underlying the Cross-Race Effect (CRE),
or the tendency to more accurately recognize members of one?s own racial group
compared to members of other racial groups. Despite the robustness of the CRE
across experimental contexts, coming to agreement on a satisfying theoretical
account for this troubling effect has proven difficult. Perhaps the longest
standing explanation for the CRE is the perceptual expertise hypothesis. In
essence, de facto segregation leads to individuals having no experience with
cross-race faces, leading to worse recognition. Although this is certainly part
of the CRE, recent evidence suggests it is not the entire story. To this end,
the current research will investigate the extent to which differential motives
to individuate SR and CR faces rather than differential expertise, can account
for the CRE. Across 12 experiments, this proposal tests the hypothesis that
inducing perceivers to individuate faces will substantially improve recognition,
and alone can even account for the CRE. This research tests the hypothesis that
individuation motives can be induced through a shared group membership (e.g., a
same-race face, a shared university affiliation), through a targets? behavior
(e.g., an individual acting in a powerful manner), or even through egocentrism
(e.g., a target being similar to the self). More importantly, these
individuation motives are predicted to change how faces are processed.
Individuated faces (e.g., SR faces) are predicted to elicit more attention and
to draw attention toward identity-diagnostic regions of the face (e.g., the
eyes). Finally, directly contradicting expertise models, the motivated origins
of the CRE predict that under situations where individuals are motivated to
perceive ingroups as homogeneous (e.g., identity threat) should actually reduce
the ostensibly highly expert SR face processing and recognition.

This targets a chronic, real-world social problem that typically disadvantages
minority populations. The research outlined here will substantially graduate and
undergraduate training by involving a diverse pool of graduate and undergraduate
researchers. Finally, this motivated model of the CRE offers a novel means of
reducing the potentially deleterious consequences of the CRE: individuation. The
PI's plans to disseminate results of this research with potential real world
impacts that will ultimately motivate perceivers to process information about
others differently.