* 0951886
* Pax6 and the genetic regulation of eye development in Tribolium
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2014
* Markus Friedrich, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 03/31/2014
* USD 500,000.00

Pax6 genes encode a highly conserved DNA binding protein (transcription factor),
which performs essential regulatory functions during eye development in most
animal species investigated including humans. How Pax6 adopted and executes this
deeply conserved role is not yet completely understood. One question is whether
Pax6 acts by specifying a large region of the head, where the eyes will develop,
or by more specifically instructing the cells that will differentiate into
retina. Another question is whether Pax6 acts solely at the top or at multiple
levels of the network of genetic interactions, which orchestrate the development
of the eye. This project will elucidate how Pax6 regulates eye development in
insects by determining the consequences of downregulating Pax6 expression in the
developing eye of the flour beetle Tribolium castaneum. Preliminary data
indicate significant differences to the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster, where
Pax6 has likewise been extensively studied. The strategy employed in this
project takes advantage of the genome sequence information available in both
species, which allows for efficient determination of gene expression levels by
high throughput sequencing. Moreover, the comparison between Tribolium and
Drosophila will reveal mechanisms that have remained conserved since the
separation of the two species at least 300 million years ago and can therefore
be assumed to be of universal importance in animal eye development. Tribolium
and related darkling beetles (Tenebrionidae) are pest species of major economic
impact. In addition, mutations of Pax6 in humans are associated with severe
visual birth defects. Therefore, results from this research will benefit ongoing
efforts to solve food storage and human health problems. This research will also
enhance the professional training of one Ph.D. student and a postdoctoral
research assistant as well as education in the USA as experimental modules of
the project will be integrated in a laboratory class offered to undergraduate
and graduate students.