* 0951976
* Photodissociation Dynamics of Transient Species:  Hydrogen-Bonded Dimers and Trimers
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2013
* Hanna Reisler, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Tanja Pietra√ü
* 05/31/2013
* USD 564,000.00

In this project, supported by the Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms Program of
the Chemistry Division, Professor Reisler will undertake a detailed study of the
predissociation dynamics of hydrogen-bonded complexes in the gas phase. Despite
their weak bonding, hydrogen bonds are crucially important in environments
ranging from living cells to icy bodies in the solar system. To gain insight
into the predissociation mechanisms, the state resolution and detection
sensitivity of photofragment ion imaging will be exploited to obtain pair-
correlated distributions of fragments following laser excitation of one subunit
of hydrogen-bonded dimers or trimers of water, acids and bases. Cyclic trimers
will serve as prototypes of vibrational energy dissipation in larger hydrogen-
bonded networks. State-specific energy flow patterns that lead to bond breaking
will be inferred from quantum state distributions in the fragments, and bond
dissociation energies will be obtained with spectroscopic accuracy. Vibrational
predissociation dynamics and mechanisms will be elucidated by comparisons with
high-level calculations of benchmark complexes involving water, ammonia, or
hydrogen chloride. The ultimate goal is to understand the yet unexplained
exquisite state specificity in vibrational energy flow that leads to bond
breaking, which depends strongly on the specific complex and the excited
vibrational mode.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students participating in this research
observe experimental manifestations of concepts learned in courses on
spectroscopy and dynamics, compare their experimental results to theory, and
construct dynamical models that emphasize physical insight. The chosen molecular
systems are relevant to atmospheric processes that affect climate change,
enhancing student awareness of societal impacts. Results will be shared broadly
with the scientific community, and the previously developed image reconstruction
method, Basis Set Expansion Method (BASEX), continues to be popular. Students
learn problem-solving techniques applied to broad areas of science and
technology, preparing them to join the high technology workforce. The principal
investigator in this project develops and leads a range of activities aimed at
encouraging women in science and engineering to pursue research careers. She
also participates in mentoring programs that promote career preparation and
advancement of members of underrepresented groups.