* 0951688
* CAREER:  Planning and Control for Overconstrained Mechanisms
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2009,01/31/2012
* Todd Murphey, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* George Chiu
* 01/31/2012
* USD 223,903.00

The goal of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program research is
to produce hybrid estimators, motion planning algorithms, and control strategies
that will work in concert to guarantee performance and stability in the face of
multiple contact interfaces in an unstructured environment. An overconstrained
multiple point manipulator prototype will be developed and planning and control
methods will be applied to this system to demonstrate manipulation that is not
sensitive to the particulars of the frictional interfaces. Multiple point
contact is common in many manipulation tasks. Examples include arrays for
distributed or micro manipulation, vehicles, and traditional robotic grasping.
Although all of these applications have received a great deal of attention, no
previous works have provided an analytical approach capable of dealing with the
inherent uncertainties in the contact state--the state that represents whether a
given contact is sticking, slipping, or is out of contact. These nonsmooth
transitions between contact states have a dramatic impact on the dynamics;
hence, it is important to systematically mitigate the negative performance these
nonsmooth effects induce. Moreover, these systems are often overactuated, so
that each contact interface is independently articulated. This leads to
mechanisms that are nominally kinematically overconstrained--that is, the
kinematic relationships between all the point contacts cannot be simultaneously
satisfied. Which constraint is broken is sensitive to details of friction and
normal force modeling, so it is necessary to estimate the current contact state
and incorporate the contact state into the motion planning and
control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Manufacturing often involves the need to
reposition and reorient objects for purposes of assembly. To accomplish this,
multiple actuators are often used, and these actuators experience stick and slip
contact with the object due to frictional interactions. The physics of the
actuators and, in particular, their interaction with the object are notoriously
difficult to model accurately. Hence, there is a strong need for manipulation
strategies that are not sensitive to these low-level details. Moreover, many
vehicles, such as the original Mars rover, have a mechanical design that
guarantees that some of the wheels must slip during operation. However, which
wheels slip is dependent on unknown environmental conditions. Hence, in this
situation as well there is a need to develop motion planning strategies that are
guaranteed to work even in the presence of substantial uncertainty arising from
the environment. This project will contribute to these needs by developing
strategies that have guaranteed performance in the face of inherent uncertainty.
In the short term this project will contribute to macro-scale manufacturing and
vehicle control, and in the long-term will likely impact micro-scale
manufacturing.