* 0951944
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: A Grammar of Kuna, a Community-Based Approach to Documenting and Grammar Writing
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2011
* Wikaliler Smith, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Keren Rice
* 05/31/2011
* USD 10,200.00

This project seeks to document instances of naturally occurring speech in Kuna,
a Chibchan language spoken mostly in the Panamanian-Colombian border area. The
data obtained from this documentation effort will then be used to produce
processed texts and a comprehensive grammar of the language, with an emphasis on
community interests of strengthening and revitalization. The initial stage of
the project will focus on collecting already-recorded, but unpublished, texts
and making new audio and video recordings of Kuna speech. The purpose is to
enrich and complement the existing collection of recordings by adding genres
that are not represented currently in the language archives. Just as
importantly, the project will produce several hours of processed texts for
community use, through careful transcription, translation and morpheme-by-
morpheme glossing of selected recordings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project also
seeks to train native Kuna speakers in basic linguistic descriptive terminology
and documentation methods. The participation of Kuna speakers in the process of
documentation, through workshops and seminars, is important because it places
value on community input and ensures continual support of the community in
strengthening and revitalization efforts. The objectives of the project are
lined up with the growing awareness of language and cultural loss among
Panamanian-educated Kuna. This has resulted in an interest in rescuing the use
of Kuna language and the exercise of cultural practices of dancing and chanting
in urban centers. The project can have a lasting impact within the community of
Kuna speakers if its members are encouraged to carry out their own documentation
projects and share new materials with the community. The work presented here,
therefore, serves as a complement to work already started within the community.