* 0951119
* Role of Chemotaxis, Motility and Adhesins during Initiation of the Earthworm-Verminephrobacter Symbiosis
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2010,09/30/2015
* Seana Davidson, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* rollie clem
* 09/30/2015
* USD 500,000.00

Most plants and animals, including humans, have beneficial bacterial partners
that are necessary to enhance health, yet most information about bacterial
interactions with hosts is based on pathogen studies. Earthworms, keystone
members of the soil system, offer an experimental model for colonization of
animal hosts by beneficial bacteria. A common composting worm, Eisenia fetida,
maintains bacteria within kidney-like organs and deposits these symbiotic
bacteria into egg capsules to colonize earthworm embryos. This study
investigates mechanisms that enable bacterial symbionts to detect, migrate into
and colonize a particular organ of their host during early development. Crucial
elements for the success of both pathogens and beneficial bacteria are the
targeting of and attachment to appropriate tissue, followed by subsequent
growth. Information about bacterial colonization gained in this study will
better equip scientists and medical professionals to combat disease and promote
beneficial microbes. The study has several goals: to (1) determine genes
involved, (2) identify sensory mechanisms used by symbiotic bacteria to locate
tissue, and (3) identify cell surface features of the host to which bacteria
bind. Approaches include genetics to analyze gene function, and biochemistry and
cell staining methods to identify cell surface proteins and sugars. This work
will reveal key mechanisms beneficial bacterial use to successfully colonize the
correct tissue. Genomic data generated by this work will be available through
appropriate public gene databases. Findings will be published in a timely manner
and updated on the lab website. Activities include education of young
scientists, including women, and public outreach in the form of hands-on
demonstrations for children in grades 3-8, and webpage updates for both
experienced scientists and the public. This research will impact a range of
scientific disciplines including developmental biology, pathobiology, and soil
ecology.