* 0951900
* Examining Development and Ultimate Attainment in Second Language Processing: An ERP Investigation
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2010,10/31/2015
* Alison Gabriele, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 10/31/2015
* USD 294,945.00

The leading questions in adult second language acquisition explore what
capacities the learner brings to the initial task of language learning, how the
second language develops over time, and whether native-like attainment is
possible. Recently these questions have been addressed from the perspective of
neurolinguistics, allowing a fine-grained characterization of the processes
underlying online comprehension in second language learners. Several studies of
high-proficiency late learners have reported native-like effects for syntactic
processing but we still have little understanding of the constraints on native-
like attainment, as many of these studies have investigated properties that are
similar in the first and second languages. In addition, studies of very early
learners have shown that similarity between the native and target language
modulates the emergence of native-like effects, but we still have little
understanding of whether it is similarity in the inventory of morphosyntactic
features or similarity in the way in which a given morphosyntactic feature is
realized in the surface morphology that facilitates acquisition. The present
project addresses these outstanding issues, utilizing event-related potentials
(ERPs) to examine the processing of gender and number agreement by English-
speaking adult learners of Spanish. The first study examines learners at three
proficiency levels, investigating both the role of the native language and the
role of structural distance between the agreeing elements at different stages of
development and examining whether or not native-like attainment is possible when
properties differ in the first and second language. The second, longitudinal
study, tracks students enrolled in their first year of Spanish in order to
examine developmental changes in brain responses at three different points. This
study investigates whether learners are sensitive to agreement anomalies at
early stages and examines to what extent this sensitivity is modulated by the
properties of the native language and the structural distance between the
agreeing elements. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In adopting both a cross-sectional and
a longitudinal approach, the project examines both the constraints on native-
like attainment and the way neurophysiological effects emerge during
development, crucially investigating what factors affect development throughout
acquisition. The study will thus shed light on the developmental process of
adult second language acquisition and will introduce a new framework for
investigating the components of the second language that present the biggest
challenge throughout different stages of learning, informing pedagogical
approaches for adult learners. Furthermore, investigating the nature and scope
of adult second language acquisition provides a highly-constrained, hypothesis-
driven test case for probing the reorganization of a cognitive system in
adulthood. Thus, this approach to examining second language acquisition will
provide new insights regarding the nature of brain plasticity more broadly. The
project will also serve to train the next generation of linguistics
undergraduate and graduate students in the fields of second language acquisition
and neurolinguistics.&lt;br/&gt;