* 0951843
* EAGER PROPOSAL: An Exploratory and Radically Different Approach for Control of a Tandem Hot Metal Strip Rolling Process for Product Quality Improvement.
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Marwan Simaan, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* George Chiu
* 08/31/2011
* USD 123,979.00

The objective of this award is to perform exploratory research into a radically
different control mechanism for the tandem rolling of hot strip in a metal
finishing process. This process is a highly significant part in the overall
manufacturing of metals such as steel or aluminum. For example, in the case of
steel almost one half of the finished product made in the world is rolled on a
tandem hot strip finishing mill. The successful completion of this research will
ultimately lead to a major improvement in the quality and yield of the final
product of this process. The approach toward this research includes the
development and verification of a mathematical model of the process, the
exploratory research leading to the discovery of a novel method of nonlinear
control for this process, and the evaluation of the extent of improvement in the
quality and yield that will be realized in the process output. The results of
this effort will be an improvement in the overall hot metal strip manufacturing
process. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The improvement in quality and yield of the
final product of tandem hot metal rolling that results from the successful
completion of this research will produce major cost savings, and thus will be a
significant step toward the revitalization of a vital domestic industry. A
broader impact generated by these cost savings will be the incentives for the
construction of new plants and the upgrade of existing facilities to counter the
pressure from fierce international competition. The variety of skills required
will provide an expansion of employment opportunities which will have a very
positive impact on societal infrastructure. Another broader impact will be
addressed by presentations at university seminars to reach graduate and
undergraduate students whose employment in the metals industry will help relieve
a crucial shortage of talented engineers in this area. &lt;br/&gt;