* 0951661
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: The Jaen Region and the Eastern Slopes: A Study of Interregional Interaction and Changing Sociopolitical Complexity in Prehispanic Peru
* SBE,BCS
* 11/15/2009,04/30/2013
* Richard Burger, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2013
* USD 20,000.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Richard Burger, Mr. Ryan Clasby will collect data
for his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct archaeological investigations at
the site of Huayurco in the Jaén region of the northeastern slopes of the
Peruvian Andes. The primary objective of this research is to investigate the
impact of interregional interaction on changes in sociopolitical complexity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The densely forested eastern slopes of the Andes have long
been considered marginal to cultural developments occurring on the Central
Andean coast and highlands. However, recent archaeological and ethnohistorical
investigations have demonstrated that the eastern Andean slope populations were
intimately involved the historical processes of the Central Andes, often
facilitating economic and ideological exchange between the peoples of the coast,
highlands, and tropical lowlands. These interregional interactions helped to
create shared histories between these different environments, impacting each
region's cultural development. At issue is how these relationships affected
sociopolitical change in the eastern Andean slopes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
investigating this question, the Jaén region has been selected as it is well
situated between the Central Andes, Amazonian lowlands, and Northern Andes.
Ethnohistorical and archaeological evidence have shown that this region has a
long history of involvement in exchange with diverse populations across these
different environments. Excavation will occur at Huayurco, a site consisting of
seven platform mounds and two domestic areas. Huayurco has multiple occupations
spanning from the Peruvian Initial Period (1800 B.C.) to the end of the Late
Horizon (A.D. 1532) and is thought to have acted as an important exchange node
within the Jaén region during various periods of prehistory.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through excavation and analysis of materials, this
research will contribute to an understanding of eastern slope communities and
their impact on Central Andean sociopolitical development. This research will
address the following questions: 1) how was Huayurco socially organized; 2) how
did Huayurco's growth as an exchange node affect changes in sociopolitical
complexity; 3) what was the patterning of the site's interregional interactions
and how might shifts in these patterns have affected culture change at Huayurco.
In order to address these questions, Mr. Clasby will excavate in both the
domestic and public sectors of the site. Material analysis will focus on the
function of public architecture, wealth/status differences, domestic activity,
craft production, subsistence base, and the presence of interregional exchange.
He will also incorporate lithic, faunal, botanical, and geomorphological studies
to analyze the various patterns of exchange at Huayurco. This includes lab
analyses such as flotation sampling and residue
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will have a broader impact in that
it will help local populations obtain a better understanding of their past and
provide material remains for educational purposes. This research also has the
potential to impact international relationships. Jaén was at the center of a
long-standing border dispute between Peru and Ecuador that was only recently
resolved. This project will demonstrate that the Jaén region acted as an
important link in prehistory between the peoples inhabiting modern Ecuador and
Peru. This research will also contribute to the graduate training of a young
scholar.