* 0951434
* Oceans and Human Health Symposium and Workshop: Accomplishments and Future Directions
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2011
* Sharon Smith, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2011
* USD 40,000.00

The urgency of the Oceans and Human Health (OHH) discipline grows daily as the
world's population increases and continues to migrate to the coastal zone, at
the same time that climate change threatens to impose varied disasters on that
coastal zone. The unknowns surrounding the coastal zone and climate change have
elevated the general issue of OHH to the level of a national security threat in
the United States. Five years ago the National Science Foundation (NSF) and the
National Institutes of Environmental Health Science (NIEHS) cooperated to fund
four national centers of Oceans and Human Health research. Each NSF-NIEHS center
was tasked to actively pair biomedical scientists with ocean scientists in the
pursuit of answers to scientific questions arising at the interface of these two
previously separate areas of inquiry. We have now reached the point where we
should synthesize the knowledge we have gained over the past five years,
identify the most important discoveries, and attempt to describe areas in which
future oceans and human health research would be most
productive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With support from this award, researchers at
the University of Miami will convene an Oceans and Human Health Symposium and
Workshop to review and discuss in a comprehensive and synthetic way what has
been accomplished over the past five years by the four NSF-NIEHS Centers and
what the new discipline of OHH could accomplish over the next decade. The
meeting is scheduled for April, 2010, in Washington,
DC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The meeting agenda will be built around two general
foci: OHH advances to-date and future challenges. Topics for the OHH advances
portin will include: (1) direct human microbial health hazards in recreational
marine waters; (2) ocean food web health hazards; (3) modeling and prediction of
Harmful Algal Blooms; and (4) interdisciplinary training. The future challenges
portion will include: (1) climate change; (2) natural disasters; (3) coastal
impacts; and (4) nterdisciplinary training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: This symposium/workshop will provide a venue for research networking
and collaborative interactions not only between current Center researchers and
students, but also among other researchers, science administrators, and policy
makers in multiple federal agencies and other organizations in the expanding the
OHH community. This will also be an opportunity for all participants to assess
the relative advantages and disadvantages of a centers-oriented approach to
federally supported OHH research.