* 0951394
* Investigations of Marine and Terrestrial Natural Products
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/2010,01/31/2014
* Madeleine Joullie, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 01/31/2014
* USD 450,000.00

This research program explores both the synthesis of novel molecules and
methodology studies. These novel natural products include gliovirin, ceanothine
D, and the marinopyrroles. The methodology studies will involve mechanistic
studies and further applications of the trisubstituted aziridine ring opening
reactions. Gliovirin is known for its biological activity but it has never been
synthesized. The proposed synthetic strategy will explore a furan Diels-Alder
reaction that could prove applicable to other structurally similar compounds.
Ceanothine D is a unique cyclopeptide alkaloid whose absolute configuration
remains unknown. Two approaches are designed to synthesize this compound. The
first will investigate a novel strategy using the aziridine opening methodology
previously developed. The second approach will involve a more traditional
synthetic strategy. The absolute configuration of the product will be
established as well. Investigation of the trisubstituted aziridine ring opening
reactions will continue. The reaction has shown utility in the stereoselective
synthesis of quaternary centers. Application of different nucleophiles to these
aziridines will elucidate the reaction mechanism and afford chiral synthons for
other synthetic endeavors. The marinopyrroles are a class of densely halogenated
natural products. These antimicrobial active bis-pyrrole structures exhibit
axial chirality and tetrachlorination of the bis-pyrrole core. The proposed
program will develop synthetic strategies for these novel natural products,
expand current methodological studies, and work to educate students for the
continued advancement of organic synthesis.

With the support of this award from the Chemical Synthesis Program, Professor
Madeleine Joulli√© of the Department of Chemistry at the University of
Pennsylvania is exploring the synthesis and properties of molecules that exhibit
promising biological activity. Efficient and reliable methods for their
synthesis will enable the scientific community to understand the bioactivity of
related natural or synthetic products. These bioactive molecules could provide
new leads for anticancer and antibiotic drug discovery, influencing the fields
of biology, chemistry and pharmacology. Gliovirin, a novel compound, presents a
challenging target for synthesis and possesses significant bioactivity. A total
synthesis of this natural product will establish reliable reactions to construct
complex molecular structures as well as provide material for further biological
evaluation. Ceanothine D was isolated from a flowering member of the Buckthorn
family indigenous to eastern and central North America. The leaves from the
plant were used as a substitute for tea during the Civil War and the brew was
reputed to have hypotensive action. The medicinal use of the plant warrants an
investigation into the chemicals responsible for its therapeutic effects. Its
historical background and potential biological activity makes ceanothine D an
interesting target. The marinopyrroles are antimicrobial structures that
represent challenging synthetic targets and show a novel biological mechanism in
the treatment of MRSA (drug-resistant staph infection), a clinically and
sociologically relevant disease state. Scientific education of students and the
general population is important to the future of society. Basic chemical
research provides a platform for scientific education. The proposed program
provides a fertile ground for basic research leading to advanced research areas.
The proposed areas of interest will provide knowledge from which new scientific
breakthroughs may occur. More importantly, the proposed studies will contribute
to the education and future of many students including women and minorities, who
have benefited from previous NSF Awards.