* 0951170
* Uncovering Novel Signaling Interactions in Plant Metabolic Networks
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2015
* Eve Wurtele, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 03/31/2015
* USD 920,000.00

The factors that regulate composition in plants provide a key to utilization of
crops for production of improved and novel constituents. Starch, an easily
accessible and energy-cheap storage of reduced carbon, is formed via
photosynthesis- that is, using solar power. However, little is known about the
molecular mechanisms of this process. This research focuses on expanding the
understanding of the molecular processes, or network that controls the amount of
starch in plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to
identify new genes and mechanisms that impact starch content in Arabidopsis
leaves. The hypothesis is that an as-yet-unidentified gene set interacts with a
novel signaling mechanism that affects starch biosynthesis. The aim is to
broaden the starch regulatory network by identifying functions for a group of
previously uncharacterized proteins that impact this network. The specific aims
of this project are:&lt;br/&gt;Aim 1. Analyze genes that are candidates in the
starch network. By examining the starch content and other constituents in
mutants for genes provides an approach to determine the role of each gene.
&lt;br/&gt;Aim 2. Refine and expand the starch transcriptional network. Data
from experiments of Aim 1 will be analyzed by statistical methods and a novel
combination of network analysis and genetic algorithms in the context of the
known starch network. These studies will reveal how selected perturbations in
the starch network effect the accumulation of starch and the health of the
plant, and will generate experimentally-testable hypotheses about which genes
participate in the network. &lt;br/&gt;Aim 3. Identify proteins that interact
with known or candidate proteins of the starch network. Much regulation of the
composition in a living organism is achieved by formation of complexes among
specific proteins. This can activate or deactivate particular processes.
Computational methods will be used to predict from a protein?s sequence and
structure what other proteins it might bind to. By using experimental methods,
we will test these predictions. These data will expand and elaborate on
potential interactions within the starch metabolic and regulatory network.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Taken together, these studies will define novel factors
that control starch accumulation in plants. This integrated research platform
will also provide a prototype of how to study plant composition. In the long
term, these results will help improve crops for food, industrial products, and
fuels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts&lt;br/&gt;This project includes a
comprehensive plan for hands-on high school and undergraduate research
activities in bioinformatics and molecular genetics of plants, for integrating
research and outreach activities among the postdoctoral researcher and graduate
students, and for postdoctoral mentoring. The multidisciplinary approaches in
the research will strengthen the experience, broadening the understanding of
young scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It will also create a new puzzle-like
module on biological networks within the MetaBlast game. MetaBlast is a 3D
interactive cellular world (http://metablast.org) populated with organelles and
proteins. It can be run in an immersive environment or on a laptop computer,
thus it can be used in classrooms and at home. The MetaBlast team includes
faculty, teachers, and students in biology, art, computer science, music, and
game design. The biological network module will be designed to illustrate the
complexities and layers of biological networks. The mission for the student
player will be to engineer interrelated parts of the (simplified) starch
metabolic and regulatory network such that they function to regulate starch
metabolism. The unit will be implemented in two undergraduate biology courses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Educational activities will strongly consider the
underprivileged and underrepresented in science. This effort will include the
integration of students from five programs at Iowa State University targeting
underrepresented undergraduate and high school students.