* 0951091
* Cause and Consequences of Maize Neocentromere Activity
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2010,02/28/2015
* R. Kelly Dawe, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 02/28/2015
* USD 539,857.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;Chromosomes, the packaging units for genetic
information, cannot be transmitted from generation to generation unless they
interact with microtubule-based spindles. Normally, the centromere (constricted
region of a chromosome) binds to the spindles. This allows the spindles to pull
pairs of chromosomes apart, so that one copy of each chromosome ends up in the
new, daughter cell during meiosis. This project will investigate neocentromeres,
which are specialized chromosomal regions that can be used to study how
chromosomes interact with spindles. In maize, neocentromeres can dramatically
change genetic inheritance. One aim of this work will focus on the maize
abnormal chromosome 10 that regulates natural neocentromere activity. Genes that
regulate neocentromeres will be identified using a combination of modern
sequencing methods. The second aim will focus on long arrays of binding sites
that have been added to different positions on chromosomes arms. Known
microtubule-based motor proteins (known as kinesins) will be tethered to the
binding sites, causing the arrays to interact with microtubules. This novel
system will make it possible to better understand how neocentromeres alter
genetic inheritance. Both approaches address fundamental questions in genetics
and will facilitate the development of new methods for improving crops by
transgenic methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;Maize is a
classic American crop that naturally appeals to students of all ages. To broaden
the impact of the research, the project includes travel and student training at
a small university [Kentucky Wesleyan College (KWC)] that serves a rural farming
community. Activities will include summer training for Professor Evelyn Hiatt
and three undergraduates over a three-year period. Visiting undergraduate
students will receive in-lab training and field experience, as well as exposure
to a research setting in a major research university. The tools and
methodologies used during the project will serve as a basis to improve
coursework and training at KWC.