* 0951487
* EAGER:  Recycled Carbonate-Rich Sediment in the Hawaiian Plume? Evidence from Ca Isotopes
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Juraj Farkas, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 08/31/2010
* USD 52,739.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed EaGER (Early Grant for
Exploratory Research) is designed to facilitate the application of a new
geochemical tool (Ca isotopes) to the field of mantle geochemistry using the
well-studied Hawaiian lavas as a case study. This is an exploratory study that
is still in its early stages of development and, hopefully, will demonstrate
through further work that Ca isotopes can be used as a reliable test of recycled
sediments in mantle sources. This proposal involves two early career scientists
(Huang and Farkas) at Harvard University who will combine their expertise in
different fields, and will educate and train graduate and undergraduate students
in state-of-the-art analytical techniques and their applications to geosciences.
The proposed research will also leverage previous NSF investments by using
samples recovered from Hawaii Scientific Drilling Project and Koolau Scientific
Drilling Project that were funded via NSF programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the
fifth most abundant element on the Earth, Ca is a major constituent of three out
of the four major minerals present in the Earth's mantle, and it plays an
important role in our understanding of mantle melting and mantle convection.
Recent development in Ca isotopic analysis revealed large isotopic variations in
modern and ancient carbonates, with ancient carbonates having significantly
lighter Ca isotopic ratios (lower 44Ca/40Ca) than modern mantle values.
Recycling of ancient carbonates into the mantle can, therefore, introduce Ca
isotopic variations in mantle-derived lavas. Hawaiian volcanoes are one of the
best examples of mantle plume-derived volcanism, and extensive geochemical and
isotopic studies on Hawaiian lavas indicate that recycled ancient oceanic crust
and sediments are important in the petrogenesis of Hawaiian lavas. The ultimate
purpose of this EaGER is to expand preliminary analyses that have shown a
slightly lower 44Ca/40Ca than typical mantle 44Ca/40Ca value for some Hawaiian
lavas that could be due to the incorporation of recycled carbonate sediments. If
fully successful, the results will have great impact on our current
understanding of mantle convection and global carbonate cycles, as well as the
behavior of Ca isotopes during magmatic processes.