* 0951479
* Advances in Neurolinguistic Research and Methods
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2010,08/31/2011
* Brian McElree, New York University
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 08/31/2011
* USD 19,808.00

Research on human sentence processing seeks to understand the moment-to-moment
computations that enable competent speakers of a language to understand and
produce sentences. Progress in this domain requires an interdisciplinary
approach, one that draws upon the expertise and tools developed in several
fields. Those tools include experimental and observational methods developed in
psychology and neuroscience; descriptive, comparative and deductive techniques
developed in theoretical linguistics and philosophy; and computational
techniques for creating and analyzing language corpora to acquire information
about language use. This proposal focuses on recent advancements in technologies
for tracking brain activity during language comprehension. The funds support a
special session on the cognitive neuroscience of sentence processing to be held
in conjunction with the 2010 meeting of the CUNY Conference on Human Sentence
Processing (March 18-20, 2010), as well as a 2-day pre-conference tutorial
workshop (March 16-17, 2010). The special session is designed to showcase
cutting edge neurolinguistic research using different technologies. The workshop
is designed to provide a detailed presentation of standard and emerging
neuroimaging and brain monitoring technologies, such as electroencephalography
(EEG), functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), magnetoencephalography
(MEG), transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS), and near infrared spectroscopy
(NIRS). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The special session and the workshop will help
both new and established researchers meet one of the major challenges to
investigating a complex system such as language comprehension. Unquestionably,
progress is best made when a variety of experimental techniques are used to
investigate different aspects of the comprehension system. Expanding a
researcher's skill set is challenging in the best of circumstances, but
particularly so when it involves cognitive neuroscience techniques, which are
developing at an extremely rapid rate. The special session and the tutorial
workshop will create important and unique opportunities for language researchers
to interact with highly successful scientists who use neural methods to address
core questions in sentence processing. Minimally, this exposure should enable a
researcher to become an "informed consumer" of relevant research using these new
methodologies. For cases where these approaches could be fruitfully applied to
core questions in a researcher's area of expertise, this exposure may induce the
researcher to seek out further training or collaborations to capitalize on the
advantages of combining one of these approaches with those currently used.
Although valuable to all in attendance, the special session will provide a
unique opportunity for graduate and postdoctoral students to learn about
cutting-edge research using methods that were not part of their training regime,
as well as to interact with leading scientists using those methods. &lt;br/&gt;