* 0951626
* DDRIG: The Morphology and Syntax of Relativization in American Sign Language
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2010,09/30/2012
* Molly Diesing, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 09/30/2012
* USD 12,000.00

The focus of this dissertation research is the structure of relative clauses in
American Sign Language (ASL). Relative clauses are common examples of embedded
structures in natural language and as such are important illustrations of the
recursivity and complexity of human language grammar. Such structures in ASL
were first described in the late 1970's. This early work identified a set of
non-manual markers (facial expressions and head tilts) which were claimed to
always co-occur with relative clause utterances. Since then however, there has
been little further work done on these forms in ASL, and there is still debate
within the field as to whether or not the structures originally identified as
relative clauses might not be better described as conjoined sentences and thus
not true relative clauses. Determining the actual form and distribution of
relative clauses in ASL is therefore crucial to understanding the nature of both
embedded and non-embedded structures in ASL. Consequently, the objectives of the
study are to identify ASL utterances which qualify as clear examples of relative
clauses, to determine exactly which signs or non-manual expressions are required
in such utterances and under what conditions, and to use these discoveries to
support an analysis of the syntactic structures involved. The research will also
identify several additional subtypes of relative clauses not previously
identified. Natural language data will be collected from native speakers of ASL
in the areas of Rochester, NY and Washington, DC through one-on-one interviews
designed to elicit relative clause structures in a variety of syntactic
positions. These interviews will be recorded with high-definition video
equipment to allow for the most accurate transcription of subtle but
grammatically important non-manual markers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
will be an important contribution to the understanding of sign language syntax.
Like other minority languages, ASL has historically been incorrectly seen as
inferior to English, in part because of the different modality. It is frequently
the case that important grammatical markers in ASL, such as those indicative of
relative clauses, are articulated on the face rather than the hands. A better
understanding of the morphological structure of these non-manual grammatical
markers has the potential to inform the teaching of ASL as a second language,
and serve to improve the general perception of ASL as a rich and complex
language.