* 0951595
* Doctoral dissertation research: The Effects of Syntactic Complexity on Native and Nonnative Agreement Processing: An Event-Related Potentials Investigation
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2010,02/29/2012
* Lee Osterhout, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 02/29/2012
* USD 12,000.00

Many languages of the world show grammatical agreement of some sort, where the
grammatical features of a linguistic constituent are visible on another
associated constituent. Recent psycholinguistic research has uncovered a number
of semantic and syntactic factors that influence how we compute agreement during
language production, though much less is known about how these factors interact
during language comprehension. Understanding the processing of agreement is also
of critical importance in the field of second language acquisition (SLA), as it
is frequently observed that second language (L2) learners show considerable
trouble with grammatical agreement, often despite many years of formal language
instruction and immersion in an L2 environment. Many SLA scholars have proposed
that L2 learners' problems with agreement are the result of processing problems,
though little research has directly investigated this.

This dissertation research project investigates how subject-verb agreement is
computed during real-time sentence comprehension by native speakers of English
and by advanced second language learners of English from different linguistic
backgrounds, specifically focusing on how a sentence's syntactic complexity
influences agreement processing. The experiment uses grammatical agreement
phenomena to additionally investigate recent hypotheses that nonnative
grammatical contrasts are unacquirable by L2 learners and that L2 learners'
language processing systems are radically different from native language
systems. These questions will be addressed by recording event-related brain
potentials (ERPs) while participants read sentences in English. ERPs have been
shown to be highly sensitive to many facets of native language agreement
processing, though no studies have investigated how syntactic complexity affects
agreement computation. Additionally, ERPs have only recently been used to study
L2 processing. There is thus a paucity of knowledge about the neural substrates
underlying L2 agreement processing or how agreement, syntax, and L1 experience
interact during L2 processing. The inclusion of modern psycholinguistic and
neurophysiological techniques in studying L2 acquisition and processing will
therefore complement the existing rich theoretical linguistic literature on L2
grammatical representation. The outcomes of this research will be of interest to
cognitive neuroscientists interested in language and to theoretical linguists
and psycholinguists studying agreement, its relationship to syntactic structure,
and how agreement interacts with syntactic parsing systems. The results will
additionally be of interest to theoretical and applied SLA researchers, having
potentially significant implications for language acquisition theory and
language pedagogy.