* 0951240
* 12th Conference on Laboratory Phonology
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2010,02/29/2012
* Caroline Smith, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 02/29/2012
* USD 19,999.00

The 12th Conference on Laboratory Phonology (LabPhon 12) will be held at the
University of New Mexico on July 8-10, 2010. The LabPhon conference series
brings together researchers from a variety of backgrounds who employ empirical
methods to study the way that language is organized at the level of its most
basic structural elements, the "atoms" of sound, sign or gesture. The conference
series is distinctive in that each conference is organized around a different
theme. The theme for LabPhon 12 is "Gesture as language; gesture and language".
The objective is to connect the study of movements as linguistic units to the
broader study of gesture as part of communication, including gestures that are
not part of a linguistic system but nonetheless help us communicate. The
conference will bring together researchers who have a gestural perspective on
language and encourage cross-fertilization between different areas of research
as these intersect at the level of phonological organization. This theme seems
particularly timely, as sign language linguistics and gesture studies are
increasingly integrated with longer-established fields of linguistic study, and
recent technological developments in the study of movement are making possible
more extensive and precise analysis of both speech and sign. Special sessions
will center on six sub-topics related to the main theme, with an international
group of invited speakers. Additional contributed papers addressing these themes
will be included in the sessions, which conclude with an invited commentator who
reflects on the contributions relating to each sub-topic. One or two non-
thematic sessions will be scheduled to accommodate significant contributions on
a wider range of topics, and three poster sessions are also planned. Sustained
interaction among attendees is facilitated by the LabPhon tradition of having
only plenary sessions, maintaining an ongoing dialogue during the three days of
the conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;LabPhon conferences enjoy strong
participation by graduate students, many of whom present results of their
ongoing research. Student participation will be encouraged through a favorable
low student registration fee. The opportunities to present and discuss their
work with peers and senior colleagues contribute to the integration of research
with education. Further, the international and inter-disciplinary nature of the
meeting is designed to enhance the kind of networking and partnership-building
that often spawns the most creative new scientific work. Particular efforts will
be made to attract participation by members of minorities under-represented in
scientific research activities, most especially in this case members of the
Native American and Deaf communities. The conference proceedings will be
disseminated not only in formal academic publications but also on the web in a
format designed to interest the lay reader and publicized via the university's
web site. Among the central topics of the conference are several that have
potential to bring direct societal benefits. Greater knowledge of how facial and
manual gestures are coordinated with spoken language production promises to
enhance automatic speech recognition, as well as training for the Deaf and hard-
of-hearing. Deeper understanding of how linguistic gestures are produced
provides a sounder foundation for clinical intervention and language instruction
as well as for applications in speech technology. Study of the special features
of individual languages increases awareness of the significance and value of
every community's language and its contribution to overall human culture.