* 0951841
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  The English of American-Born Chinese in New York City:  Sociophonetic Variation and Social Meaning
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2012
* John Singler, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 03/31/2012
* USD 9,540.00

Rapid language shift has made English the dominant, if not the only, language
spoken by many American-born Chinese in the U.S. How do these speakers draw on
phonetic/phonological variation in American English to construct personae,
negotiate sociocultural boundaries, and project emergent identities? Does their
heritage language influence this process even if these speakers have limited
competence in it? Under the direction of Dr. John Singler, Amy Wong's
dissertation research will examine the linguistic practices of thirty second-
generation Chinese Americans, born and raised in New York City, as they navigate
the social landscape using a range of dialectal variation in English. Merging
sociophonetic analysis with ethnographic methods, this study addresses three
interrelated questions: First, do New York-born Chinese of Cantonese descent
produce the vernacular features of New York City English? Second, does their
English contain features that show phonological effects from their heritage
language? Third, to what extent are these phonetic/phonological resources in
English employed as indices of sociocultural identities and local interactional
meanings?

Ms. Wong will utilize three kinds of data collected from speakers between the
ages of 11 and 29, recruited from several community organizations and social
networking groups: researcher-driven speech collected from sociolinguistic and
ethnographic interviews, speaker-driven spontaneous conversations recorded in
natural settings and in-depth ethnographic information obtained through
participant observation. Well-documented dialect features and understudied
substrate features are analyzed using instrumental sociophonetic techniques.
Quantitative analysis of inter- and intra-speaker phonetic/phonological
variation is informed by qualitative ethnographic examination of speakers'
styles, sociodemographic backgrounds, social alignments and intersecting
identities (e.g. "female", "fresh-off-the-boat", "cosmopolitan"). Results from
this study will inform our knowledge on how ethnic minorities use and possibly
shape the English spoken in a diverse metropolitan setting. They will also
enhance our understanding not only of Chinese American identities but also of
the dynamics involved in identity practices within the changing ethnolinguistic
landscape of the U.S.