* 0951145
* EAGER: From Mechanics of the Eshelby Twist to Nanotube Chirality
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2015
* Boris Yakobson, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 07/31/2015
* USD 150,000.00

The objective of this research project award is to rapidly build on the
overarching concept, a dislocation mechanics in one-dimensional structures of
different geometries and topologies: nanotubes, nano-wires, and their archetypal
building material?graphene. The specific types of dislocations include the edge
and the screw dislocation lines with distinctly different roles. While the edge
dislocation dynamics is greatly responsible for the inelastic mechanical
response, strength and plastic yield (either in nanotubes, or wires, or
graphene), the screw dislocations play central role in the formation mechanisms
of nanowires and?as recently discovered?even nanotubes. The energy analysis will
be performed on the range of structures in order to understand how the
distribution of chiral types varies with the topology of the objects. Notably,
only one chiral type normally occurs for the wires, while a broad range is
systematically produced among the nanotubes. We will further expand this study
to biologically important microtubules, which have analogous mechanical
constitution, while the building blocks are of different scale and nature
(tubulin dimers). Deliverables will include the quantified classification of
tubular structures of different scales and different chiral symmetries, models
of their elastic and inelastic mechanics, including validation through
comparison with experiments, student education, documentation and dissemination
of research results.&lt;br/&gt; If successful, this project will lead to deeper
and cross-disciplinary understanding of topological makeup of a class of
material structures, important and diverse as for electronics, strong materials,
cytoskeleton dynamics. The results will be disseminated through publications,
professional conferences, and presentations to students to potentially enable
making new devices and enabling new technologies outside the academia. Students
will benefit from the direct involvement in research as well as through
classroom instruction, exposing them to the cutting-edge technological
developments. This will have a long-lasting impact as they embark in their
future careers.&lt;br/&gt;