* 0951943
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Learning of Novel Phonetic Categories After Training in Perception and Production
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2011
* Matthew Goldrick, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 01/31/2011
* USD 6,860.00

Humans possess a remarkable ability to produce and understand speech. In order
to successfully learn a language, an individual must learn what the sound
categories in a particular language are and what makes various sounds different
from one another. For instance, "r" and "l" belong to different sound categories
in English, but not in some other languages. Learning how to differentiate
between these sounds and produce them is an important part of learning a
language. Currently much is known about how listeners learn to perceive the
speech sound categories; however, significantly less is known about how speakers
learn about speech categories in production and how learning in one modality
(i.e., perception or production) is related to learning in the other modality.
The relationship between perception and production could take many forms.
Learning in one modality could always lead learning in the other (i.e., an
individual would have to be able to perceive a distinction before they could
produce it). Category formation could occur in parallel for both modalities
(i.e., both perception and production could learn about new sounds
simultaneously). Alternately, learning in one modality could actually hinder
learning in another modality (e.g., learning in speech production could disrupt
learning in speech perception). This study aims to differentiate among these
hypotheses. The experiments in this study are designed to train participants on
novel sound categories with the training focusing on either perception or
production. Then participants are tested in both perception and production.
Untangling how new sound categories are formed and accessed in the two
modalities will give insight not only into the learning process of new sound
categories but also into how the two modalities are related.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The findings of this study will be significant in both
theoretical and applied domains. Having a better understanding of how categories
are formed will help inform theories of learning for both first- and second-
language learners. Understanding how speech perception and production are
related will be informative in the development of models of speech processing in
both perception and production. In the applied domain, understanding how
perception and production interface, particularly at the level of sound
categories, will be beneficial for second-language teachers. Furthermore,
clinicians, such as speech-language pathologists, will benefit from a better
understanding of how the two modalities interact when learning (or re-learning)
novel sound categories. For instance, if patients have an impairment in speech
production, they may be able to use their intact perceptual abilities to re-
train the impaired modality.&lt;br/&gt;