* 0951125
* Mechanism of Homologous Recombination in Archaea
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/2010,02/28/2015
* Cynthia Haseltine, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 02/28/2015
* USD 492,452.00

Homologous recombination is a major mechanism for repair of double-strand breaks
caused by exposure to chemical mutagens and radiation. Repair of these breaks is
an evolutionary imperative and ensures proper transfer of information from
generation to generation without information loss. General understanding of this
process has come mostly from studies from the bacterial or eukaryotic branches
of life. Very little is known about double-strand break repair in the third,
archaeal branch. Archaea physically resemble bacteria, but use some cellular
approaches to life that seem to be more eukaryotic. Key among these eukaryotic-
like processes are methods of genome maintenance, including double-strand break
repair. This provides a unique opportunity to study homologous recombination
mechanisms in an evolutionarily distinct group of organisms. The overall
objective of this project is to use the well established archaeal model
Sulfolobus solfataricus to determine the mechanistic role of three proteins that
are related by sequence to the strand-exchange protein, RadA. The research on
these paralogues will involve graduate, undergraduate, and high school students
using two complementary but independent approaches: 1) Biochemical activity of
the proteins in vitro will be determined individually and in combination with
other known recombination-related proteins, where their interactions and point
of function in the repair pathway will be established; 2) Roles of the
paralogues in vivo will be assessed through studies of protein persistence after
radiation damage and measurement of chromosomal repair rates in both wild-type
and mutant strain backgrounds.

This project focuses on a mechanism necessary for cellular survival following
DNA damage in a member of the least well studied branch of life. In addition to
understanding more about the way in which all cells repair their DNA, this work
is expected to provide new overall insight into the regulation of homologous
recombination and maintenance of genome stability. These studies are
multidisciplinary, using biochemical, genetic, and cellular approaches that will
provide a broad laboratory education for students at various educational stages.
Specifically, this project provides laboratory training for one graduate and two
undergraduate students, with a special emphasis on outreach recruiting of
underrepresented minority students. Additionally, two high school students will
be supported through summer internships, which will offer a valuable research
experience to young scientists at early stages in their careers.