* 0951647
* NSF-NSC Summer Institute on BioSensing &amp; BioActuation
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2013
* K.  Jimmy Hsia, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* John Tsapogas
* 05/31/2013
* USD 180,175.00

BioSensing-BioActuation (BSBA) is a compelling new research frontier that will
have profound impact on both engineering and biology in sensing/actuation
science and technologies. This project establishes a series of three Summer
Institutes on BSBA (SI-BSBA) for early career researchers and graduate students
from the U.S. and Taiwan. SI-BSBA is jointly organized by the PI and Professor
Shuo-Hung Chang of National Taiwan University and is funded in the U.S. by the
National Science Foundation and in Taiwan by the National Science Council. The
goals of the Summer Institute are to provide a platform for researchers from a
diverse background to exchange ideas in the BSBA area, to train students and
researchers in the highly interdisciplinary BSBA area who are knowledgeable in
both engineering and biology, and to promote international collaborations in the
BSBA area between researchers in the US and in Asian Pacific region. Each
institute will include approximately twenty students/early career researchers
from each side. SI-BSBA activities include a 2-week Summer Institute on BSBA
alternately held in the US and in Taiwan. Experts in the BSBA area from
engineering and biology will be invited to give lectures on the basics of
sensing/actuation technologies and fundamentals of biology, as well as on the
state-of-the-art research topics. Hands-on laboratory training of basic
engineering tools such as micro- and nano-fabrication, basic tools from cellular
level to organism level studies, and BSBA components such as neuron-networks and
computational tools will be conducted. The impact of SI-BSBA will be significant
and far-reaching, including developing new research tools, transforming the
existing research methodologies, and potentially leading to solutions to some of
the biggest challenges in society such as the environment, healthcare, sensor
networks, and multi-functional materials. Furthermore, the international
experiences of the participants will be extremely valuable to the next
generation of US scientists and researchers. The Engineering Directorate
Division of Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation cofunded this award
with the Office of International Science &amp; Engineering.