* 0951330
* Electrosensory Processing of Plankton Capture in the Paddlefish Brain
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2013
* Lon Wilkens, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Standard Grant
* David Coppola
* 05/31/2013
* USD 120,000.00

The proposed research will increase understanding of how the vertebrate brain
processes sensory information and translates it into appropriate behaviors. A
very unique animal and sensory mechanism is the subject of the project, the
American paddlefish, which detects and captures its planktonic prey by sensing
the weak electric signals from tiny water fleas. No other sensory modalities are
necessary for successful feeding. The extremely small electric fields are
detected by skin receptors and relayed to the posterior (primitive) region of
the brain where they are processed and sent forward to the midbrain where motor
commands are generated that govern swimming and feeding. This research will
build on what is already known about how the paddlefish brain interprets
electrical signals in terms of the physiological response properties of nerve
cells in the hindbrain and their anatomical features in projecting to the
midbrain. Dyes are microinjected into the brain that are transported along axons
and dendrites of the cells, morphological features that constitute the wiring
diagrams of the brain. Microelectrodes inserted into the brain allow the action
potentials or spike activity of individual neurons to be recorded in response to
sensory stimuli. Using these experimental procedures the current phase of the
study will focus on how cells in the midbrain collect information from
electrosensory and visual inputs, how individual cells come to represent complex
features of the external environment, and the projection of these cells into the
various processing centers (brain nuclei) of the hindbrain and spinal cord that
activate the muscles triggering behavioral responses. This research has already
had a significant impact on understanding the role of electrical signals, which
humans do not experience, in paddlefish biology and corresponding conservation
efforts. The study has also contributed to the research education and training
of students in high school, college, and graduate school.