* 0951079
* Collaborative Research: LiT: Effects of Temperature and Elevated CO2 Levels on Biomineralization and Metabolic Physiology of Marine Bivalves
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2010,04/30/2015
* Inna Sokolova, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Hammond
* 04/30/2015
* USD 315,351.00

PROJECT TITLE: Collaborative Research: LiT: Effects of Temperature and Elevated
CO2 Levels on Biomineralization and Metabolic Physiology of Marine Bivalves

PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATORS: Inna Sokolova and Elia Beniash

PROJECT NUMBER: IOS-0951079 and IOS-0951139

Global climate change driven by an increase in carbon dioxide (CO2) levels is
expected to significantly change biodiversity worldwide. Marine ecosystems are
affected by warming due to the "greenhouse effect" and acidification of
seawater, because higher partial pressure of CO2 causes a decrease in calcium
carbonate (CaCO3) saturation. Marine organisms, especially calcifiers such as
corals and mollusks that build CaCO3 skeletons, are adversely affected by these
changes, but effects of elevated CO2 levels on their physiology and
calcification are not well understood.

Marine calcifiers produce two types of CaCO3: aragonite and calcite. It is
hypothesized that high sea water CO2 levels will affect aragonite-producing
organisms more than those with calcite skeletons, since aragonite is more
soluble than calcite. This project studies three common North American mollusk
species with different shell mineralogies: eastern oysters (calcitic), hard
shell clams (aragonitic), and blue mussels (mixed calcitic/aragonitic).
Investigators will use state-of-the-art analysis to determine how elevated
temperature and CO2 affect shell formation, mineralogy, structural and
mechanical properties, as well as survivability, growth, energy metabolism and
expression of calcification-related genes in these species.

This study will provide new insights into the effects of temperature and CO2
level on energy metabolism and shell calcification in three important mollusk
species representing the major calcifiers in coastal ecosystems as well as key
species for fisheries and aquaculture. The proposed studies will also provide
data for the marine carbon cycle models and help to predict effects of climate
change on marine ecosystems and coastal economies worldwide. The project
provides training opportunities for undergraduate, graduate, post-doctoral and
K-12 students with improved learning through peer- and hands-on programs,
curriculum development and will strengthen collaborations among UNC Charlotte,
University of Pittsburgh and Johnson C. Smith University.