* 0951907
* Western Algebraic Geometry Seminar - Fall 2009
* MPS,DMS
* 11/15/2009,10/31/2011
* Ravi Vakil, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 10/31/2011
* USD 26,470.00

On October 24 and 25, 2009, the Western Algebraic Geometry Seminar (WAGS) will
meet at the University of California at Los Angeles. WAGS is a weekend
conference held twice a year at various institutions in the western part of the
United States and Canada, including the University of Utah, Stanford University,
the University of British Columbia, the University of California at Berkeley,
Colorado State University, the University of Washington and now the University
of Colorado and the University of Arizona. The seminar traces its roots back to
the Utah-UCLA Algebraic Geometry Seminar started in 1989 by H. Clemens, D.
Gieseker, M. Green, J. Kollar, and R. Lazarsfeld. In its current form WAGS has
run since 2002, and every WAGS has had over 50 participants. For the UCLA-WAGS,
currently there have been 55 registered graduate students, and there are about
30 faculty participants. WAGS has been instrumental in building a vibrant
algebraic geometry community in the western part of US. It provides an important
way for researchers to connect to one another in the broader geographical area.
This is especially important in the west since many algebraic geometers there
are the only members of their department in the &#64257;eld, and the
geographical distance between the research institutions in the western United
States means they can be relatively isolated. A crucial feature of WAGS is that
it provides an opportunity for them to come together and hear a semesters worth
of seminars, and equally importantly, meet at length with each other and with
younger researchers. Graduate students get the opportunity to meet senior
faculty, and to get a broader sense of the &#64257;eld than they would get from
speaking only with their advisor. The success of WAGS is underscored by the fact
that many people around the world currently leading the &#64257;eld of algebraic
geometry have come up through the WAGS system.



The speakers this fall will discuss their research in the field of algebraic
geometry. Algebraic geometry concerns the solution sets of algebraic equations,
and has long been a central subject in mathematics with deep and substantial
connections to almost every aspect of modern mathematics. Beyond the natural
interactions with ?neighboring? mathematical &#64257;elds such as number theory,
symplectic geometry, topology, and commutative algebra, exciting connections
have recently emerged between algebraic geometry and apparently ?foreign? fields
including mathematical physics, biology, digital communications, and robotics.
There are numerous di&#64256;erent approaches to the study of algebraic
geometry, utilizing a wide variety of technical tools; commutative algebra,
complex analysis, sheaf theory, cohomological methods, and combinatorial
techniques all play important roles. Algebraic geometry continues to be a very
active area of research. The recent year has been particularly exciting, as
signi&#64257;cant progress was made on ?classical? problems with roots going
back to the 19th century (such as the minimal model program), as well as on the
development of new tools and techniques (for example the extension of Givental?s
formalism to the world of stacks). This broad and active &#64257;eld is widely
represented in the Western United States. The speakers at WAGS this fall
represent a broad spectrum of research in the field and a good mix of
established figures and young active researchers. The organizers expect that the
conference at UCLA will continue to facilitate the development of the algebraic
geometry community in the Western United States.

