* 0951348
* Collaborative Research: Neural, Behavioral and Computational Investigations of Vocal Sequencing in Songbirds
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2010,07/31/2014
* Todd Troyer, University of California-San Francisco
* Continuing Grant
* David Coppola
* 07/31/2014
* USD 265,000.00

The proposed research will initiate a cross-institutional collaboration between
an electrophysiologist and a computational neuroscientist to examine fundamental
questions about how the brain produces complex sequences of behaviors. Research
will be conducted using songbirds, animals that produce a richly structured
sequence of highly reproducible song syllables. Previous studies have recorded
the activity individual brain cells while birds are singing, and have shown that
neural activity is locked to song production at a temporal scale of several
thousands of a second, a level of precision rarely achieved in the study of
complex natural behaviors. This proposal will exploit this precise relationship
between brain activity and sequential behavior by recording from individual
birds as they sing many song renditions. Sophisticated analysis tools will then
be used to examine both brain activity and song output in great detail. Subtle
variations in syllable features and syllable sequencing will be used as ?natural
experiments? to determine how the precise activity of individual nerve cells are
grouped together to form behavioral units (the syllables), and how these
groupings of neural activity are strung together into syllable sequences. Guided
by these data, computer models will be constructed to better understand the
underlying biological mechanisms that orchestrate complex sequences of brain
activity. As part of the proposed interdisciplinary research, novel algorithms
for the fine-grained analysis of vocal behavior will be developed, and these may
find application in related fields ranging from motor control to robotics to
human speech. The proposal also supports a cross-institutional student exchange
between the University of Texas at San Antonio, a Hispanic-Serving Institution,
and the University of California San Francisco, a world-renowned center for
biomedical research.