* 0951287
* Influence of Fatty Acid Desaturation on Plant Defenses Against Aphids
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2015
* Fiona Goggin, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 03/31/2015
* USD 653,068.00

Aphids are a common pest of plants that feed on plant sap, reducing crop yields
and frequently transmitting plant-pathogenic viruses. Cultivation of crop
varieties that are resistant to aphids is one of the most effective and
environmentally sustainable approaches to aphid pest management. However, our
ability to develop such cultivars is hampered by our limited knowledge of the
genes and biochemical pathways that control how resistant or susceptible plants
are to aphids and other sap-feeding pests. The goal of this project is to
investigate how fatty acids in plants may regulate plant defenses against
aphids. The investigators have determined that in two different plant species
(tomato and Arabidopsis), mutations that cause loss of function of a particular
fatty acid desaturase (FAD7) also dramatically inhibit aphid infestation. Thus,
FAD7 appears to be a common regulator of plant susceptibility to aphids. Loss of
function of FAD7 causes dramatic changes in the fatty acid composition of the
foliage, and likely also alters production of a diverse array of oxylipins, a
family of compounds derived from fatty acids. In tomato, mutation of FAD7 also
appears to enhance accumulation of salicylic acid, a plant hormone known to
mediate plant defenses against many pathogens. An emerging body of evidence
indicates that fatty acids in plants regulate salicylic acid-dependent defenses
and pathogen resistance, but the underlying mechanisms are not yet well-
understood. This project will use molecular and biochemical approaches to
investigate how fatty acids, salicylic acid, and specific oxylipins contribute
to plant defenses against aphids, and how fatty acids regulate salicylic acid
signaling. Ultimately, this project should enhance our understanding of plant
defense and contribute to economically sustainable pest management. In addition,
it will provide training for undergraduate and graduate students and
postdoctoral researchers, as well as internship opportunities for K12 science
teachers.