* 0951043
* Post-transcriptional Regulation of Neurofilament Expression during Axon Outgrowth
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2014
* Ben Szaro, SUNY at Albany
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Ann Asson-Batres
* 03/31/2014
* USD 484,000.00

Neurons communicate with each other by transmitting electrical impulses down a
long cellular process called the axon. The central question of this project is
how does a neuron coordinate the synthesis of the many structural proteins that
are needed to make an axon during development? This coordination had long been
thought to occur as genes are first read out (i.e., during transcription), but
new information indicates that much of it also happens afterward, as the
proteins themselves are being synthesized. Loss of a single protein that
regulates protein synthesis, called hnRNP K, leads selectively to the loss of
not only one of the most abundant axonal structural proteins (a neurofilament
protein) but also of the entire axon. Because loss of neurofilaments does not
normally lead to loss of entire axons, hnRNP K is hypothesized to be a global
regulator of the synthesis of multiple structural proteins that cooperate in
building the axon. The first objective of this project is to use high throughput
biochemical assays to identify these proteins. The second objective is to use
mutated versions of hnRNP K that can be visualized in living neurons to study
how the actions of hnRNP K are regulated by cell signaling pathways during axon
outgrowth. The potential impact of this work is to provide new insights into how
neurons coordinate the expressions of multiple, functionally interrelated
proteins during development. This project will provide research training for two
PhD students and undergraduates at a public institution with a culturally
diverse student body. Spinoffs from this work will have an impact on
undergraduate student laboratory exercises in Developmental Biology and on
courses taught by the PI in Molecular Biology, Developmental Neurobiology, and
Molecular Neurobiology.