* 0951630
* Designing Virtual Organizations for Impact and Sustainability:  Exploring a Resource-Use-Impact Planning Model
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2009,10/31/2012
* Brian Butler, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Meszaros
* 10/31/2012
* USD 241,455.00

Increasingly, virtual organizations are being formed to undertake science and
engineering research, but with mixed success. This project creates a resource-
based framework for planning and evaluating virtual organization development
efforts and explores the role that this framework can play in enhancing virtual
organization success. The resource-based framework helps identify whether a
virtual organization will be able to successfully create and mobilize shared
resources through voluntary individual action to leverage the support of
external stakeholders and have significant impacts within and beyond the virtual
organization itself. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project bridges the gap between
social science research, infrastructure design, and management planning and
evaluation. The framework draws attention to the nature of the resources and the
support needed to create and maintain virtual organizations, the activities that
participants will engage in and the expected impacts of the virtual
organization, including how these impacts will be made visible to participants
and to external stakeholders. Interactions between these three areas are also
investigated. The proposed framework will be developed, refined, and tested
through a combination of interviews, case studies, and usability exercises
undertaken with virtual organization leaders and
developers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Creation of science-informed guidelines for
virtual organization design and evaluation is a crucial step in developing
cyberinfrastructure-supported virtual organizations that are more sustainable
and have a broader impact on the team science efforts underway at many
government agencies, non-profits, businesses and NGOs. Developing a tool for
virtual organization planning and evaluation will have a profound impact,
allowing technology to bring together a wide range of resources to solve
critical problems and address fundamental questions. In addition, under-
represented groups and minority institutions can more easily participate in
virtual organizations engaged in scientific and engineering collaborations.