* 0951576
* DMUU: Center for Robust Decision Making on Climate and Energy Policy
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2016
* Kenneth Judd, University of Chicago
* Cooperative Agreement
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2016
* USD 6,054,994.00

As additional governments are acknowledging the existence of climate change,
many are systematically evaluating policy actions to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions. Simultaneously, various groups like utilities, private-sector firms,
and state and local governments are estimating the potential costs related to
mitigation, adaption, or damage and the potential benefits of climate change and
alternative policies. All of these decisions collectively will have economic
impacts measuring into the trillions of dollars. Decisions of such magnitude
should be based on the best possible analysis tools. Such tools inevitably must
be based on computational models because of the complexity of the system of
systems that need to be analyzed to project possible future states, identify
potential unexpected consequences, and understand sensitivity to uncertainty.
This interdisciplinary collaborative group will develop and disseminate tools to
help individuals and organizations make more informed decisions relating both to
short-term economic dislocations induced by climate policies and to long-term
consequences of climate change. The group's primary product will be CIM-EARTH, a
powerful and flexible framework of model components that can be used to help
answer questions across a wide range of policy analyses. At the core of the CIM-
EARTH framework will be an open-source, dynamic, general equilibrium model. The
architecture of this framework will leverage high-performance computing and
numerical methods that enable the evaluation of far more detailed models than
existing code. The group will focus on enhanced representation of key energy
producing and consuming sectors and on dynamic processes, such as capital
investment and technology development. Another key component of the group's work
will be the characterization of multiple types of uncertainty inherent in any
complex system. CIM-EARTH will be developed in the newly created Center for
Robust Decision Making on Climate and Energy Policy (DMCEP), which will be
staffed by experts in economics, energy technologies, energy systems, climate
modeling, and computational science who represent multiple institutions and
countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Robust decision-making research is critical if
policymakers are to fully understand the factors to be weighed in policy design
and choice. While there are existing models that provide some guidance, they
have shortcomings that limit their practical utility. This group will produce
next-generation computational models for analyzing complex system of systems,
with specific emphasis placed on advances in model components that represent
economic systems. CIM-EARTH is expected to create a new standard for open-source
modeling that encourages the participation of a community users and
contributors. In addition, by incorporating recent advances in computer
architecture, numerical methods, and economic modeling, CIM-EARTH will enhance
methodologies that will be of tremendous value to other computational models
with similar complexity. This collaborative group project is supported by the
NSF Directorate for Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences through its
Decision Making Under Uncertainty (DMUU) competition.