* 0951061
* Collaborative Research:   Functional genomics of spider silk synthesis and fiber performance within the Western black widow and among cob-web weaving spiders
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2015
* Cheryl Hayashi, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 04/30/2015
* USD 200,713.00

Among silk producing organisms, spiders are unparalleled in their reliance on
silk and variety of ways they use silk. Most spiders have multiple types of silk
glands, with each type synthesizing a task-specific fiber or glue. Previous
molecular studies of spider silk evolution and mechanical function have focused
almost entirely on the attributes of the main structural proteins (fibroins).
However, the spider silk system necessarily includes fibroin as well as non-
fibroin genes. Hence, in this research, state-of-the-art genomic methods will be
used to identify all the major elements and their relative abundance within the
gene repertoires that underlie silk synthesis in cob-web weaving spiders. The
functional significance of the gene repertoires will be assessed by relating
them to the mechanical properties of the various fiber types produced by three
different species. These results will enhance the understanding of how spiders
make their high-performance silks. This knowledge is relevant to the
biotechnological efforts to mass-produce synthetic spider silk for industrial
and medical applications. In terms of educational impact, this research will
directly involve undergraduates at a primarily undergraduate institution
(Washington &amp; Lee) and a minority-serving institution (UC Riverside) through
incorporation into classroom curricula and student research projects.
Importantly, the grant will enable undergraduates to travel between the
institutions for cross-training and to present at national science conferences,
which will let the students eyewitness the collaborative nature of research and
career opportunities for professional biologists. Project results will be
broadly disseminated by depositing data into genetic databases, publication in
scholarly journals, incorporation into press releases, and presentations to
school children and the general public. &lt;br/&gt;