* 0951901
* Collaborative Research: Multiscale Travel Time Tomography of the Mantle to 1000 km Depth Beneath the Western USA
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2010,04/30/2013
* Robert van der Hilst, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 04/30/2013
* USD 78,161.00

Teleseismic data recorded across the western U.S. provide information on the
structural nature of the mantle beneath North America, a volume of Earth's
interior that has been shaped by a complex history of subduction of oceanic
lithosphere. Tomography images high-velocity structures that are commonly
attributed to subducted slabs but which are not as simple as expected from our
current understanding of the geologic history of subduction. Hence, such images
hold key information on the actual subduction history, the fate of young
subducted slabs, and convective flow in the upper mantle and across the
transition zone to the lower mantle. The area affected by the Laramide orogeny
is now experiencing small-scale convection beneath most of the western U.S., and
a presumed Yellowstone plume is (probably) interacting with subducted slab and
small-scale downwellings. Understanding this richness of geological processes
and resolving the individual structures from one another requires careful and
accurate seismic imaging. The goal of this project is to test specific
hypotheses about the complex history of the western U.S. by creating a
comprehensive 3-D P-wave velocity model extending from the base of the crust to
~1000 km depth. The seismic modeling will combine all available local, regional,
and global travel-time datasets with newly available constraints on crust and
transition zone structure. In addition, it uses finite frequency techniques
(where useful) and 3-D wave propagation techniques. This work supports two
graduate students.