* 0951347
* The regulation and function of miR-124 in ascidian neural development
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2014
* Robert Zeller, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 02/28/2014
* USD 390,000.00

Gene regulation typically refers to the process of transcriptional regulation,
that is, the controlled production of an RNA molecule, and subsequently a
protein, from a gene. Recently a class of small RNAs, called microRNAs, has been
shown to regulate gene expression by a different mechanism. In animals,
microRNAs control gene activity primarily by repressing the production of
proteins from RNAs. Because a single microRNA may regulate hundreds genes, they
are thought to play important roles in the development of organisms. In this
project, a simple animal, the ascidian, which is closely related to humans, will
be used to study the regulation and function of a particular microRNA, called
miR-124, which is expressed in the nervous system of animals. Although much is
known about microRNA function, previous studies have primarily used cultured
cells that have been removed from their normal environment within the tissues of
an organism. In contrast, ascidians provide an excellent whole animal
environment in which to identify and characterize the genes regulated by this
microRNA. This proposal will use an integrated experimental approach employing
bioinformatics, molecular genetics and classical embryological methods to
investigate miR-124 function. Because these studies will be done using a whole
animal approach, it is expected that many novel miR-124 targets will be found
(i.e., ones that have been missed in experiments with cultured cells). In
addition, this project will examine whether miR-124 mediated gene regulatory
mechanisms evolved prior to the appearance of vertebrates (such as mice and
humans) and whether ascidians and vertebrates share miR-124 target genes. The
detailed analysis provided by this project will lead to a better understanding
of microRNA function during nervous system development and will establish the
ascidian as an excellent whole animal model for studying microRNA function. This
proposal will also provide research opportunities for both undergraduate and
graduate students as they train to become the next generation of biological
researchers.