* 0951008
* Long-Term Effects of Transient Estradiol Exposure on Hippocampal Function
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2014
* Jill Daniel, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Cushing
* 03/31/2014
* USD 406,001.00

Gonadal hormones can act to permanently organize the brain and behavior.
Traditionally, these actions have been thought to occur during a sensitive
period early in development. However, results of recent experiments conducted in
Dr. Daniel's lab indicate that administration of a transient period of
estradiol, the primary estrogen produced by the ovaries, to middle-age rats at
the time of cessation of ovarian function results in lasting enhancements on
measures of learning and memory that persist well beyond the period of exposure.
Furthermore, these enhancements in performance are associated with permanent
increases in levels of a type of receptor for estrogen, estrogen receptor alpha
(ERá) in the hippocampus, a brain area important for learning and memory. This
project will determine the temporal characteristics of the sensitive period
following loss of ovarian function during which transient exposure to estradiol
can exert lasting effects on cognition and the hippocampus. The project will
also determine if permanent changes in levels of ERá mediate the long-term
effects exerted on the hippocampus and associated behaviors as a result of a
period of transient exposure to estradiol. Lastly, the project will investigate
how estrogen receptors can affect cognition in the absence of ovarian estrogens.
These experiments will use behavioral, molecular, and electrophysiological
techniques to investigate how and under what conditions a transient period of
estradiol exposure in adult mammals can permanently affect the brain and
behavior. The activities involved in this project will provide increased
research opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students from the state of
Louisiana, a geographical region that has traditionally been underrepresented in
the sciences.