* 0951690
* Relationship between early and later developing numerical abilities
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2010,07/31/2016
* Elizabeth Brannon, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* david moore
* 07/31/2016
* USD 699,966.00

Number is important for almost everything we do as adult humans. Where does our
quantitative mind originate? Previous research by Dr. Brannon and others has
shown that very young infants can discriminate sets of items based on number
alone. Despite the abundance of evidence that now demonstrates that infants have
rudimentary abilities to perceive numerical differences, we do not yet
understand whether or how these capacities relate to later mathematical
cognition. The focus of this project is to ask whether nonverbal numerical
abilities that emerge early in human development serve as a foundation for
learning mathematics. To answer these questions Dr. Brannon and her research
team have developed a new procedure that quantifies an individual infant's
ability to see numerical differences. The procedure involves presenting babies
with two streams of numerical images. One of the streams features a constant
number of dots in each image; however, the images vary in the location and size
of the dots. The other image features two different numerical values that
alternate. Infants prefer to look at the changing numerical stream and the
magnitude of their preference for the changing stream depends on the ratio
between the two values in that stream. The project will use a longitudinal
design to look at the relationship between numerical discrimination abilities in
6-month-old babies and later numerical discrimination and math concepts in the
same children at 3.5 and 4.5 years of age. A large sample of 6-month-old infants
will first be tested in the new numerical change detection task. The same
infants will be tested in a variety of nonverbal numerical discrimination tasks
at 9 and 18 months and then in both verbal and nonverbal numerical tasks at 3.5
and 4.5 years of age. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide a
foundation for understanding the relationship between numerical abilities in
infancy and later childhood. Establishing a link between rudimentary numerical
abilities in infancy and later developing mathematical abilities could provide
an important avenue for identifying early mathematics difficulties and
developing interventions to address these difficulties.