* 0951672
* Field and numerical studies of self-organization in high-order drainage networks
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2010,05/31/2015
* J. Taylor Perron, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 05/31/2015
* USD 327,536.00

The familiar branching pattern formed by river networks is one of the most
widespread features of Earth's surface. Yet explanations for this branching
pattern based on erosion mechanics have proven elusive due to the difficulty of
modeling large regions of Earth's surface and the lack of a unifying framework
for relating the geometry of river networks to basic erosion laws. Consequently,
many previous studies of river networks have focused on random or rule-based
models. This project will develop a new framework for using erosion mechanics to
explain the branching patterns of river networks. The new framework is based on
the principle that the form of river networks reflects the degree to which
erosion by incising rivers dominates erosion by rock and soil transport on
hillslopes. The two main components of the research will be numerical
experiments that simulate the development of large-scale river networks, which
will provide a means of calibrating the new mechanics-based framework, and field
studies of two landscapes that formed under simple geologic and tectonic
conditions, which will provide independent tests of the theoretical predictions.
In addition to generating an improved mechanistic explanation for the branching
structure of river networks, the results of the study will provide a way to
infer long-term landscape dynamics from present-day topography when measurements
of erosion and sediment transport are impractical, and a way to quantify the
influence of factors such as rainfall rate and rock type on the large-scale
topography of Earth's surface.

River networks are the main conduit for sediment, surface water, and nutrients
on the continents, and their structure is critical to ecosystem function, water
resources, agriculture, and the carbon cycle. This research will improve our
understanding of how major factors such as geology, climate, and biology control
the branching structure of river networks. The results will not only help
determine the dominant conditions under which a given river network has
developed, but will also inform expectations of how river networks will respond
to changes in rainfall, vegetation, and other factors. Through the development
of new computational techniques, this project will also advance the ability of
other researchers to model changes in Earth's surface environment.