* 0951509
* SIMS Analysis of Carbonate-Associated Sulfate: Toward Building a d34S Record of Individual Carbonate Grains and Fossils
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2010,06/30/2014
* David Fike, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 06/30/2014
* USD 151,223.00

Sulfur isotope ratios (&amp;#948;34S) have become one of the most useful
geobiological tools for probing sedimentary rocks with regard to: the evolution
of the sulfur cycle, the first appearance and subsequent rise(s) (and falls) of
atmospheric oxygen, and the redox balance of buried sedimentary phases (pyrites
vs. sulfates). Moving beyond evaporite-based studies, the increasing application
of carbonate-associated sulfate (CAS) has enabled us to fill in the temporal
record of seawater sulfate (&amp;#948;34SSW) over much of Earth history. When
compiled, however, these data yield several surprises, often recording high-
frequency stratigraphic variation in &amp;#948;34SCAS and large differences in
&amp;#948;34SCAS between spatially distant but coeval sections, which are
inferred to reflect conditions of low (~mM) marine sulfate concentrations for
much of the Ediacaran and early Paleozoic. As a bulk-rock proxy,
&amp;#948;34SCAS can be influenced by the complex histories that ancient
sediments often have experienced, combining detrital, pelagic, benthic,
diagenetic, and metamorphic components. Deciphering the multiple origins of
sulfate within carbonate minerals is critical to extract meaningful information
from &amp;#948;34SCAS about the depositional and diagenetic environment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a method to analyze
&amp;#948;34SCAS using secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS) to investigate the
variability of &amp;#948;34SCAS between multiple co-existing phases, including
analysis of individual grains and fossils, at a scale (~10&amp;#956;m)
previously unobtainable. Preliminary &amp;#948;34SCAS data have been collected
on a Cameca 7f Geo to demonstrate the feasibility of this method. With proper
development, this approach can dramatically improve our ability to a primary
seawater sulfate &amp;#948;34S curve through time (e.g., from unaltered
brachiopods), much the same way that micro-drilling and analysis of
&amp;#948;13Ccarb, &amp;#948;18Ocarb, and 87Sr/86Sr from individual well-
preserved fossils advanced our understanding of the evolution of these
biogeochemical proxies over the Phanerozoic. The ability to extract precise
(sub-permil precision) &amp;#948;34SCAS data from individual grains or fossils
would allow us to robustly document spatial variations in marine &amp;#948;34S
(e.g., between benthic and pelagic organisms, or from basin to basin), without
the uncertainties associated with complex bulk-rock proxies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By developing a new analytical tool (SIMS analysis of
&amp;#948;34SCAS) that can be widely applied to geobiological questions
throughout Earth history, this project will open up a new field of
microanalytical work that can be fruitfully explored by many researchers for
decades to come. Analysis of &amp;#948;34SCAS by SIMS will be a central
component of undergraduate, graduate, and post-graduate research in the PIs lab,
providing them with research experience using cutting-edge analytical tools and
techniques. The PI?s course ?Methods in Biogeochemistry? currently has a section
on SIMS applications with hands-on instrument use, to which this technique could
profitably be added.