* 0951199
* Molecular Mechanisms for Cells to Sense Small DC Electric Fields
* BIO,MCB
* 01/15/2010,12/31/2013
* Peter Devreotes, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 12/31/2013
* USD 570,386.00

Cells, in order that they can carry out important physiological functions, must
sense direction and spatial position. Many types of signals in the environment
(for example light and gravity) are known to direct the behavior of cells.
Electric fields are also a guidance cue that has been known for decades, but the
mechanisms by which cells sense electric fields are largely unknown. They occur
naturally, including for example in chick and mouse embryos during development,
in plant roots, and in the eggs of seaweed. Although the strength of these
electric fields is low, they guide both cell polarization (galvanotropism) and
cell migration (galvanotaxis or electrotaxis). It has been very difficult to
study the molecular mechanisms underlying electrotaxis because genetically
accessible model systems have not been available. In the past few years, the
principal investigators have jointly established in the slime mould
(Dictyostelium) a simple model system by which to study electrotaxis. The first
step in this project will be to generate hundreds of thousands of mutants of
Dictyostelium cells. Then, using novel high throughput screening techniques,
mutant cells will be identified that have abnormal electrotaxis phenotypes.
These cells will then permit the identification and study of the molecules by
which they detect and respond to extracellular electric fields.

Broader Impacts: Elucidating the mechanisms by which cells sense naturally
occurring weak electric fields will establish a new biological signaling
mechanism and provide powerful tools to intervene in many biological processes,
including the engineering of tissues and organisms. This project will develop a
genetically accessible model system and resources that will be made available to
the community that studies cell migration. The investigators will continue to
work with middle school students, undergraduates and postdoctoral fellows to
provide experiences ranging from introductions to research to advanced training
in unique interdisciplinary projects. Active participation in NSF-funded
programs (including the Center for Biophotonics Science & Technology) will
provide additional opportunities for students from underrepresented minorities
to participate in this research.