* 0951110
* Structural Characterization of Highly Reactive Heme Enzyme Intermediates
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2010,08/31/2013
* James Kincaid, Marquette University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 08/31/2013
* USD 611,636.00

Intellectual Merit: An important class of proteins, occurring throughout both
the plant and animal kingdoms, possess a so-called heme group at the active
sites whose structure and inherent chemical reactivity are largely responsible
for their critical functional properties, including the transport and storage of
oxygen by hemoglobin and myoglobin, anti-bacterial activity and the clearing of
pollutants from living organisms. This last function being facilitated by a
group of enzymes known as cytochromes P450. Certain heme enzymes, such as the
hydroperoxidases, are responsible for elimination of dangerous oxidizing species
from living systems. Despite the great importance of such processes to
maintenance of life, many of the details of these critical reactions with oxygen
and derived species still remain unclear, because the reactions occur so fast
that the fleeting intermediates that arise and actually control the reaction are
difficult to trap and characterize. This research project employs an effective
combination of two powerful methods to attempt to clarify many of these
unresolved issues by determining the structure of key parts of the trapped
intermediates. First, the heme enzyme is reacted with oxygen and very quickly
frozen at very low temperatures to stop further reaction. It is then exposed to
high energy light, so called gamma rays, which cause electrons to be generated
in the frozen sample. These electrons can migrate to the site where the oxygen
is bound to the heme iron to reduce the bound dioxygen and generate these highly
reactive species that normally can¡¦t be trapped; the low temperatures restrict
further reactions, allowing the reactive intermediates to be further studied. In
this work Raman spectroscopy, which is exquisitely sensitive to the heme active
site structure, is exploited. This overall approach is used to characterize the
active site structure of these crucial, but elusive species for several
important types of heme proteins, including myoglobins, peroxidases and the
cytochrome P450s.

Broader Impacts: Inasmuch as heme proteins are involved in so many aspects of
plant and animal life, including processes important to agricultural and
environmental sciences, gaining a better understanding of how these proteins
actually perform their function is of wide general and fundamental importance.
Obviously, this project will present very effective training opportunities for
graduate, undergraduate and High School students; Marquette University has a
thriving undergraduate program and Chemistry Majors are strongly encouraged to
participate formally, with the possibility of earning up to 6 credit hours
towards graduation. Also, connections and communications with local high school
students is now made more efficient through a so-called SMART Team program being
conducted in cooperation with local high schools and MSOE, another local
college. This project is jointly supported by Molecular Systems cluster in the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the Chemistry of Life
Processes in the Division of Chemistry.