* 0951272
* Collaborative Research: Signal Perception and Cellular Mechanisms Governing Oxylipin Mediated Maize - Fungal Crosstalk
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2011,03/31/2015
* Nancy Keller, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 03/31/2015
* USD 491,863.00

Exchange of small molecules between host and pathogen lies at the heart of
cellular decisions in both organisms that result in either compatible (i.e.
disease) or incompatible (i.e. resistance) interactions. A subset of these
molecules are oxygenated lipids (oxylipins) produced by conserved oxygenases in
both organisms. Of intellectual and potential economical significance is the
investigators' recent discovery that maize and fungal volatile and non-volatile
oxylipins play a pivotal role in fungal growth, spore and toxin production by
Aspergillus flavus, a major seed infecting fungus that produces the carcinogenic
mycotoxin aflatoxin. Our central hypothesis is that fungi and plants induce,
intercept and recognize each others oxylipins and that these interactions direct
the outcome of the host-pathogen interaction. The overall goal of this project
is to elucidate molecular, biochemical and cellular mechanisms governing
oxylipin regulation and perception in both maize and A. flavus. By using
oxylipin mutants in both organisms, the investigators will assess the role of
these lipid molecules in seed colonization, fungal development and aflatoxin
production. They will also test the hypothesis that maize oxylipins are
perceived by A. flavus G-protein coupled receptors to modulate pathogenesis
processes. The results will generate conclusive evidence of cross kingdom lipid-
based signaling communication that governs the outcomes of host-pathogen
interactions. These results will be of significance to the scientific community
involved in studies of cross-talk signaling in plant-insect, animal- and human-
pathogen interactions. The broader impacts of this project include insights
required for the incorporation of mycotoxin resistance into commercial
germplasm, an advance of immediate significance for the general public, seed
industry, maize growers and breeders. A key component of this project is to
train graduate students and postdocs in cross-disciplinary fields of plant and
fungal genetics, molecular biology and lipid biochemistry and mentoring of
undergraduates in laboratory and class settings.