* 0951489
* Action anticipation in infants
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2010,07/31/2015
* Amanda Woodward, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Namy
* 07/31/2015
* USD 399,155.00

Humans are an intensely social species, and this fact is evident even at the
earliest points in development. Infants are highly attentive to their social
partners and cognitively engaged with them. In particular, research over the
last decade has revealed that young infants view others' behavior not as purely
physical movements but rather as actions structured by the person's goals and
states of attention. This sensitivity to the goal structure of action is
fundamental to human experience and critical for social and cognitive
development. However, current findings do not tell us whether and how infants
recruit this sensitivity to others' goals in order to predict their actions in
real time. Anticipating others' goal-directed actions is essential for many
forms of social coordination, including one-on-one social interactions,
collaborative activities and communication. This project will address this gap
in the literature by investigating infants' ability to visually predict a
person's next action based on information about his or her prior goals and focus
of attention. By using a remote eye-tracking system to record infants' gaze
shifts as they view actions on a video monitor, the studies will investigate the
range of situations in which infants of different ages can generate action
predictions. In addition, the studies will explore two potential contributors to
the development of action prediction -- infants' own experience producing well-
structured actions and infants' sensitivity to linguistic information about a
person's goals. In this way, the project will both document the emergence of
action prediction during infancy and provide insights into the developmental
processes that contribute to this ability in infants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will provide foundational insights into a critical and largely unstudied
aspect of social competence in infants. More broadly, this work will inform our
understanding of social, cognitive and linguistic development because it will
shed light on the social-cognitive processes that undergird young children's
social learning in these domains. The experiments will also develop new research
methods for assessing social information processing in infants. Because the eye-
tracking methods developed in these studies can also be adapted for use with
broader populations, this research will lay the foundation for comparative work
across ages, populations, and possibly species. These eye-tracking methods may
be particularly useful in participants who have limited abilities to respond to
verbal instructions, such as individuals with autism. By elucidating the early
development of an important aspect of social cognition, this work may also yield
important insights into understanding clinical disorders that involve deficits
in social reasoning, social attention, and the on-line interpretation of others'
actions (for example, autism and conduct disorder).