* 0951495
* EAGER: The causes and consequences of clonal diversity in spatially and temporally varying metapopulations
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Christopher Steiner, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 08/31/2012
* USD 257,500.00

This project addresses a critical question at the intersection of ecology and
evolution: what ecological factors maintain genetic variation within a keystone
species in an ecosystem and how does that genetic variation feedback on food web
interactions to influence temporal variation in the structure and function of
ecosystems? This project further extends that question to a metacommunity
perspective by explicitly considering spatial variation in ecological
communities across a landscape. The research focuses on Daphnia pulex, which is
a common grazer species of zooplankton in freshwater ponds. Daphnia reproduce by
facultative parthenogenesis and populations are composed of different clones
known to vary in ecological traits. Molecular genetic approaches will be used to
quantify spatial and temporal clonal variation within and among different pond
populations. Hypotheses concerning the relationship of this clonal variation to
ecological function will be tested in manipulative experiments conducted in
field mesocosms. One trait that is hypothesized to vary among clones is their
thermal tolerance; experiments will test for the significance of this variation
in enabling populations to adapt to climate warming. This research is ambitious
and risky, but also has high potential to produce results that could be
transformative to the science of ecology. This project is being funded as an
EAGER: Early concept Grant for Exploratory Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will provide research training in aquatic evolutionary ecology for
undergraduate and graduate students, including individuals from underrepresented
groups. The results from this project will aid in understanding how climate
warming will impact aquatic habitats and the relationship between biodiversity
and ecosystem processes. The project provides support to a beginning
investigator at an early career stage.