* 0951812
* CAREER: Fundamentals of the Relationship between Pore Structure and Transport of Light Gases in Materials with a Hierarchy of Pore Sizes
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2016
* Sergey Vasenkov, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 03/31/2016
* USD 402,000.00

This NSF award by the Chemical and Biological Separations program supports work
by Professor Sergey Vasenkov at University of Florida to obtain fundamental
knowledge of the relationship between structural properties of materials with a
hierarchy of pore sizes and transport properties of gases in these materials on
different length scales of molecular displacements.

Porous membranes fabricated for separations of gas mixtures are usually
structurally heterogeneous. In particular, mixed matrix membranes contain
interconnected networks of pores of different sizes, i.e. networks of micropores
with pore sizes approaching the sizes of gas molecules and networks of much
larger mesopores. Such membranes have great potential for effective separations
of small gas molecules such as CO2, CH4, and N2. Over the last decade
significant progress has been made in understanding gas transport in pore
networks with uniform or similar pore sizes. At the same time, diffusion in
materials containing a hierarchy of pore networks with very different pore sizes
is still poorly understood. The research goal of the project is to quantify
different types of gas transport on small (i.e. micrometer and submicrometer)
length scales in materials with a hierarchy of pore networks and to find a
relationship between such transport and macroscopic long range diffusion. The
proposed studies focus on measurements of sorbate diffusion along and through
the interfaces between microporous particles and their surroundings. In
addition, the effect of correlated motions of sorbate molecules on small length
scales on the long range diffusion will be investigated. The hypothesis is that
these types of transport can make a significant and quantifiable contribution to
long range diffusion of gases in hierarchical porous materials. Measurements of
gas transport will be carried out using a unique experimental approach: pulsed
field gradient (PFG) NMR at high field (17.6 T) and high gradients (up to 36
T/m). Experimental studies will be complemented by dynamic Monte Carlo
simulations.

In the framework of the education plan of the project a new departmental program
for minority undergraduate students will be introduced. The program includes
organizing mentoring seminars, providing research experiences, and pairing
freshmen minority students with the students who obtained research experience in
the groups of the PI and other faculty members of the department. High field and
high gradient PFG NMR hardware and measurement methodology will be developed as
a new multi-user resource at the National Magnet Lab. The PI's plans to reach
this goal include: (i) training his students to advise other users on the
procedures of PFG NMR measurements, and (ii) development of a manual for such
measurements. The outreach activities include expansion of the local symposium
(JSEHS) for high school teachers and students and hosting 10th and 11th grade
students at the PI?s group during summer months.

The proposed research will quantify different types of gas transport on small
length scales and establish a quantitative relationship between these types of
transport and macroscopic long range diffusion in porous membranes and related
materials. Molecular fluxes through macroscopic porous systems are determined by
long-range diffusivities. Hence, new knowledge generated in the proposed
research will enable designing concrete strategies for optimizing gas fluxes in
porous membranes while preserving separation selectivities.