* 0951999
* RUI:  The Sources of Substrate Specificity in Hydroquinone Dioxygenases
* MPS,CHE
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2014
* Douglas Juers, Whitman College
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 03/31/2014
* USD 259,000.00

This award in the Chemistry of Life Processes (CLP) program, co-funded with the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences (MCB), supports work by Professor
Tim Machonkin at Whitman College to understand the fundamental determinants of
how certain enzymes bind and carry out chemical transformations on chlorinated
hydroquinones. Some bacteria have the remarkable ability to break down stable
aromatic compounds, including in rare cases chlorinated aromatics. Certain types
of iron-containing enzymes are involved in these processes. Among the least
studied are ones that specifically recognize and cleave chlorinated
hydroquinones. These hydroquinone dioxygenases appear to have evolved recently
to degrade synthetic compounds that entered the environment from human activity.
The factors that determine how these enzymes specifically recognize and carry
out the ring-cleaving reaction on chlorinated hydroquinones are unknown. Thus,
hydroquinone dioxygenases provide an ideal platform for learning how proteins
can specifically bind chlorinated molecules and activate them for chemical
transformations, as well as how metalloenzymes (such as iron-containing ring-
cleaving enzymes) evolve new functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will
immerse a significant number of undergraduate students in cutting-edge
biochemical research involving an array of techniques, promoting the integration
of teaching and research at this primarily undergraduate institution. The
knowledge gained from this research could be applied to other classes of iron-
containing enzymes involved the breakdown of aromatic molecules, and could lead
to engineering of enzymes with novel properties. This, in turn, could lead to
improved methods for bioremediation of chlorinated aromatic molecules, which are
common intractable environmental pollutants.