* 0951846
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Phonological and Phonetic Biases in Speech Perception
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2012
* John Kingston, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 03/31/2012
* USD 9,450.00

Our knowledge of the sound patterns in a language plays a key role in
determining our perception of incoming speech. An important question for an
accurate model of speech perception is how the auditory system and our knowledge
of sound patterns interact. Do we first use our auditory system to perceive
speech just like any other type of sound, and then later bring our knowledge of
sound patterns found in the language to bear on it? Or do we apply our knowledge
of the sound patterns immediately? According to the first view, the working of
the auditory system itself cannot be influenced by our knowledge of linguistic
patterns, but on the second view, it can.

Under the direction of Dr. John Kingston, Mr. Michael Key will conduct
identification and discrimination studies, as well as a priming experiment that
measures certain potentials of the brain's electrical response, in order to
investigate these questions. This dissertation research will assess whether the
behavior associated with knowledge of a sound pattern corresponds to the
activity of relatively late electrical activity in the brain, or whether it is
also reflected in relatively early brain activity. Converging evidence from
these various techniques bear directly on questions regarding the architecture
of speech perception -- specifically whether linguistic knowledge is applied
separately from general hearing or simultaneously with it. Several of the
studies concern sound patterns in other languages and the role of a listener's
linguistic experience, and will therefore be carried out at universities in
France, Germany and the U.K. This project will help to establish new
international partnerships for speech perception research comparing different
language backgrounds. In addition, undergraduate students will be trained in the
methods of speech perception research.