* 0951741
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Semantic and Phonological Activation in First and Second Language Reading
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2012
* Catherine Harris, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 04/30/2012
* USD 11,700.00

Highly regular orthographies that encode sound in a transparent manner (e.g.,
Spanish) are referred to as shallow orthographies, while those with irregular
spelling-to-sound mappings like English are referred to as deep orthographies.
According to the Orthographic Depth Hypothesis, the process of reading a shallow
orthography activates more phonological information than reading a deep
orthography, because the former encodes phonological information in a more
transparent way. This cross-orthography study will investigate how the
orthographic depth of a writing system influences semantic and phonological
activation when reading a first language (L1) versus a second language (L2). The
first goal of the present study is to attempt to extend the predictive power of
the Orthographic Depth Hypothesis to semantic activation. Orthographies that
only weakly activate phonological information might strongly activate semantic
information during reading. A second goal is to better understand orthographic
transfer in L2 reading acquisition. The proposed experiments will test the
hypothesis that the occurrence of orthographic transfer depends on relative
orthographic depth of the L1-L2 pairing.

Both the traditional isolated word method and an innovative sentence priming
method will be used to conduct primed semantic category judgment tasks and
primed naming tasks to assess priming. This will determine how early semantic
and phonological priming effects occur, how strong the priming effects are, and
how long the priming effects persist. The participation of 3 groups of L2
learners (i.e., native English speakers, advanced Chinese learners of English,
and advanced Spanish learners of English) will allow us to examine the
activation patterns of English and Chinese, and whether L1 literacy background
influences L2 activation patterns.

The proposed study will extend current knowledge of how orthography shapes
cognitive mechanism and how L1 orthography influences L2 learning. One of the
implications for education is that the transparency differences in phonology
between L1 and L2 orthographies can influence learners' performance in L2
reading. Specific teaching methods should be designed to help learners adjust
their activation patterns to L2 orthography.