* 0951597
* The Hidden Correlates of Social Exclusion
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2010,05/31/2014
* John Tooby, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Sally Dickerson
* 05/31/2014
* USD 399,792.00

Social exclusion is universally practiced and universally painful. Ostracism or
rejection by important relationship partners is almost always psychologically
damaging. Research in psychology has shown that social exclusion changes the
ways that people think about their social worlds, sensitizing them to relevant
types of social information. Although social exclusion (unsurprisingly) makes
people feel sad or hurt, a surprising finding from a number of studies is that
social exclusion often leads to increased anger and aggression and that such
aggression can even be directed towards individuals who did not do the
excluding. The present research project builds on these findings and generates
novel hypotheses by integrating a social psychological perspective on social
exclusion with theories of sociality coming from evolutionary psychology.
Specifically, this research applies the evolutionary psychological idea of
hidden correlations. Hidden correlations are relationships that cannot
necessarily be detected during one's own lifetime, but that can be detected by
natural selection over deep time. These hidden correlations can drive the
evolution of psychological processes, creating minds that expect certain
correlations to exist, even if an individual would be otherwise unable to learn
of them through experience. The proposed research therefore focuses on the
hidden correlates of social exclusion.

Based on this, the present research, conducted by researchers Leda Cosmides and
John Tooby at the Center for Evolutionary Psychology at the University of
California, Santa Barbara, examines four related sets of hypotheses. The first
study set examines the hidden correlates of different reasons for exclusion: Do
different causes of exclusion lead to distinct responses? The second study set
examines the hidden correlations between social exclusion and social devaluation
(the extent to which others take - or fail to take - one's interests and welfare
into account). This study set investigates how hidden correlates of social
exclusion lead to antisocial reactions, such as aggression, as a means of
'bargaining' for better treatment. The third study set examines a surprising set
of predictions made by thinking in terms of hidden correlations: Social
exclusion will sensitize the mind to threats of predation, starvation, and
illness and injury - all threats faced by excluded individuals in ancestral, but
not necessarily modern, environments. Finally, across all study sets, the
proposed research examines the biological mediators of the effects of social
exclusion by measuring hormonal indicators of stress.