* 0951580
* Experience and cognitive development in infancy
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2014
* Lisa Oakes, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Namy
* 08/31/2014
* USD 305,523.00

In this project, Dr. Oakes will examine how infants' everyday experiences shape
their learning. Most theories of cognitive development argue for the role of
experience in processes such as learning, memory, and perception, but few
studies have systematically examined how experience shapes changes in cognition.
This project will fill this gap by systematically examining how naturally
occurring differences in experience (e.g., living with a pet versus not living
with a pet) and experimentally enhanced experience (e.g., being provided with a
picture book of unfamiliar animals to read) contributes to infants' learning of,
attention to, and perception of images. In the first year of life, as infants
interact with the people and animals they encounter, they learn about faces,
emotions, language, the behavior typical of particular kinds of animals (e.g.,
dogs bark and cats meow), etc. This project will enhance our understanding of
this important process by examining aspects of looking behavior by 3- to
9-month-old infants as they visually investigate images of animals and human
faces. Differences in how long infants look, precisely where they look (e.g. the
heads versus the tails of dogs, the eyes versus the ears of human faces) will
reveal how infants are perceiving, attending to, and learning about those
images. By comparing infants with more or less relevant experience, this project
will uncover differences in how infants' previous experience influences their
learning about images. Moreover, by experimentally enhancing experience through
the provision of picture books created for this study (e.g., exposing an infant
who does not have pets to pictures of cats), this project will demonstrate how
experience actually induces change in cognitions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will add to our understanding of how experience influences cognitive
development both by observing the effect of naturally occurring differences in
experience on infants' learning, and by testing the effect of experimentally
enhancing infants' experience on their learning. In addition, this project may
contribute to our understanding of atypical development and how to intervene
with infants at risk for atypical development. That is, although disorders such
as Williams Syndrome and Autism Spectrum Disorder develop over time, there is
little understanding of what events occur in infancy that influence the outcomes
for children with such disorders. Because atypical attention to and visual
scanning of images of people and faces are characteristic of these disorders, it
is possible that experiences in infancy contribute to the particular
developmental trajectory of children with these disorders. A comprehensive
understanding of how experience contributes to typical development may be
important for both future investigations of such neurodevelopmental disorders
and understanding how altering children's experience may help protect them from
some of the outcomes associated with such disorders. The results of this work
will be broadly disseminated, not only to the scientific community, but also to
parents and child care professionals through lectures to parenting groups,
participation at the Yolo County Child Development Conference, and television
and radio.