* 0951233
* Initiation of ENCORE:   an ENCyclopedia Of Gene Regulatory Elements in S. Cerevisiae.
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2011
* Paul Cliften, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* robert coyne
* 05/31/2011
* USD 0.00

Phylogenetic comparisons enable identification of conserved functional elements
within a genome and are essential for a complete analysis of any genome
sequence. Despite years of prior experimentation, comparative sequence analyses
of related species significantly altered our knowledge of the yeast genome. New
genes were identified, dubious open reading frames (ORFs) were detected and
tremendous amounts of sequence conservation were discovered in intergenic
regions of the genome. Unfortunately, the function of most conserved intergenic
sequences is still unknown because the early sequence comparisons moved far
beyond our limited knowledge of gene expression and the experimental data upon
which it is built. In this work, several highly conserved yeast promoter
sequences will be characterized in greater detail than any yeast promoters have
been analyzed. The sequences will be tested in hundreds of growth conditions to
determine when they function. Additional assays will be developed to help
determine which transcription factors interact with specific regulatory
sequences on a genome-wide scale. This work is meant to encourage a large scale
ENCODE-like project for yeast aimed at identifying all of the gene regulatory
elements in this simple model organism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact:
This project is focused on advancing our limited understanding of gene
regulation and provides an excellent opportunity for training students to use
computational tools for biological discovery. These skills are quickly becoming
an essential part of biological research because of the vast amounts of data
that are being generated. It is likely that the next generation of biologists
will need to be as skilled with a computer as they are at the lab bench. A
bioinformatics course has been developed to train both graduate and
undergraduate students, including those with physical disabilities who would not
be able to work at the lab bench, in the theory and use of computational tools.