* 0951542
* US-Ethiopia Workshop:  Enhancing Collaborations in Sustainable Water Resources Development and Management, Addis Ababa, December 2009
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Mekonnen Gebremichael, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* DeAndra Beck
* 08/31/2010
* USD 47,625.00

Professor Mekonnen Gebremichael of the University of Connecticut will conduct a
workshop on U.S.-Ethiopia: Enhancing Collaborations in Sustainable Water
Resources Development and Management to be held at Akaki campus of Addis Ababa
University in Ethiopia over 4 days, 15-18 July 2009. The Ethiopian organizers
are Dr. Yonas Gebrewubet, Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering,
Addis Ababa University, Addis Ababa, and Dr. Tena Alamirew, Department of
Agricultural Engineering, Haramaya University, Harar. The sub-themes of the
workshop are: (1) Climate Change, Climate Variability, Impacts in the Water
Sector, (2) Water Resources Monitoring and Assessment, (3) Water, Climate and
Health, (4) Water Demand, Economics and Policy, (5) Watershed Management, and
(6) Hydrologic Extremes and Early Warning Systems. The workshop will bring
together 124 scientists and collaborators (20 from the U.S., 90 from Ethiopia,
and 14 from other countries) involved in the different disciplines of the water
sector covering the six sub-themes of the workshop. The participants will
represent 52 institutions: 12 universities and research centers from the U.S.,
32 organizations from Ethiopia, and 8 institutions from other countries. Authors
will be strongly encouraged to submit papers from the workshop to a Special
Issue of a Journal. All the workshop presentations will be posted on the
workshop?s website so that any researcher can obtain information that emerges
from the workshop. A network of researchers involved in Sustainable Water
resources Development and Management in East Africa will be formed to initiate
joint research programs through several funding mechanisms (e.g., NSF-PIRE) and
to facilitate exchange visits. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit ? The
study of water resources and related issues (climate and health) in Ethiopia is
expected to create numerous opportunities to (1) improve our understanding of
the weather and climate of East Africa, and its influence on the extreme events
regionally and globally, (2) provide the underpinning science that relates the
weather variability to issues of water resources, health and food security for
East African nations, and (3) evaluate the accuracy of global model and remote
sensing estimates of hydrometeorological and land surface products. By bringing
together international scientists involved in the different disciplines of water
resources, the workshop will provide pathways to establish multidisciplinary
collaborations to advance the state of knowledge of SWRDM. The U.S. researchers
will have an opportunity to gain first-hand knowledge of the current research
direction, expertise and resources in Ethiopia. Discussions with Ethiopian and
international researchers will lead to new areas of multidisciplinary
cooperation and academic exchange. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact - The
workshop will provide an opportunity to establish international and
multidisciplinary collaborations that will address (1) a major development
problem in developing countries, and (2) key science questions that can lead to
a more accurate prediction of extreme weather events in the U.S. and waterborne
disease outbreaks. It will create pathways to enhance the contribution of U.S.
scientists in the creation and dissemination of new knowledge, and to educate
U.S. students in international issues so that they can operate effectively in
domestic and international settings. The selected group of U.S. participants is
well balanced among established scientists, highly accomplished junior faculty
and researchers, outstanding postdoctoral researchers and students. Of the 16
U.S. Participants supported by NSF, 10 are junior U.S. scientists within 6 years
of the Ph.D. (including the PI), 11 are from underrepresented groups (including
the PI), 1 is a female, and 2 are graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;