* 0951120
* Argonaute-RNA Interactome in Arabidopsis
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2014
* Sing-Hoi Sze, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 01/31/2014
* USD 517,709.00

Intellectual Merit: The overall goal of this project is to elucidate the
molecular mechanisms by which small RNAs (smRNAs) are assorted to several
Argonaute (AGO) proteins in Arabidopsis, and to identify smRNA-guided targets
using high throughput approaches. SmRNAs are critical regulators to many aspects
of biological processes in most eukaryotes. They associate with an AGO to
repress expression of target genes. A large number of smRNAs have been
identified in Arabidopsis using next-generational sequencing techniques.
However, the mechanisms by which the smRNAs are selectively loaded into
different AtAGOs remain elusive. Furthermore, functional analysis of these
smRNAs is substantially limited by slow processes in identification of their
targets. In addition, preliminary data revealed that some AGO genes are
specifically expressed in certain cell lineages or induced by particular abiotic
stresses, suggesting that these AGOs are functionally specialized for particular
physiological conditions. To elucidate mechanisms of AtAGO/smRNA/target RNA
association, and to understand the biological roles of these AGOs, this project
will employ biochemical methods to purify AtAGO-containing ribonucleoprotein
complexes and to directly identify all RNA components from the isolated AtAGO
complexes. Three specific objectives of this project will be: 1) Identification
and characterization of AtAGO10-associated smRNAs, 2) Identification of target
mRNAs from AtAGO1 and AtAGO10-containing complexes, 3) Functional analysis of
AtAGO2 and AtAGO3 in high salinity conditions. The results from this project
will not only shed light on new mechanisms of RNA silencing, but also provide a
benchmark to dissect functional specialties or redundancies in AtAGO family
genes. In addition, comprehensive investigation of the physiological relevance
and underlying mechanism of AtAGOs in abiotic stress responses will also have a
significant impact on agricultural productivity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The planned research provides unique and advanced training
opportunities for undergraduates, and graduate students in broad areas from
biochemistry, molecular biology, genetics to cutting-edge genomics and high-
throughput sequencing / computational biology. The PI will also integrate his
experiences in the lab into his teaching mission in the classroom and thereby
provide a more inspiring educational experience to students. Finally, the
research will reach out to scientists of diverse backgrounds so that the
knowledge of RNA silencing gained from Arabidopsis plants will be utilized to
improve economically important crops to the benefits of the whole of society.
Databases, information, materials, and other resources generated from this
project will be made directly available to the public and other researchers,
either through a web server or through downloadable source codes.