* 0951845
* Commercializing of Continuous Pharmaceutical Manufacturing Technology
* ENG,EEC
* 12/01/2009,11/30/2013
* Rajesh Dave, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Lynn Preston
* 11/30/2013
* USD 1,800,000.00

This project will enable a vigorous commercialization effort for continuous
pharmaceutical manufacturing technology developed by C-SOPS. This manufacturing
approach can enable significant improvements in product quality, process
robustness and productivity, and overall economic performance of the
manufacturing process. A high level of interest exists at the present time in
this technology, both by the US FDA, and by large pharmaceutical manufacturers,
many of which are C-SOPS members. Many technology suppliers that are also
members of C-SOPS have also indicated a keen interest in addressing this market
need. The key missing element needed for successful commercialization is that,
at the present time, no single technology supplier has all the necessary
capabilities required to address this commercial opportunity. Thus, the main
goal of this proposal is to assemble a coalition of technology suppliers, led by
a systems integrator, and to enable them, by knowledge transfer and technical
support, to commercialize fully integrated "turn key" manufacturing systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Intellectual Merit of this proposal has three main
components. (1) This project will bring to the market place commercial-grade
integrated technology for continuous manufacturing that is designed and
optimized based on an in-depth understanding of the main components of the
manufacturing system. (2) This project will expand the existing scope of
continuous manufacturing at C-SOPS, which currently comprises uncoated tablets
manufactured either via direct compression or dry granulation. We will add
capabilities to enable the continuous manufacturing of both coated and uncoated
tablets and capsules manufactured by direct blending, dry granulation, and wet
granulation. (3) This project will demonstrate the impact of engineering methods
for pharmaceutical product and process design and optimization, helping promote
adoption of modern methodologies across an essential industry that at the
present time uses empirical methods and batch processes as its main development
and manufacturing paradigm. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Broader Impact of this
project is also manifold: (1) Based on projected sales, we anticipate creation
of 80 direct jobs, devoted to the commercialization, design, and implementation
of continuous manufacturing systems, and perhaps twice as many indirect jobs by
the end of the third year of this project. (2) The project will also create
seven full time technical positions at center sites. (3) This project will
demonstrate the capabilities of our ERC to develop innovative commercial-grade
manufacturing technology, helping establish it as the premier worldwide center
of academic research in pharmaceutical product and process design, setting the
foundation for the long term viability and sustainability of our ERC. (4)
Availability of commercial sources of integrated continuous technology will lead
to its rapid adoption and implementation, and will lead to improved product
quality, higher productivity rates, and lower cost of manufacturing, likely
resulting in price reductions for the patient population.