* 0951047
* EAGER: Feasibility Study of Solving Sulfur Contamination Problem of Solid Oxide Fuel Cells in Coal-Fired Power Plants Using Power Control
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2009,11/30/2011
* Hongwei Gao, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* George Maracas
* 11/30/2011
* USD 74,463.00

&lt;br/&gt;Objective&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the project is to investigate
the feasibility to use the power conditioning systems in Solid Oxide Fuel Cells
(SOFCs)-based coal-fired power plants to pulse the power of the SOFCs, thereby
causing a sufficient amount of O2 to diffuse from the SOFC cathodes to anodes,
oxidize the sulfur on the anode surfaces, and hence prevent the sulfur from
damaging the anodes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit
&lt;br/&gt;The proposed sulfur removal method provides the necessary protection
to the SOFCs that the conventional absorbent-based protection method does not
offer. The method also reduces the cost for sulfur removal because it allows
less powerful and cheaper absorbents to be used or even make an absorbent
unnecessary. The method also has the potential to prevent other contaminants in
coal, such as As, P, Hg, Cd, Zn, Sb, Pb, Bi, Na, K, Fe, and Ni, from damaging
the SOFCs without requiring additional absorbents.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broad Impact&lt;br/&gt;The project can expedite
development of SOFCs-based coal-fired power plants and therefore contributes to
improvement of the nation?s energy security and quality of life. The project
will provide research and hand-on experience to students in the area of power
electronics and power systems and expose the students to leading-edge
technologies such as coal-gasification and SOFC. The project will also enhance
student education in power electronics at Montana State University (MSU) by
incorporating research results in an undergraduate power electronics course. The
project will also disseminate research results through conference presentations
and journal publications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;