* 0951225
* Epigenetic Silencing of Gene Expression in Saccharomyces Cerevisiae
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2014
* Scott Holmes, Wesleyan University
* Continuing Grant
* Susannah Gal
* 02/28/2014
* USD 635,207.00

Intellectual Merit:

Genetic differences in DNA sequence between two individuals can be manifested as
differences in the individual's physical characteristics and functions. The term
epigenetics refers to the fact that two organisms, or two cells within the same
organism, can have identical genetic information (the same DNA sequence) but
have very different characteristics and functions. Epigenetic controls are
essential in establishing the hundreds of distinct cell types (e.g., skin,
muscle, liver) in complex organisms such as humans. Cells within an organism
have the same DNA, and therefore identical genes, but can assume unique
morphologies and functions by establishing unique patterns of gene expression,
expressing some genes while turning others off. The DNA in cells is organized
into structures known as chromosomes. A key mechanism for controlling whether
genes are on or off is by altering the structure of the chromosome. Once
established, these alterations can become a stable, heritable part of the
chromosome. The nature of these structures and the manner in which they are
inherited is not clear. To understand how epigenetic mechanisms work this
project utilizes a simple organism, budding yeast. Yeast uses an epigenetic gene
repression mechanism, known as silencing to control the genes responsible for
determining cell type. The fundamental mechanisms of gene regulation and cell
growth are remarkably similar in yeast and human cells; however, as it is far
easier to perform many types of experiments using yeast, progress is more rapid
using the yeast system. This project is focused on determining if the cell
machinery responsible for duplicating and partitioning chromosomes as cells
divide also has a role in establishing and maintaining silenced chromosomal
structures. These studies will also examine the function of the Sir2 silencing
protein in yeast. Interestingly, Sir2 proteins in many species affect lifespan,
and there are several Sir2-like proteins in humans.

Broader Impacts:

The research pursuits described in this project will be closely integrated into
the educational mission of Wesleyan University, an undergraduate-oriented
liberal arts university. Projects in the principal investigator's laboratory on
epigenetics are integrated into an advanced lab course required of undergraduate
majors. This course is designed to familiarize undergraduates with the methods
and approaches of the field in the context of pursuing novel research questions.
Undergraduates (typically ~3/semester) also join the project leader's research
lab, where they join a group of approximately three graduate students. The
project leader is also collaborating in developing lessons in genetics with a
local high school biology teacher; advanced students from this high school also
visit the research lab to shadow graduate students.