* 0951188
* EAGER: The Joint Ecological and Genetic Dynamics of Metapopulation Extinction
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Ilkka Hanski, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2011
* USD 154,251.00

This project will examine the genetic and ecological changes that lead to
extinction of species that live as a series of semi-separate, spatially
localized populations (i.e., meta-populations) through computationally intensive
analysis of an extensive empirical data set for many local populations of the
Glanville fritillary butterfly. Because extinction is probabilistic and is
affected by many factors and by non-linear relationships, it is a 'hard problem'
for which general approaches and answers typically are lacking. This research
will develop and test the ability of high-power computation to advance
understanding of extinction. The project will pioneer application of recently-
developed computationally-intensive software to understand the general pathways
that can lead to extinction, to test the particular pathways followed by one
species for which an extensive long-term data set is available, and to produce a
user-friendly interface through which the software can be applied by others to
estimate extinction risks and probabilities for other species. The research is
risky, but has the potential for significant advancement of understanding
through new computational approaches. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research has the
potential to transform general understanding of the roles and interactions of
genetic and ecological factors in populations whose patchy distribution and
small population sizes may put them at risk of extinction. The project will
result in publicly available open-access software. The research fosters an
interdisciplinary and quantitative international collaboration. The results have
significant applications to environmental management and conservation,
particularly in times of environmental change.