* 0951366
* DMUU: Decision Center for a Desert City II: Urban Climate Adaptation
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2016
* Kelli Larson, Arizona State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Robert O'Connor
* 08/31/2016
* USD 6,506,908.00

The scale, scope, and uncertainties associated with climate change pose
formidable challenges for scientists, policy makers, and citizens. Cities in
arid locales around the world urgently need integrative research with a long-
term perspective to provide a sound scientific basis for policy making to
improve adaptive capacity in the face of climate change. The Decision Center for
a Desert City (DCDC), which initially was established in 2004, is a boundary
organization at the interface of science and policy that advances the scientific
basis for water management decision making in the face of climatic uncertainty
in the Phoenix metropolitan area of Arizona. This collaborative group will use
additional funding to expand its already extensive interaction with the policy-
making community, thus improving links between scientific knowledge and action.
The investigators will develop fundamental new knowledge about decision making
under uncertainty from three perspectives: climatic uncertainties, urban-system
impacts, and adaptation decisions. As a boundary organization, DCDC scientists
will use social science principles to develop and test a more integrated
decision-support process for policy making in this complex environment. They
will examine the interconnected water, energy, and land-use decisions that exist
in a complex dynamic urban system under climate change. The previously developed
DCDC WaterSim model will be refined to capture the scale dynamics, economic
feedbacks, and distributional effects associated with climate-change decisions
in the face of climate uncertainty. The DCDC collaborative group will work
closely with the NSF-funded Central Arizona Phoenix Long Term Ecological
Research (CAP LTER) project to measure, monitor, and model tradeoffs among
ecosystem services, social equity, and economic well-being.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DCDC research will produce new knowledge about individual
and societal responses to climate change and the best practices for linking
science and decision making to improve outcomes. New knowledge about urban-
system dynamics will provide a better scientific basis for adaptation strategies
to make cities less climate-sensitive, while new knowledge about effective
approaches to decision making in the face of long-term environmental risk will
aid in formulating approaches to developing and implementing these strategies.
DCDC research will link knowledge about water supply and demand under current
and future climate conditions with social science research on decision making,
thereby providing an improved basis for scientists, policy makers, and other
stakeholders to collaborate and to create and evaluate approaches to adaption in
the face of climate change. The DCDC educational program will help educate and
train the next generation of scholars who can move easily between the worlds of
science and policy to improve society's ability to adapt to a changing climate.
This collaborative group project is supported by the NSF Directorate for Social,
Behavioral, and Economic Sciences through its Decision Making Under Uncertainty
(DMUU) competition.