* 0951412
* Archival Storage Containers for Large Fishes and Reptiles at the Florida Museum of Natural History
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2012
* Kenneth Krysko, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Anne Maglia
* 05/31/2012
* USD 205,484.00

The University of Florida's Museum of Natural History (FLMNH) has among the
largest collections of fishes (2,500,000 specimens) and amphibians and reptiles
(210,000 specimens) in North America. Specimens from these collections are
heavily used by scientists and educators. Of particular interest are the many
large specimens that are rare in collections and add greatly to the value of the
UF collections. Although the University of Florida (UF) continues to support the
museum's collections and recently has dedicated and improved major expansions of
space, the serious problem of improper storage for the largest specimens
remains. These specimens are stored in ArcaSystems tanks and large plastic
barrels. Several tanks and barrels have developed cracks and a few have leaked,
exposing specimens and spreading alcohol over large areas, causing unpleasant
and at times hazardous conditions. As the tanks age, more are developing cracks
and becoming a serious threat to the integrity of some of the most valuable
specimens. Funding from NSF will allow UF to provide improved storage for large
specimens by replacing inadequate containers with archival stainless steel
tanks. Stainless steel tanks are nearly indestructible and leak-proof. In
transferring specimens to new tanks, labels and database records will be
updated. These activities will guarantee the long-term preservation of valuable
specimens and maximize their utility to scientists and educators well into the
future. FLMNH serves a broad clientele, including researchers and a diversity of
scholars, students, and resource managers. This project will allow UF to
continue to make comprehensive information accessible to researchers, educators,
and decision-makers who depend on knowledge of biological diversity. The
collections are important components of undergraduate and graduate education at
UF and are used in educational programs ranging from public exhibits, workshops,
and tours to university courses. The FLMNH ichthyology collection can be found
at http://www.flmnh.ufl.edu/fish/Collection/collection.htm.