* 0951651
* Prosodic Systems in New Guinea: Integrating computational and typological approaches to linguistic analysis
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2010,03/31/2016
* Mark Liberman, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 03/31/2016
* USD 299,333.00

The world's languages make heavy use of prosody--tone, stress, intonation, and
length--to communicate meaning, and tone is the most complex of these elements.
Although non-tone languages typically exploit pitch for intonational purposes,
the more sophisticated use of pitch in tone languages means that speakers of
such languages will have quite different mental representations of pitch from
speakers of English and better-known European non-tone languages. This project
will investigate the tone and reduced-tone languages of New Guinea, a
linguistically under-investigated area of the world which is home to a sixth of
the world's languages. The project will collect substantial new bodies of
recorded and transcribed language data from several undescribed tone languages.
It will then use computational and theoretical methods to analyze the
geographical distribution of tonal properties and the interaction of tone and
other prosodic features.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will incorporate
technology into linguistic field work and develop an exemplary model of prosodic
description. Language consultants will be trained in the model's use, leading to
more accessible primary data and more accountable descriptions. The data will be
made available in a form that can be readily used by scholars, language
teachers, and communities of speakers and will support the development of
writing systems and literacy programs for these languages.