* 0951430
* Faulting Process from Top to Bottom Along the San Andreas Fault in the San Juan Bautista Region
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2010,06/30/2015
* Roland Burgmann, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 06/30/2015
* USD 381,752.00

Understanding of the spatially and temporally varying deformation field around
fault zones is critically important for understanding active tectonics, fault
interaction and the occurrence of large earthquakes. This project is focused on
the San Juan Bautista area of California, where the complexity of the fault
structure and a variety of time-varying slow-slip (aseismic) phenomena make a
perfect natural laboratory to study active faulting processes from the top of
the Earth's surface to great depth. The site is also attractive because of the
availability of a rich historic data set and the recent deployment of EarthScope
instrumentation, including continuous GPS stations, strainmeters and
seismometers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team is analyzing geodetic and
seismic data in this region and integrating them to interpret the underlying
architecture and mechanics of the faulting process. Creepmeter, strainmeter,
GPS, and InSAR data constrain models of the four-dimensional distribution of
fault slip in the upper crust. The geodetic data are complemented by information
on aseismic slip deep below the surface inferred from repeating earthquakes.
Furthermore, episodes of non-volcanic tremor hint at deformation transients at
sub-seismogenic depths. Because fault slip is tied to the mechanical properties
of the fault zone rocks and adjoining crustal blocks, the team is also
evaluating changes in crustal properties through time using receiver-function
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These diverse data sets provide valuable
information on the interactions between earthquakes and aseismic slip that
occurs in various depth ranges in the fault zone. Results from this work provide
insight into the role of aseismic fault slip transients in earthquake occurrence
and clustering. Improved understanding of aseismic slip transients, their
relation to regional strain anomalies, and improved models of the earthquake
cycle may help to improve earthquake forecasts and intermediate to longer-term
predictions.