* 0951616
* Tonoplast Protein Trafficking in Arabidopsis
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2010,01/31/2012
* Marcela Pierce, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 01/31/2012
* USD 99,971.00

The vacuole is an essential organelle in plants and has major implications for
human health. In fact, an important portion of our diet, including the essential
amino acids found in beans and corn, comes from molecules stored in the vacuole.
The integrity of the vacuolar membrane is important for the storage of
metabolites and hormones, the sequestration of ions and the maintenance of
cellular turgor. To improve plant stress tolerance and ultimately increase the
nutritional value of plants for human consumption, it is essential that we
understand how to regulate vacuolar membrane biogenesis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal of this research is to identify and
characterize the trafficking machinery for vacuolar membrane proteins. An
integrated strategy of genetic, biochemical and cell biological approaches will
be utilized to identify and characterize mutations and chemical inhibitors that
disrupt the trafficking of membrane proteins to the vacuole. The specific aims
are to: 1) Identify mutants impaired in the targeting of membrane proteins. 2)
Identify small inhibitors that induce mis-localization of vacuolar membrane
proteins. Both mutants and inhibitors will uncouple the distinct targeting
pathways of membrane proteins to the vacuole. This research will have a major
impact in the understanding of vacuole biogenesis and the ability to improve
plants with enhanced vacuolar content.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts
of this project include the training of minority undergraduate and graduate
students in state-of-the-art techniques in molecular biology and microscopy. In
addition, a teacher and minority high-school students from the Wake County
public schools system will be engaged as part of this research program.