* 0951807
* Combined Laboratory and Modeling Studies of Ice Vapor Growth
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2014
* Jerry Harrington, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 07/31/2014
* USD 718,190.00

Ice-containing clouds can exist anywhere within the lower atmosphere. Cirrus
clouds in the upper troposphere are a common example, being composed entirely or
mostly of ice. Low-level clouds may contain both liquid and ice while mid-level
clouds contain some liquid at most latitudes. Ice crystals take on a variety of
complex shapes and can grow large by vapor diffusion alone. The presence of ice
complicates the links between cloud microphysics, dynamics, and radiation,
making accurate cloud simulations difficult. Ice growth from the vapor phase
proves to be a key but perplexing link in this chain. Previous laboratory
measurements suggest that the deposition coefficient, a measure of growth
efficiency, is very small for small ice crystals. In addition, it now appears
that aspect ratio prediction may be critical for the simulation of ice-
containing clouds; however competing hypotheses exist regarding mass
distribution on the crystal faces during growth. Modeling studies show that
simulated ice concentrations and supersaturation in cirrus clouds, as well as
the rates of glaciation of mixed-phase clouds, depend sensitively on ice growth
rates.

Intellectual merit. This integrated study will focus on ice growth from the
vapor phase with the intention to reduce uncertainties in past measurements and
to test hypotheses regarding molecular incorporation and aspect ratio evolution.
The laboratory methods make use of electrodynamic levitation to isolate ice
particles from system walls and permit particle growth to be followed under
precisely controlled conditions. New measurements of vapor growth rates will be
obtained as functions of size, supersaturation, temperature, and aspect ratio.
These data will be used to test competing growth hypotheses and constrain the
parameterizations in cloud models. Ice crystal growth theories and numerical
models will provide guidance to the laboratory work, help interpret experimental
findings, and provide a framework for extending lab results to cloud systems.
The synergism afforded by this laboratory-modeling study will shed new light on
poorly understood ice processes that are currently limiting our ability to
accurately predict cloud evolution.

Broader Impacts. This research has potentially broad impacts on the atmospheric
sciences and society. Large uncertainties exist in simulations of ice-containing
clouds at all modeling scales indicating that the consequences of improving ice
vapor growth parameterizations in models could be scientifically far-reaching.
The research will train graduate students and give advanced undergraduate
students exposure to modern research. The research and laboratory can also be
demonstrated to diverse audiences, including K-12 students.