* 0951694
* Collaborative Research/RUI:  Factors that Affect the Likelihood of Prejudice Confrontation
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2012
* Leslie Ashburn-Nardo, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Sally Dickerson
* 05/31/2012
* USD 74,130.00

This research project will advance understanding in the area of prejudice and
stigma reduction by contributing to understanding the obstacles people face in
prejudice confrontation. Prejudice remains a significant and frequent experience
for members of stigmatized groups; one with important consequences for physical
and psychological well-being. Previous research on prejudice reduction
demonstrates that one effective way to decrease prejudice is to confront it when
it occurs. Not only does prejudice confrontation reduce subsequent expressions
of prejudice, but it also empowers victims of prejudice. Despite these positive
consequences of prejudice confrontation, people often refrain from confronting
the prejudice they witness. Understanding the factors that predict whether
people will confront prejudice would benefit our understanding of an important
social psychological phenomenon. The project also includes development of a
training program to teach people how to overcome the obstacles to confrontation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research builds on previous knowledge about prejudice
confrontation. The first set of studies investigates participants' judgments
about the urgency of taking action against prejudice by measuring perceptions of
harm and injustice as a function of the type of prejudice, target presence, and
witness reactions. The second set of studies measures participants' perceptions
of responsibility for confronting prejudice as a function of the number of
witnesses, target presence, and role accountability. The third and final set of
studies examines whether participants confront prejudice as a function of
perceptions of confrontation self-efficacy and outcome expectancies.
Importantly, this research can provide a base from which to build training
programs to empower those who witness prejudice to voice their disapproval, and
ultimately these findings may generalize and be useful in attenuating the
occurrence of other incivilities (e.g., bullying, teasing).