* 0951518
* CAREER: Evolution of the Southern African Plateau Using Advances in (U-Th)/He Thermochronometry, and Enhancing Student Critical Thinking in Science
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2010,07/31/2017
* Rebecca Flowers, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* David Fountain
* 07/31/2017
* USD 566,933.00

The southern African Plateau is a unique and particularly intriguing example of
a continental plateau, a large elevated interior region of a continent. The
causes of plateau elevation gain, both of the southern African plateau and of
continental plateaus generally, are not well understood. In this project, recent
advances in apatite (U-Th)/He and 4He/3He thermochronometry are used to
investigate the erosional history of the southern African plateau. These methods
resolve the cooling history of rocks as they move through the upper few
kilometers of the Earth's crust, and allow insight into denudation and
topographic evolution at the Earth's surface. Erosion, or denudation, is the
transport of rock materials at the Earth's surface by a mobile agent, such as
water, wind or ice.

There are two major gaps in our knowledge of the erosional history of the
southern African Plateau: the denudation history of the elevated plateau itself
is poorly constrained, and the post-65 Ma denudation history of both plateau and
coastal passive margins is not well known. No apatite (U-Th)/He data has been
published for any location in South Africa. The research strategy is
specifically designed to capitalize on new methodological advances that broaden
the utility of the apatite (U-Th)/He and 4He/3He techniques. Four research
questions motivate and will be addressed by the present study: 1) What is the
erosional history of the elevated interior of the southern African plateau, and
what are its implications for elevation gain of the plateau? 2) Is there a
spatial heterogeneity of denudation that mimics the spatial sweep of magmatism,
diamondiferous pipe emplacement, and regional heating across the region? 3) Is
regional erosion instead attributable to the evolution of river systems in the
plateau interior? 4) Is there a phase of accelerated erosion after 65 Ma that
could be attributable to a phase of plateau surface uplift?

A comprehensive education component is being carried out. Project personnel are
collaborating with the African Earth Observatory Network to run a short course
on (U-Th)/He thermochronometry in South Africa as part of African Earth
Observatory Network's Africa-wide network plans. There is no (U-Th)/He facility
anywhere in Africa. An African student associated with African Earth Observatory
Network will be involved in the project and travel to the U.S. to gain hands-on
experience with cutting-edge analytical methods. The principal investigator is
also participating in the University of Colorado's Science Education Initiative
through development, implementation, and evaluation of a modular approach to
teaching critical thinking in Earth Science. The research motivations for the
proposed South African project will be developed into one of these modules. The
effectiveness of the new materials will be assessed at the module and course
level with help from a Science Teaching Fellow affiliated with the Colorado's
Science Education Initiative.

This project is supported by the Tectonics and Education and Human Resources
Programs in the Earth Sciences Division and the Africa, Near East & South Asia
Program in NSF's Office of International Science and Engineering.