* 0952032
* Collaborative Research:  Millennial-Scale Records of Sea-level Change Along the Atlantic Coast of the United States
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2012
* Jeffrey Donnelly, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 08/31/2012
* USD 156,007.00

This research will produce high-resolution reconstructions of sea-level change
for the last 2000 years along the latitudinal gradient of the Atlantic Coast of
the United States from Connecticut to Florida. Accurate estimates of sea-level
rise in the pre-satellite era are needed to provide an appropriate context for
21st century projections and to validate geophysical and climate models.
Documenting geographic trends in sea level is important because sea-level
changes are not globally uniform owing to isostatic (land-level) movements of
the solid Earth, gravitational and rotational changes driven by the exchange of
mass between oceans and ice sheets, ocean density (steric) changes from
temperature and salinity variations, and other factors. Analysis of microfossils
from salt marsh sediments will generate transfer functions that document
prehistoric sea level at a vertical resolution of Â±0.1-0.3m. The age of the
sediments will be determined from complementary dating methods. Sea-level
reconstructions will be adjusted for land-level movements and ocean density
influences to address the underlying mechanisms of sea-level change, focusing on
the interplay between the contrasting influences of both the Greenland and
Western Antarctic Ice Sheets. Whereas the Greenland Ice Sheet produces a
significant latitudinal gradient in the magnitude of sea-level rise from north
to south along the Atlantic Coast of the United States, the influence of Western
Antarctic Ice Sheet is spatially uniform. Four specific research hypotheses
related to the timing and magnitude of sea-level rise will be tested: (1) The
timing of 20th century sea-level rise was synchronous between sites and the
magnitude of this rise increased from north to south; (2) The magnitude of a
deceleration in sea-level rise associated with the Little Ice Age (AD 1500-1850)
increased from south to north; (3) The magnitude of sea-level rise during the
Medieval Climate Anomaly (AD 1000-1500) increased from south to north; and (4)
The rate of sea-level rise was constant from AD 0 to
1000.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sea-level rise is a vital barometer of climate
change, with potentially devastating consequences in the 21st century for
coastal landforms, populations and infrastructure. Knowledge of sea-level
variability during the past 2000 years is limited and the response to known
climate deviations such as the Medieval Climate Anomaly, Little Ice Age and 20th
century warming is unknown. This project will increase comprhension of the
driving mechanisms of sea-level change and enhance the ability to predict 21st
century sea-level rise. Such predictions must be validated against observations
that constrain spatial and temporal variability in sea-level. The results of
this project will contribute to the assessment of national hazards with respect
to sea-level rise and coastal responses.