* 0952420
* CAREER: Socially-Aware Distributed Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2016
* Adriana Iamnitchi, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 04/30/2016
* USD 485,010.00

Collective intelligence has been harnessed recently to create new collaborative
forms that were not previously achievable. This socially-emergent intelligence
appears in collaborative management and indexing of information, authoring
encyclopedia articles, participating in blogs, tagging or commenting photographs
or videos. This socially-emergent movement also exposes an unprecedented amount
of social information. Particularly, two classes of Internet applications reveal
voluminous social information: popular online social networks (e.g., Facebook or
LinkedIn); and the widely-adopted collaborative tools (e.g., CiteULike or
Delicious) that provide rich information fabric through tags, annotations, and
text organization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates the potential
of including social knowledge in the design of community-enabled peer-to-peer
distributed infrastructures. It will design, prototype, and evaluate a
community-oriented peer-to-peer infrastructure that exploits social knowledge
for services such as data and computing management, while protecting social data
privacy seen as contextual integrity. Using social knowledge in the design of
services will likely improve performance, based on the assumptions that social
incentives reduce churn; socially-inferred trust reduce security breaches and
expand the set of available resources; and shared interest improves data
placement decisions or co-location of data and computations. This will create
the potential to enable new classes of applications and infrastructures.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops innovative teaching strategies that
facilitate non CS-major students use of computational tools in their
professional lives. This will be done through multidisciplinary co-teaching of
an undergraduate introductory course, and coordinated teaching of independent
graduate courses in computer science and social sciences.