* 0952335
* ICE  (Integrating Cartographic Elements:  Creating Resources Emphasizing Arctic Materials)
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Helen Aristar-Dry, Eastern Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 08/31/2012
* USD 322,923.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The Arctic region is home to over 40 indigenous languages from at least six
genetically unrelated language families: Uralic, Altaic, Chukotko-Kamchatkan,
Eskimo-Aleut, Dene-Yeniseian, Yukagir, and the isolate Nivkh. Rapid change in
the Arctic has led to the endangerment or extinction of the indigenous
languages, and the relative geographic isolation of the region has further
created difficulties in recording these changes. Maps provide researchers with a
transparent way to organize and analyze heterogeneous, cross-disciplinary data.
And the centralization of distributed geolinguistic resources on the Polar
Regions will ensure that such data is readily available to all researchers in
the scientific community.

The "ICE:Integrating Cartographic Elements: Creating Resources Emphasizing
Arctic Materials (ICE)? project will integrate Arctic cartographic data and
geolinguistic resources into a network of interlinked databases that is already
maintained by The LINGUIST List (http://linguistlist.org). In addition,
facilities will be developed to enable researchers to add data in real time to
the geolinguistic database. At the same time, ICE will provide both cartographic
and linguistic training to promising graduate students interested in the Arctic
and the burgeoning new field of geolinguistics.

The project will enhance existing map and language family data in the region,
integrating these data with relevant non-linguistic information. The data will
be of interest not only to linguists, but also to related scientific disciplines
such as anthropology, geography, archaeology, history, and genetics. Moreover,
the educational component of the project will indirectly benefit community
groups. The project will develop the technical expertise of research assistants,
and this expertise, as they move into linguistic field work projects, will
become available to speaker communities in the Arctic.