* 0952943
* CAREER: Learning Models for Scalable Content-Based Image Retrieval
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2017
* Lorenzo Torresani, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 03/31/2017
* USD 494,964.00

This project addresses the design of machine learning algorithms enabling
content-based image retrieval in Web-scale collections of photos. This research
formulates image retrieval as a binary classification problem: decide which
database images are the "same" as the user-provided photo. Efficiency and
scalability to large collections are achieved by constraining the classifiers to
be models supported by traditional text-search engines, which perform real-time
search in databases of several billion documents. In order to implement search
based on high-level notions of similarity, the research team develops methods to
automatically localize the most content-relevant regions in the input photo and
to extract from them semantically powerful classifiers combining appearance cues
with robust geometric constraints. The algorithms learn from user-provided
labels indicating the presence but not the location of similar visual content,
thus requiring a minimal amount of human supervision. This research investigates
also how this advanced form of similar-image search can be used to organize
personal photos, provide semantic annotations, and support content-based
clustering of pictures. Furthermore, this work provides technical advances in a
wide range of computer vision problems including object detection, visual
saliency, and content-based clustering of photos. Moreover, the research team is
collecting an unprecedentedly large image data set to evaluate the developed
image retrieval system and to be available to the community. Research is
naturally integrated with education and outreach by means of related courses and
out-of-classroom activities aimed at attracting students to this field and at
encouraging interdisciplinary collaborations.