* 0952237
* SBIR Phase II:  A MHz High Energy Femtosecond Fiber Laser System for High Throughput Photonic Device Fabrication
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2010,06/30/2013
* Jian Liu, PolarOnyx Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2013
* USD 749,569.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will develop an
integrated femtosecond high-energy fiber source for high-throughput photonics
device fabrication. The final goal of the project will be a laser
oscillator/amplifier that confines the pulse to the fiber throughout the
generation and amplification process. This will lead to high stability,
robustness, and easy integration into other systems. These characteristics will
make the fiber laser system superior in terms of production throughput, size,
and cost. Phase II will develop a functional prototype of the fiber laser. To
demonstrate the ability of the laser to fabricate real-world devices,
experiments will be carried out involving the microfabrication of glass and
waveguide channels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial
potential of this project will be a breakthrough in understanding of high-energy
femtosecond fiber lasers and an unprecedented new design for laser products
across a wide range of applications. The new laser product will offer a
combination of high power, high repetition rate, and low cost which surpasses
any existing laser on the market today. Potential markets include photonic
device fabrication (e.g. for waveguides, couplers, modulators, and switches),
metal processing (welding, cutting, annealing, and drilling), semiconductor and
microelectronics manufacturing, general materials processing (e.g. rapid
prototyping, desktop manufacturing, micromachining, and photofinishing), medical
equipment, and biomedical instrumentation. In the medical area, potential
applications include ophthalmology, refractive and general surgery,
photocoagulation, therapeutics, imaging, and cosmetic applications. Biomedical
measurements which might be affected include cytometry, DNA sequencing, laser
Raman spectroscopy, spectrofluorimetry, ablation, and laser based microscopes.