* 0952160
* CAREER: Creating Effective, Sustainable Inquiry-Based Instruction in Middle School Science Classrooms
* EHR,DRL
* 02/15/2010,01/31/2016
* Jeff Marshall, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Julio Lopez-Ferrao
* 01/31/2016
* USD 563,299.00

The goal of this project is to improve the quality of middle school science in a
select number of schools within the Greenville County School District (GCSD) and
to gain insight into effective science professional development practice more
generally. To achieve this goal, the project will focus on the following
objectives: (1) increasing the quantity and quality of inquiry-based instruction
in the classroom of participating teachers; (2) facilitating the development and
implementation of inquiry-based instruction that is tailored to the unique needs
of each cohort school; and (3) improving student achievement in middle school
science classrooms of participating teachers at cohort schools. In light of
these objectives, long-term professional development (PD) will be the vehicle
for transforming (and sustaining) inquiry-based instructional practices for more
than 40 middle school science teachers. Through over 80 clock-hours of PD,
teachers will engage in two major interventions. The first intervention will be
a professional development institute (PDI-1) that will focus on classroom
instruction, lesson development and refinement, assessment, and reflection. The
second intervention will be another PD institute (PDI-2) that will provide
advanced training and leadership opportunities for a select number of PDI-1
participants. The expected outcome is that teacher participation in these
interventions will lead to changes in classroom instructional practices
resulting in improved student achievement in science.

The main research questions include: -What are the effects of the professional
development experiences upon the quantity and quality of inquiry-based
instruction in middle school science classrooms for participants in the first
and second year PD experiences? -Does the second year PD experience help sustain
and continue to improve inquiry-based instructional practice within the
participants? respective schools? -Do students whose teachers participate in the
program demonstrate greater academic growth in the science content and process
knowledge? Is the growth different between students of first year and second
year participants?

The study will build on several pilots administered through a longstanding
partnership between Clemson University and GCSD. Classroom observations,
surveys, review of lessons plans, interviews, focus group sessions, and scores
from the Measures of Academic Progress tests will be used to collect data
relative to the research questions. Approaches and instruments are in place to
measure the impact of the interventions for teachers and students and both have
been refined and/or tested for reliability and validity through a three-year
pilot. Both approaches and instruments have the capacity to address and measure
teacher change (e.g., overall lesson performance; constructs and individual
indicators) as well as student growth (e.g., science content and process;
weather, forces, systems) at the macro and micro levels, respectively. A quasi-
experimental design will be used to study student growth using students taught
by teachers participating in the study (more than 100 per teacher), a comparison
group of students taught by teachers in the same district; and a virtual
comparison group of students drawn from the Northwest Evaluation Growth Research
Database. For both students and teachers, there are clear methods, instruments,
and strategies for data collection and analysis.

The broader impacts of this study reside in the significance and importance of
results that might show a clear link between the interventions and student
performance in science. Few, if any studies have been able to clearly make this
connection. Therefore, the fundamental issue that might be resolved through this
study could be whether or not student performance in science can be directly
linked to teacher interventions through PD institutes. This information could
help policymakers make better decisions about science instruction at all levels.
Lessons learned from this study will be disseminated through multiple channels
and pathways available to education stakeholders nationally. Thus, this project
could potentially add to research in this area, advance knowledge about science
instruction, highlight the impact on student achievement, and provide tools for
measuring inquiry-based science instruction.