* 0952617
* CAREER: Clause Generation: A New Perspective on Parallel Symbolic Model Checking
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2010,02/29/2012
* Aaron Bradley, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 02/29/2012
* USD 123,904.00

Symbolic finite-state model checking is a technique for analyzing properties of
computational systems. This project rethinks symbolic model checking to achieve
scalable performance on multi-core and networked computers. Current attempts to
parallelize model checking use standard algorithms and techniques, but this
project takes a new approach in which parallel threads share Boolean clauses,
which are lemmas of the final proof. It is hypothesized that such clauses
represent the appropriate quantum of shared information for parallelization:
neither so simple as to cause excessive communication, nor so complex as to
cause threads to duplicate work. If the hypothesis is correct, implementations
will achieve near-linear scaling with the number of computer cores. The work
also investigates the tradeoffs between verifying correctness of properties
versus checking properties for counterexamples, exploring performance
implications of the tradeoffs.

Symbolic model checking has applications in a wide range of areas, from
verifying sequential circuits and security protocols to analyzing biological
processes. Advances in model checking allow one to analyze systems of
increasingly higher complexity. The project will integrate research and
education by developing curriculum that increases the workforce's proficiency in
logic, as well as develop educational material on computational thinking for
secondary school students.