* 0952399
* ETBC Collaborative Research: Weathering Under Cover: Role of biofilms in mineral weathering and nutrient uptake in the mycorrhizosphere
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2010,12/31/2013
* James Harsh, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 12/31/2013
* USD 491,421.00

Intellectual merit: Recent advances across several fields set the stage for
process-based research into the biogeochemical agency of vascular plants -- in
particular, how their physiologies drive Earth?s ?weathering engine? to extract
mineral matter from regolith to build soils, chemically denude the continents,
and set the chemistry of the ocean / atmosphere on geologic timescales. Such
research is timely and needed to interpret pedo-geologic records of global
change, and to forecast the effects of terrestrial C sequestration on the global
CO2 cycle and soil sustainability in a human-altered world. The PIs overarching
concept is that plant-driven weathering rates and mechanisms vary, depending on
geologic setting and ecosystem phase. They focused on primary-successional
settings, where plants must extract nutrients from soils by chemical weathering.
The premise is that a key adaptation of many plants to these conditions is
development of mycorrhizospheric biofilms, which attach the root system to
mineral surfaces and micro-localize the biology, chemistry, and hydrology of
weathering and nutrient uptake at the root system-mineral interface. At this
micron scale, dissolution and biological mass transfers occur over very small
distances and in relative isolation from bulk soil water, thereby increasing
macroscopic nutrient acquisition efficiency and decreasing nutrient loss in
drainage. The central hypothesis is that varying degrees of nutrient limitation
(i.e., the need to extract base cations from mineral sources) influence biofilm
development and weathering/uptake function. To address this hypothesis, the PIs
propose to use replicated ectomycorrhizal seedling systems in a growth
experiment, and vary the availability of Ca and K in bulk soil water and primary
minerals by manipulating irrigation solutions and initial mineral composition.
This research will provide insights into the mechanisms that link micron-scale
processes of mineral weathering to ecosystem-scale processes of nutrient
acquisition and ultimately global-scale processes of continental denudation.

Broader Impact: Eight undergraduate students will work on this project. Because
of the unique combination of researchers, students will be drawn from a
community college, a four-year undergraduate college, and two research
universities. The proposed research will foster a collaborative network of
scientists that includes Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, the US Forest
Service, the Agricultural Research Service, and academic institutions. The
results will be disseminated to science networks including the Critical Zone
Exploration Network and the Hubbard Brook Ecosystem Study, and introduced to the
general public through teaching and learning modules designed for middle and
high school classrooms. Ultimately, this work will serve as a foundation for
improving plant nutrition and soil sustainability, and better understanding
terrestrial and hydrospheric carbon sequestration.