* 0952158
* EAGER - Active Flow Control for Wind Turbine Applications
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Hermann Fasel, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Ram Gupta
* 08/31/2011
* USD 100,000.00

0952158&lt;br/&gt;Gross&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wind
energy is emissions free and renewable. It can be cost competitive with energy
derived from fossil fuel, and predictions are that it will provide up to 11% of
the global energy production in 2020. Emphasis in this area in the past has been
mainly on the development of larger wind turbines where the design was mostly
conventional and the technology was based on earlier research and development.
Aerodynamics seems to haven take a backseat compared to other components deemed
more important such as gearbox, generator, structural design of the blades, and
controller design. Clearly, a renewed and substantial effort has to be made to
address the aerodynamic efficiency of wind
turbines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Research is needed in the
following areas: (1) Understanding of the relevant physics for both, the
controlled and uncontrolled flow, with particular focus on the interaction of
separation and transition which is of high relevance for wind turbine
applications; (2) advancement of Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) codes and
turbulence modeling capabilities; (3) development of physics based Reduced Order
Models (ROMs) which can predict unsteady aerodynamic loads, and (4) prediction
and reduction of acoustic noise which has an impact on the public acceptance of
wind turbines. This proposed research will address the first key area. The PIs
will explore if computational fluid dynamics on a scale that has not been
attempted for wind turbine applications can lead to true breakthroughs in the
understanding of the relevant physics for the controlled und uncontrolled flow.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The proposed research will broadly benefit
society as it will make wind energy more affordable and thus allow for a
reduction of the carbon based energy production. It will also help reduce the
dependency on foreign energy resources and raw materials. The PIs will seek
cooperation with wind turbine manufactures to assure that our proposed research
is aligned with the needs of the wind turbine industry. They will also seek
cooperation with government research labs as well as national and international
research institutions. The proposed research will also advance basic science and
technology in the emerging field of active flow control which will benefit other
disciplines. Results will be presented at interdisciplinary conferences and
published in the appropriate journals. Part of the proposed experiments will be
accomplished by undergraduate students. The PIs have access to a 2m wind turbine
demonstrator which will be made available to high schools and other educational
institutions to foster basic science education with focus on energy
sustainability and environmental awareness. By attracting attention from the
local press this work will create community interest in wind energy. Part of the
proposed research will be accomplished within the framework of two established
and very active international student exchange programs (University of
Stuttgart, Germany, and ENSMA, Poitiers, France).