* 0952128
* CAREER: Improving Software Assurance Using Transactions
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2016
* Vinod Ganapathy, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2016
* USD 400,000.00

he goal of this CAREER project is to develop novel mechanisms that
use&lt;br/&gt;transactions to improve software assurance. This project is
developing&lt;br/&gt;Transactional Memory Introspection---or TMI, which is an
approach to &lt;br/&gt;building software security mechanisms by leveraging
recent advances in &lt;br/&gt;hardware and software transactional memory.
Security mechanisms based &lt;br/&gt;on TMI build upon the same machinery that
transactional memory systems &lt;br/&gt;use to ensure performance and
functionality. TMI therefore promises to &lt;br/&gt;make security mechanisms
efficient and easy to integrate with software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TMI-based
security mechanisms being researched in this project include:&lt;br/&gt;(1)
TxAuth: a reference monitor architecture to better ensure
complete&lt;br/&gt;mediation of security-sensitive operations and allow easier
integration &lt;br/&gt;with legacy systems;&lt;br/&gt;(2) TxInt: a data
structure integrity monitor to protect extensible &lt;br/&gt;software systems,
such as operating systems and browsers, from untrusted &lt;br/&gt;extensions;
and&lt;br/&gt;(3) TMWatch: a data watchpoint framework that equips malware
analysis &lt;br/&gt;tools and debuggers with new capabilities to reverse-
engineer malware &lt;br/&gt;behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More broadly, this
project seeks to demonstrate that concurrency control&lt;br/&gt;machinery
implemented in transactional memory systems can also be used to
&lt;br/&gt;improve software assurance. These additional benefits may lead to
more &lt;br/&gt;research on transactions and their ultimate adoption by hardware
and &lt;br/&gt;software vendors. The results from this project are being
disseminated &lt;br/&gt;via the development of new course material that will
expose students and &lt;br/&gt;software vendors to the dos and don'ts of secure
programming. Suitable &lt;br/&gt;course material developed in this project is
also being included in &lt;br/&gt;courses targeted towards K-12 and
undergraduate students to attract&lt;br/&gt;them to computer science programs.