* 0952056
* Research Conference on Nanoscience and Nanotechnology; location and date unknown
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Nikhil Koratkar, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 08/31/2010
* USD 99,325.00

The investigator will hold a conference, jointly organized and funded between
the US National Science Foundation and the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft
(German Research Foundation- DFG). The conference will focus on the sustainable
use of nanomaterials and nanotechnologies for novel engineering solutions. The
conference includes 60 scholars (30 each from the US and Germany), whose work is
at the cutting edge of nanoscience and nanotechnology research. Scholars include
senior and junior researchers representing a broad range of universities.

The conference is intended to be the starting point for joint research
activities between researchers from academia, industry and national laboratories
in the field of nanoscience and nanotechnology. The conference aims at a strong
cross-disciplinary approach by taking into account the availability of materials
resources and new design opportunities inherent to the use of nanomaterials and
their development for novel engineering solutions. The objective is to explore
the advances in several research communities with regard to such questions, and
to bring these communities together across disciplinary boundaries.

The conference format including special one-hour panel discussions after every
session is designed to enhance cross-disciplinary exchange and open dialogue and
debate between the research communities. All participants will present in a
single room, so as to stimulate maximum cross-talk and exchange of ideas between
the participants. The conference also includes a poster session that provides a
venue for presentation of original research by Junior scholars.

Broader impacts include the development of cross-disciplinary research
initiatives, dissemination of graduate student and post-doc research, and
enhancement of US/Germany collaborative research possibilities.