* 0952402
* CAREER:  Assessment of Infrastructure Risk Under Natural Disasters in a Multiscale Probabilistic Framework
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2010,09/30/2016
* Jack Baker, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* David Mendonca
* 09/30/2016
* USD 403,513.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award
is to create a new probabilistic description of regional ground shaking during
earthquakes, which replaces the near-infinite number of possible disaster
scenarios in a region by a small set of representative scenarios. Analysis of
infrastructure systems subject to natural disasters is limited by the need to
capture complex network effects and difficulties in describing the complex
variation of the disaster's impact over a large region. Current infrastructure
analyses often estimate disruption given a single scenario disaster. The
probability of occurrence of that scenario is rarely incorporated, hindering
risk management based on cost-benefit analysis. These limitations are caused by
the impossibility of computing disruptions to complex networks under the huge
number of possible disaster scenarios that might occur. Multiscale models for
ground shaking and transportation network disruption will then be developed to
facilitate coarse scale modeling wherever possible, coupled with finer-scale
modeling as needed. This multiscale treatment leads to new methods for
quantifying the characteristic spatial scale of disasters and infrastructure
networks. These analysis techniques will then be applied to other lifeline
networks and hazards to more generally understand how characteristic spatial
scales relate to infrastructure disruption patterns. Risk-based (performance-
based) modeling of individual structures has been a major thrust of structural
engineering in the past decade, and multiscale modeling has been a revolutionary
approach in computational mechanics. Extension of these concepts to analysis of
infrastructure systems will provide new insights into how fine-scale features of
infrastructure networks affect performance at the regional
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Critical lifeline disruption in natural disasters
increases suffering and impedes post-disaster recovery, but resources to upgrade
these systems are limited and so risk reduction efforts must be carefully
targeted. Insights from this research will guide decision making regarding
infrastructure development and maintenance. As decision-makers utilize this
knowledge, they will ultimately produce safer, more resilient and more
economical infrastructure. The project's outreach objectives will facilitate
education and training of other researchers (through the production of open-
source software and web content), undergraduates (through development of a
project-based seminar for prospective engineering majors) and high school
students (through continued participation in Stanford's Summer Research
Internship Program for High School Students). Assessment of these outreach
programs will be achieved by leveraging existing university programs to track
the educational/career paths of participants.