* 0952291
* ETBC: COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: MASS-DEPENDENT AND INDEPENDENT MERCURY ISOTOPE FRACTIONATION DURING MICROBIAL METHYLATION AND REDOX TRANSFORMATIONS OF MERCURY IN NATURAL WATERS
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2014
* Tamar Barkay, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 05/31/2014
* USD 397,757.00

Intellectual merit: The proposed research is based on recent achievements by the
PIs and others, and seeks to expand the PIs? on-going studies of isotopic
fractionation during microbial and abiotic Hg transformations. During the last
five years the PIs have shown that: (i) Mass dependent isotopic fractionation
(MDF) occurred during the microbial reduction of ionic mercury (Hg[II]) by
several bacterial strains that possess the enzyme mercuric reductase and MDF
also occurred during microbial methylmercury (MeHg) degradation; (ii)
Photoreduction of Hg(II) and photodegradation of MeHg caused MDF as well as mass
independent fractionation (MIF) of up to 2?. Varying amounts of MIF (denoted as
Ä199Hg and Ä201Hg) recorded in freshwater and marine fish tissue suggested
different extents of photo degradation of MeHg prior to its incorporation into
the aquatic food web. These results along with large variations in natural
samples documented by the Blum lab and others, strongly suggest that the
isotopic composition of Hg has the potential for distinguishing between
different sources of Hg(0) emissions and pathways of Hg(II) reduction and MeHg
degradation.&lt;br/&gt;To date, the PIs? studies have focused on Hg redox
transformations and MeHg degradation. Yet, the bioaccumulation of MeHg in
aquatic food webs has a profound effect on human and ecosystem health and the
examination of whether or not isotope fractionation occurs during methylation of
Hg is, therefore, a high priority. If significant fractionation occurs during
formation of MeHg and is modulated by different environmental conditions and by
the nature of the methylating processes, tools for distinguishing sources and
pathways of MeHg in the environment may become available and enhance the
management of Hg contaminated ecosystems. The first objective of the proposed
study is the examination of isotopic fractionation during Hg methylation by
sulfate and iron reducing bacteria to test the hypothesis that microbial Hg
methylation results in significant MDF, but not in MIF. The second objective is
the investigation of&lt;br/&gt;how environmental variables, which define
freshwater and marine environments, impact MIF and MDF during Hg redox
transformations to test the hypothesis that photochemical reduction, oxidation
and demethylation will imprint diagnostic MDF and MIF signatures on reaction
substrates and products. Finally, Hg isotopic fractionation during
transformation pathways mediated by an important component of aquatic
ecosystems, phototrophic planktonic organisms, has not been examined to date.
The third objective addresses this lack of knowledge by testing the hypothesis
that intracellular Hg(II) reduction and MeHg degradation in phytoplankton
incubated in the light will result in MDF and possibly MIF.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The proposed research activity will
continue to lay the groundwork for a new approach or the identification of
sources, sinks, and pathways of Hg transformations in impacted ecosystems. This
approach has the potential to significantly enhance understanding of Hg
biogeochemistry on temporal and spatial scales ranging from molecular
mechanisms, to ecosystems, to global cycles, and to the geological record. As
ecosystem Hg contamination remains a major public health concern, this project
will support implementation of sound environmental practices to reduce Hg
contamination and exposure. The proposed research will train a postdoctoral
fellow in the application of stable isotope-based approaches in geobiology and
ecosystem processes. In addition, undergraduate and graduate students will be
integrated into the project, exposing them to cutting edge concepts and
technologies, which are at the interface between biology, geology and ecosystem
sciences. It is at this interface that important&lt;br/&gt;paradigm-shifting,
research advances are being made. Undergraduate students will assist with the
analytical geochemistry as part of senior thesis research projects and PhD
dissertation projects. Results will be published and disseminated broadly.