* 0952630
* CAREER: Understanding Gauge Theories Through String Theory
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2015
* Luis Kruczenski, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2015
* USD 442,344.00

The long term objective of this project is to improve the understanding of gauge
theories by using string theory and to apply such knowledge to QCD, the theory
of strong interactions. Steps to the main goal to be investigated are:
understanding the emergence of strings from a field theory as a tool for
describing gauge invariant operators, mappping new solutions of the string
equations of motion to the field theory using their integrable structure,
consideration of generalizations of previous cusp anomaly calculations to better
understand gluon dynamics and Wilson loops in N=4 super Yang-Mills theory and
finally the study of field theory planar diagrams in light-cone gauge. Progress
in any of these areas is expected to lead to a better understanding of the
string /gauge theory duality leading to the final goal of understanding the
strong interaction at low energy. The project builds on previous experience of
the PI who has made several contributions to the subject.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: These ideas are part of an introductory
lecture on string theory and particle physics that the PI and his students
prepared in order to help motivate Indiana's high school students to pursue a
career in science. It has been delivered in local high schools with good
acceptance. In the future it will be improved and extended to be delivered in
other high schools as well as the QuarkNet Center at Purdue, which is an NSF and
DOE sponsored program for high-school teachers. Evaluation of the interest of
such activities will be done by the High School teachers themselves and
collected by the PI.