* 0952376
* CAREER: Innovative Seismic Sensing for Earthquake Analysis and Seismic Hazard Assessment
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2010,09/30/2011
* Elizabeth Cochran, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 09/30/2011
* USD 127,169.00

The Quake-Catcher Network (QCN) is a transformative approach to earthquake
detection, science, and outreach. QCN is a distributed computing seismic network
that links internal (no cost, built-in) or external (low-cost, USB-based)
accelerometers connected to any participating computer for earthquake research.
The objective of QCN is to dramatically increase the number of seismic
observations by exploiting recent advances in sensing technologies and
cyberinfrastructure. This approach will enable the creation of the world?s
largest and lowest-cost seismic network to explore earthquake fault rupture and
the ground response to seismic wave passage by leveraging innovative cyber-
enabled seismic data. This proposal will result in 375 QCN seismic stations at
regional K-12 schools and an additional thousand public participants to enable
groundbreaking discoveries in seismology. The work will address the following
scientific questions: 1) Can MEMS technology and distributed computing produce
transformative outcomes in real-time seismology applications by increasing the
density of strong-motion observations, improved triggering algorithms and
metadata generation, and innovative clustering algorithm development? 2) How do
earthquake source properties, such as slip amplitudes and rupture velocity, vary
at small spatial scales and how does increased density of observations improve
the resolution and stability of source rupture modeling? 3) What is the
variability in seismic amplification at a block-by-block scale and do increased
seismic observations translate into improved prediction of ground motion
estimates?&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will result in wide-reaching educational
outcomes by involving the community directly in seismic research. Any member of
the public, a school, or a community organization can house a QCN strong-motion
station. In return, the participant becomes a citizen-scientist, receives up-to-
date science results, and access to educational activities and interactive
software. The two main educational objectives of this proposal are to: (1)
improve student engagement in science and (2) increase community understanding
of earthquakes and related seismic hazards. To achieve the first objective, the
PI will augment and improve classroom activities that utilize QCN sensors and
software and distribute 375 USB-connected MEMS sensors to classrooms. In
addition, teacher workshops will be held each year to introduce teachers to QCN,
provide educational materials, and form sensor-communities. To accomplish the
second objective, the PI will work closely with regional museums to develop
displays that incorporate interactive models, regional seismic hazard
information, and preparedness information. The QCN software and sensors are a
natural platform to introduce the public to seismology as it allows for real-
time displays of acceleration data. The aim is to improve public understanding
of earthquakes and empower the public to take an active role in earthquake
preparedness and policy discourse.&lt;br/&gt;