* 0952164
* Observations and Predictions of Sand Grain Size Variability and Morphodynamics on Beaches
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2010,01/31/2015
* Edith Gallagher, Franklin and Marshall College
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 01/31/2015
* USD 143,894.00

At first glance many sandy beaches appear to consist of sand that is all the
same size. Most numerical models of the changing shape of the beach also assume
uniform grain size across the model domain. However, even small changes in the
size of the grains can have a large effect on whether or not the sand will move
and how much sand can be transported. The hypothesis for the present study is
that small grain size variations can determine whether and where a beach is more
likely to erode. As part of this research, the variability of sand grain size
will be measured, both in space on a natural beach and in time through storms
and calm periods. Correlations between the spatial and temporal variability of
sand size and changing beach morphology will be examined, with the goal of
determining whether variations in grain size are important in the development of
patterns of erosion and accretion. For example, coarser sediments are often
observed in rip channels while finer sediments are found on the shoals between
channels. It has also been observed that finer sediments are found high on the
intertidal beach and offshore in sand bars, whereas grain sizes in the surf zone
are much coarser. In addition, this coarse-sediment region moves up and down the
beach with the rise and fall of the tides. To make measurements of sand grain
size, a digital imaging system (DIS) will be used that consists of a digital
camera with a macro lens in an underwater housing. Images of sand are processed
to give estimates of mean grain size. With the DIS, many more measurements of
grain size can be obtained than is logistically feasible with traditional
sediment sampling techniques. As part of this study, high-resolution grain size
surveys will be conducted regularly. These observations will be compared with
predictions of the motion of different sand size classes from state-of-the-
artmodels of waves, currents and beach changes. The results will be used to
explore the physical processes moving different size classes, to assess the
importance of spatial and temporal grain size variability in making accurate
predictions of sediment transport and to improve prediction of beach
morphodynamics for a wide range of environmental conditions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The present research will contribute to improved knowledge
and prediction of coastal changes. Predictions of this type are presently used
by federal, state, and local governments to provide coastal planning and
management, for military operations, and by scientists to better understand the
physical processes responsible for moving sand and other materials in the
coastal region. In addition, the resulting improved model will lead to better
predictions for sediment transport and shoreline changes on coasts threatened by
extreme waves and sea level rise. A large percentage of the world's population
lives within the coastal region and a better understanding and predictive
capability of the physical processes affecting the coasts will allow planning,
management and mitigation for safer coasts worldwide.