* 0952428
* CAREER: Emergent Phenomena in New Quantum Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2010,07/31/2016
* Bogdan Bernevig, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2016
* USD 450,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical
research and education to investigate recently discovered materials and
materials-related effects involving strongly correlated electrons and spin
dynamics. The research has four main thrusts: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Iron-
based oxypnictide superconductors. The PI's study will have particular emphasis
on the mechanism responsible for their high-temperature superconductivity, the
pairing symmetry, possible new collective modes in the superconducting state,
development of new techniques beyond one-loop functional renormalization group
to deal with strongly correlated systems, and experimentally testable
predictions of different weak and strong-coupling theories. The PI will also
focus some effort on issues in cuprate superconductors such as investigation of
Gutzwiller-projected wavefunctions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2) Non-abelian
fractional quantum Hall states and non-abelian fractional statistics. The
research will focus on understanding the imprint of topological order and
pushing the boundaries of numerical computation for these truly strongly-
interacting systems through new and insightful approximations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3) Topological insulators and the quantum spin Hall
effect. The research will have emphasis on the prediction of new materials
exhibiting this effect, the physics of the gapless edge and surface states at
low-temperature, experimentally falsifiable predictions about the bulk physics
of these materials when doped and subjected to magnetic and electric fields, and
novel transport laws that they might exhibit. The PI will also look into the
possibility of using these materials in specific thermoelectric devices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4) The effects of spin-charge dynamics in systems with
strong spin-orbit coupling in both the diffusive and ballistic regimes, and the
study of new spin-relaxation mechanisms, such as random spin-orbit coupling.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational activities associated with this CAREER
award include several initiatives geared toward making substantial contributions
to undergraduate and graduate education through pedagogical course development
coupled with research seminars, outreach activities in the form of lecture
series and one-semester courses designed for non-science students and the
general public, as well as fostering interactions between academia and industry.
Some of these initiatives will leverage resources of the Princeton Center for
Theoretical Science to uniquely maximize the impact of the planned educational
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical research and
education on new materials with interesting and exciting properties, and
intriguing new effects. These include iron-based superconductors and topological
insulators. Superconducting materials can conduct electricity without losses
when they are cooled to sufficiently low temperature which is well below room
temperature. The iron-based superconductors are interesting because they remain
superconducting to higher temperatures than many other known materials.
Understanding these materials may hold the key to achieving superconductivity at
room temperature. The PI aims to understand how electrons in these materials
organize themselves into high temperature superconducting states.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will also use theoretical methods to search for new
materials that are topological insulators. Like ordinary insulators, for example
rubber, topological insulators do not conduct electricity though the interior of
the material. Unlike ordinary insulators, topological insulators are able to
conduct electricity on their edges or boundaries through the formation of a new
state of matter. Among the known topological insulators are compounds made of
the elements bismuth and selenium, and bismuth and tellurium.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports fundamental research that
advances our fundamental understanding of how electrons organize themselves into
new states of matter which exist in or on the surface of materials. Their
existence is in part a consequence of properties of the materials. While
interesting in their own right, the study of these new states of matter may lead
to foundations for new device technologies. Research successes leading to the
discovery of new high temperature superconductor materials may lead to
significant energy savings by enabling low loss energy transmission. The PI will
interact closely with several experimental groups working on these problems to
ensure that the research will benefit the overall progress of the fields
indicated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational activities associated with this
CAREER award include several initiatives geared toward making substantial
contributions to undergraduate and graduate education through pedagogical course
development coupled with research seminars, outreach activities in the form of
lecture series and one-semester courses designed for non-science students and
the general public, as well as fostering interactions between academia and
industry. Some of these initiatives will leverage resources of the Princeton
Center for Theoretical Science to uniquely maximize the impact of the planned
educational activities.