* 0952486
* CAREER: Lattices and Sphere Packings, Arithmetic Geometry and Computational Number Theory
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/2010,02/29/2016
* Abhinav Kumar, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 02/29/2016
* USD 308,317.00

In this project, the PI, Kumar, will investigate the topics of sphere packings,
arithmetic geometry and computational number theory, and the various areas of
overlap of these directions of research. The PI and his collaborators have
worked on the problem of finding the densest packings in 8 and 24 dimensions,
using the technique of linear programming bounds. They have studied the sphere
packing and associated coding problems in context of potential energy
minimization. This has led to various new questions and techniques, such as the
concept of universal optimality, gradient descent in the space of packings, and
inverse problems which may have applications to molecular self-assembly. This
project will explore some of the questions that arose in previous
investigations, as well as other fundamental questions such as improvement of
asymptotic bounds on the density of sphere packings. Another component of the
project is arithmetic geometry, especially the study of K3 surfaces and their
automorphisms, such as Shioda-Inose structures. The PI also proposes to study
arithmetic applications such as the description of modular curves and surfaces,
Galois representations and the computation of modular forms and elliptic curves
of high rank. The project also encompasses related questions in computational
number theory. Lattices are a unifying theme of the topics of the proposal, and
one of the broad goals of the project is to understand explicitly families of
interesting lattices in high dimensions.

The "greengrocer's problem" of packing equal sized non-overlapping spheres
efficiently in space is a classical problem in geometry. Nevertheless, it turns
out to have surprising and beautiful connections with various parts of
mathematics, physics, and computer science. Its theoretical and practical
ramifications extend to Lie algebras, exceptional finite groups, quadratic
forms, coding theory, cryptography and energy minimization in physics. This
project will seek to further our understanding of sphere packings in high
dimensions as well as explore and exploit these connections. Arithmetic geometry
seeks to understand the properties of the natural numbers using the powerful
tools of algebraic geometry. One of the most spectacular successes of twentieth
century algebraic geometry is Faltings' Theorem (erstwhile Mordell's
Conjecture), which provides the final link in a trichotomy which links the
number of rational points on an algebraic curve to its topological genus, and
roughly establishes how many solutions we can expect to an equation linking two
variables. The analogous question of how many solutions we can expect to an
equation linking three or more variables is still quite a mystery. Some of the
questions the PI intends to investigate involve the arithmetic of surfaces,
especially K3 surfaces, which are important in mathematics and physics. The
project also hopes to make progress on the still murkier computational aspects,
such as how to find these solutions. The PI will also develop courses and
seminars in topics related to the proposal, and aim to involve graduate and
undergraduate students actively in this research. Other aims of the project will
be to develop algorithms and open-source code, as well as a catalog of
interesting codes in different spaces.