* 0952869
* CAREER: Complex Projective Structures, Teichmuller Theory, and Character Varieties
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/2010,04/30/2016
* David Dumas, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 04/30/2016
* USD 500,000.00

CAREER: Complex Projective Structures, Teichmuller Theory, and Character
Varieties&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the PI will explore complex
projective structures on surfaces and their applications to other areas of
analysis and geometry. The space of all complex projective structures on a
surface is a contractible manifold which has two natural but very different
coordinate systems; one involves a classical complex-analytic construction (the
Schwarzian derivative), while the other comes from the operation of grafting,
which assembles a projective surface from Euclidean and hyperbolic pieces. The
major research goals of this project are to understand the relationship between
the two coordinate systems for the moduli space of projective structures and to
use this understanding to solve problems in related areas. The project will also
include a significant educational component focusing on undergraduate
mathematics at the University of Illinois at Chicago (UIC) through two targeted
programs: First, the PI will organize a yearly undergraduate research symposium,
which will include lectures by senior mathematicians and by undergraduates
reporting on their own research projects. Second, the PI will create a new
course at UIC for undergraduate mathematics and mathematical computer science
majors on "experimental mathematics", discussing the way computer software (both
custom and off-the-shelf) is used as an exploratory tool in mathematical
research. The PI will teach the course for the first time in the 2010-2011
academic year, emphasizing computer exploration of the geometry of curves and
surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study of the shapes and configurations of
geometric objects has applications to diverse areas of science and engineering,
from understanding the folding of proteins or the formation of galaxies to
programming autonomous vehicles that must navigate complex terrain. In a
mathematical abstraction of this type of problem, one studies the space of all
possible shapes, or "moduli space", of a geometric object. This project focuses
on the moduli space of complex projective Riemann surfaces, a class of geometric
objects that encode information about $3$-dimensional spaces (hyperbolic
manifolds) in $2$-dimensional form. Through both theoretical study and
computational experiments, the PI will develop new tools for analyzing these
structures, enhance the connections between $2$- and $3$-dimensional geometry,
and expand applications of these structures in related fields of mathematics.
The project will also produce computer images of the moduli space, displaying
its rich structure and complexity in a way that can be appreciated by scientists
and non-scientists alike.&lt;br/&gt;