* 0952623
* CAREER: Healthy Families: Technology to Support the Health and Wellness of Young Children
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2017
* Julie Kientz, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2017
* USD 519,541.00

This project focuses on the design, development, and evaluation of the
effectiveness of computing interventions to assist parents in ensuring the
healthy development of their child. As young children undergo rapid development
and learn skills that will influence their entire lives, regular visits to a
pediatrician and detailed record-keeping can ensure that children are
progressing and can identify early warning signs of developmental delay or
disability. The PI will use a comprehensive human-centered approach to explore
and understand the tensions and opportunities for technology to support the
health of young children while involving parents and professionals across
diverse and underserved populations. The PI will seek to create feasible and
effective technologies that motivate and encourage record-keeping by parents.
Both qualitative and quantitative research methods will be employed to validate
technology designs using a long-term study lasting 18 months in collaboration
with Seattle Children's Health and Seattle King-County Public Health. Research
outcomes will include: Discovery of design requirements for technologies to
support the health of young children, especially for families from diverse and
underserved populations; A suite of three new technologies based on the design
requirements that leverage mobile and social computing technologies for
assisting parents of young children with tracking their child's health
information and learning about children's health; Validation of computing
technology as a viable means of supporting parent record-keeping, of increasing
parent knowledge and confidence in their child's developmental progress, and
improving parent-pediatrician communication.

Broader Impacts: This research involves conducting formative studies that
further our knowledge of how health technology can be designed for underserved
populations so as to minimize anxiety and support the doctor-patient
relationship. Thus, the project will address a major public health goal of more
closely tracking the health and development of young children, especially those
from lower income backgrounds and those with developmental delay. The findings
will have implications for domains beyond early childhood development. Project
outcomes will expand our knowledge about how mobile and social computing
applications can be developed and adapted based on the financial and time
constraints of the users. Finally, this work will help refine techniques for
evaluating technology applications designed for behavior change and long term
outcomes, which in turn will advance the field of Human-Computer Interaction in
general.