* 0952686
* CAREER:  Interdependence of Cortical Circuitry and Emergent Dynamics
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2016
* Jason MacLean, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 03/31/2016
* USD 750,023.00

The mission of the MacLean laboratory is to understand how the brain encodes and
stores information. The MacLean lab is multidisciplinary, combining biology and
mathematics, and provides a rich training environment for neuroscientists of the
future. In addition to the training and mentoring of both graduate and
undergraduate students, Dr. MacLean is actively promoting scientific literacy
through outreach programs including training opportunities within his lab for
underrepresented groups and is also using his data in a course on advanced
topics and methods in computational neuroscience. Using state of the art laser
microscopy the MacLean lab films groups of neurons in the brain in action,
allowing for the investigation of neuronal circuits. In the same way that an
electrical circuit is formed by connecting simple components, a neural circuit
is formed by its component neurons and the connections between them. It has long
been known that single neurons work as part of larger circuits but only recently
have the tools been available to investigate large populations of neurons at the
same time. MacLean and co-workers recently showed that each neuron is co-active
with a group of other neurons and that activity flows from group to group in an
orderly and often repeating sequence. These organized circuit patterns are
analogous to the scrolling text in Times Square, New York City. While no single
light can convey even a single word, the array of lights can convey a full
phrase or sentence through their patterned activity. Similarly, no single neuron
can communicate the full information in a neural circuit on which the brain
relies for its functioning. A fundamental, though often unspoken hypothesis in
neuroscience is that information is coded by patterns of activation within
circuits -- a question which the MacLean lab is investigating. Researchers also
postulate that these spatiotemporal circuit patterns are a result of the
specific connectivity between the neurons. Thus these patterns can be considered
an elementary functional unit of information processing in the brain and
simultaneously can reveal the underlying structure of brain circuits. Using data
from many circuits the MacLean lab will uncover the basic circuit composition
rules of the sensory cortex. For instance this work will reveal how many
circuits are present in a patch of the sensory cortex containing a set number of
neurons, a very basic question for which there still is no answer. Further the
MacLean lab will mathematically show how information is represented by patterned
circuit activations. Finally these researchers will determine the biological
mechanisms which produce these patterns. These are fundamental questions
critical to our understanding of cognition, learning, memory and behavior. The
MacLean lab will provide substantial broader impacts by introduction of his
research program into the experimental approaches taught in a course on
computational neuroscience. In addition, Dr. MacLean will initiate a new Science
and Technology program to show demonstrations of his work to girl scouts, in the
hope of increasing participation of women and minorities in science.