* 0952861
* EAGER: Reconfigurable Gigabit Wireless Networks for Data Center Interconnects
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2011
* Ravi Prakash, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* GEORGE HADDAD
* 08/31/2011
* USD 61,200.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to
demonstrate the feasibility of reconfigurable wireless interconnection networks
operating in the 60 GHz ISM band for data centers and server farms. The approach
is to build a test bench using a personal computer, commercially available
software and off-the-shelf components to simulate an actual data server using 60
GHz wireless interconnects and switches. Actual measurement data using the
available hardware and reported results will be used to achieve realistic
simulations of data servers and farms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of the proposed research includes: (1) investigation of the medium access
control protocols to successfully control the reconfigurable and versatile
wireless interconnect networks that can handle the combination of both point-to-
point and non-directed wireless links in a single data center, and (2) the
investigation of the 60 GHz wireless link, its channel performance, the
impairments owing to obstructions and link dropouts, timing issues for the data
transfers within the servers, and the overall coping mechanism of such networks
with respect to data congestion and packet loss. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of this research include improving the way data servers
communicate and the overall network setup and configuration. The wireless
interconnect switches, as proposed, will allow on-the-fly reconfigurability of
the interconnection network, providing optimal load sharing, and minimizing
disruption because of failures, and easier debugging, upgrades and repairs,
without compromising the overall speed and size. This will be accomplished at a
considerably reduced cost because of significantly lower to no downtime.
&lt;br/&gt;