* 0952300
* PIRE: Graduate Education and Research in Petascale Many Body Methods for Complex Correlated Systems:  A Collaboration with Partners in Germany and Switzerland
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2015
* Juana Moreno, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 08/31/2015
* USD 2,280,895.00

Moreno 0730290&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PIRE Graduate Education and Research in
Petascale Many Body Methods for Complex Correlated Systems: A Collaboration with
Partners in Germany and Switzerland&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to develop a new international research and graduate education
program leveraging cyberinfrastructure investment to study complex phenomena in
correlated materials. The project represents a partnership between researchers
at the University of North Dakota (UND), the University of Cincinnati (UC), and
Oak Ridge National Laboratory in the U.S.; the University of Bremen, the Max
Planck Institute of Solid State Research, the University of Wurzburg, and the
University of Gottingen in Germany; and the Eidgenossische Technische Hochschule
Zurich in Switzerland. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The recent onset of petascale
computing coupled with the development of new algorithms for complex systems
allows the modeling of strongly correlated materials, such as high temperature
cuprate superconductors, heavy fermion systems, and out of equilibrium nanoscale
devices. These correlated materials form the basis of future high-tech devices
and thus their proper theoretical understanding is paramount for technological
progress. Highlights of the research to be funded by this award include
simulations of strongly correlated systems using models parametrized by first
principles calculations which include chemical details. These models will be
solved with massively parallel many-body methods. A bottom-up modular approach
for code development will be used. The resulting library of code modules will be
broadly applicable and essential for the rapid construction of codes for student
thesis projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Approximately 20 U.S. doctoral students
from UND and UC will spend six to twelve months in Europe collaborating with
partners above, over a period of five years. In addition to these extended
research stays, students and faculty will collaborate virtually via video
conferencing and emerging internet technologies and will participate in a 12-day
summer workshop to be held at one of the partner institutions each year. Two
postdoctoral researchers and the PI/coPI team will participate in the workshop
and other collaborative activities as well.&lt;br/&gt;This international
education and research partnership will work collaboratively to: 1) develop
sustainable, multidisciplinary, international research opportunities for Ph.D.
students, 2) capitalize on complementary research strengths to facilitate the
development of petascale computational models which will lead to innovative
discoveries in complex correlated systems, and 3) provide graduate students with
a rich international research experience to increase their ability to compete in
the global marketplace.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project receives support from
NSF's Office of International Science and Engineering and Division of Materials
Research.