* 0952743
* CAREER:   Threshold-specific readouts of the Dorsal morphogen gradient of Drosophila
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2010,06/30/2012
* Albert Erives, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Leslie Pick
* 06/30/2012
* USD 375,000.00

In developmental biology, a morphogen is any molecule that acts at different
concentrations to cause cells to do different things. In many animal embryos,
concentration gradients of morphogens allow cells to decide where they are in
the body and how they should behave. Morphogens often have such a function by
binding to regulatory DNA switches (or DNA sequences) that can turn on specific
genes, which in turn influence cell behavior. Many areas of biological
investigation would be advanced significantly if it was understood how
regulatory DNA sequences encode these concentration-threshold specific
responses. The reason is that all regulatory DNA switches, not just those that
respond to morphogens, need to encode concentration-thresholds. In this project,
a large set of regulatory DNA switches will be examined that respond to the same
morphogen, specifically a protein called Dorsal that patterns one of the
embryonic body axes (the dorsal-ventral axis) in the fruit fly. In this research
study, DNA sequences that read out different concentrations of the Dorsal
protein will be compared and manipulated in an effort to break the code for this
classical morphogen system. In addition, new students will be trained in cutting
edge genomics and molecular biology and will identify new principles in how
cells regulate gene expression. These principles are expected to apply broadly
to other tissues and other organisms (including humans) because the system being
studied uses basic components that are widely conserved.