* 0952912
* Cationic Lewis acids as anion receptors
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2013
* Francois Gabbai, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 02/28/2013
* USD 438,209.00

Dr. François Gabbaï, Chemistry Department, Texas A&amp;M University, is
supported by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms Program to explore
novel, cationic, main group Lewis acids as receptors for small anions including
fluoride, cyanide and azide. This research focuses on the synthesis and study of
boron, silicon and antimony compounds whose anion affinity is increased by a
combination of Coulombic, hydrophobic, and/or chelate effects. These new,
cationic Lewis acids are studied as acceptors in charge transfer processes. This
reactivity can be harnessed for the design of turn-on anion sensors. In addition
to investigating the synthesis and structure of these novel main group
compounds, special attention is devoted to their anion binding selectivity,
their compatibility with aqueous environments, and the magnitude of the
photophysical response induced by anion binding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research advances the fundamental understanding of anion recognition processes.
Cyanide is widely available in both research and industrial settings even though
its potential release into the environment is a source of concern; Cyanide is a
toxic anion which can bind to and deactivate enzymes in the body, sometimes with
fatal consequences. While fluoride is often added to drinking water and
toothpaste because of its beneficial effects in dental health, high doses of
this anion can be lead to dental fluorosis. Anion receptors capable of binding
and/or sensing potentially toxic anions in water aid in both environmental
remediation and medicine. The graduate and undergraduate students involved in
this research program receive excellent training and research experiences in
synthetic inorganic chemistry and photophysics. By being exposed to a project
concerning the capture of toxic anions in water, this project increases the
students' awareness of current environmental and health challenges. Efforts to
translate some of this research into undergraduate Inorganic Chemistry
Laboratory courses provide a vector for the integration of research and
undergraduate education.