* 0952729
* CAREER: New Physics with Top Quarks at the LHC and Bringing It Home to a Regional Planetarium
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2010,06/30/2015
* Reinhard Schwienhorst, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* James Shank
* 06/30/2015
* USD 500,000.00

The LHC is expected to reveal the origin of particle mass and of electroweak
symmetry breaking and provide access to new physics signatures that give insight
into the fundamental nature of the universe. The top quark is a key player in
this search for new physics, and this important relationship will be addressed
in the work supported by this award. The primary purpose of this CAREER award is
to enhance, strengthen and broaden Professor Schwienhorst's research program at
ATLAS and initiate new activities in dissemination of LHC results to the general
public using the Abrams planetarium on the campus of Michigan State University.
This award allows for the expansion of the existing ATLAS single top effort at
MSU (the Standard model (SM) single top group) to create a new group
specifically devoted to new physics which can be addressed with the single top
final state (the New Phenomena (NP) single top group). The PI has outlined an
analysis plan leading from general searches for new physics in early data to
precision measurements and specific searches with large data samples that
require advanced analysis techniques. The results of this research will be
relevant not only to particle physics but also to cosmology and astrophysics and
our general understanding of nature. This work involves both graduate and
undergraduate students in important roles in data analysis and communication of
physics results. It connects particle physics to astronomy, astrophysics, and
cosmology through the Abrams Planetarium. The students, together with
information graphics experts at MSU and planetarium staff, will build short
self-contained modules about particle physics, the LHC, and the ATLAS
experiment, initially for the Abrams planetarium, and later to be available for
distribution to other planetariums around the country. The modules will be
updated and expanded regularly as LHC results start to appear and a concrete
picture of new physics emerges. The planetarium show not only will introduce a
large general audience to particle physics but also will provide an excellent
opportunity for undergraduate students to learn about particle physics as
practiced at MSU. This is an innovative contribution which significantly extends
the reach of traditional particle physics outreach projects.