* 0952442
* CAREER: Investigation of DNA-binding Protein Dynamics With High-resolution Optical Traps
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/2010,01/31/2016
* Yann Chemla, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 01/31/2016
* USD 810,214.00

A broad class of DNA-binding protein interacts with the genome in a non-
sequence-specific manner. These proteins act mechanically on their substrates,
altering DNA conformation by bending, twisting, or stretching the molecule, and
oligomerizing to form long filaments. These nucleoprotein complexes often serve
as substrates upon which genome maintenance processes occur. Thus, they are
involved in all aspects of DNA metabolism, in replication, recombination, and
repair, and are important regulators of cellular processes. Single-stranded DNA
binding proteins (SSB) serve as a model system for features common to this class
of proteins. This project will use a synthesis of techniques from traditional
biochemistry and molecular biology, in combination with single-molecule
biophysics and computational biology to investigate: (1) how SSBs induce
conformational rearrangement of nucleic acids, (2) how they oligomerize into
nucleoprotein filaments, and (3) how these protein clusters recruit and modulate
the activity of other proteins involved in nucleic acid processing.
Specifically, high-resolution optical trapping in combination with single-
molecule fluorescence techniques will be used to reveal dynamic protein-DNA
interactions, going beyond the limitations of current methods. This work will
shed light on fundamental aspects of genome
maintenance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: &lt;br/&gt;The PI has a deep
commitment to interdisciplinary education of young scientists and outreach
towards underrepresented groups. In particular, he sees in biophysics a unique
opportunity to recruit women, who have traditionally been drawn to biology over
physics, into the quantitative sciences. The outreach and education components
of the project synthesize these themes into a broad plan targeting middle and
high school, undergraduate, and graduate education. Specifically, the PI will:
(1) develop a lab camp for a girls' summer program to teach middle and high
school girls about physics and its impact on biological problems and to provide
hands-on experience with biophysics, (2) improve the teaching of an introductory
undergraduate physics course for life science students (the majority of whom are
women) to better connect physics concepts with biology and medicine, (3) develop
a lab course devoted to the training of the next generation of biophysicists in
advanced technologies as part of the NSF Center for the Physics of the Living
Cells (CPLC), and (4) participate in yearly minority conferences. This project
is jointly supported by the Genes and Genome Systems Cluster and the
Biomolecular Systems Cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences.