* 0952280
* Kinematic and Dynamic Models of Actively Deforming Lithosphere of the Western US
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2014
* Kaj Johnson, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 06/30/2014
* USD 157,401.00

With the recent expansion of the GPS network in the western US provided by the
PBO component of Earthscope, geodynamicists are poised to make rapid progress in
our understanding of the processes by which the lithosphere
deforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a contribution, we are developing new methods
for modeling the deformation of the lithosphere and comparing model predictions
to GPS measurements of surface motions. Our approach is to jointly develop
kinematic and dynamic models of lithosphere deformation in the western US to
address a series of long-standing problems about how the lithosphere deforms
including: 1. What is the mode of deformation in the western US? 2. What is the
relative influence of various driving forces on lithosphere deformation? 3. What
is the rheology of the lithosphere and how does rheology change with depth? 4.
Is lithosphere deformation self-driving and decoupled from mantle flow? 5. Where
is slip along faults aseismic and seismic? And, 6. To what extent do faults
interact mechanically by transfer of loads through elastic and viscous processes
in the lithosphere?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We are developing kinematic models of
long-term and interseismic deformation that will be used to infer the viscosity
structure of the lithosphere, fault slip rates, distribution of interseismic
fault creep, and lithospheric block motions. To do this we are constructing 3D
earthquake cycle models consisting of faults in an elastic schizosphere
overlying a layered viscous plastosphere. We are examining the extent in space
and time to which postseismic relaxation processes in the mantle and on deep
crustal faults might be evident in GPS measurements of interseismic deformation
and to what extent these processes influence our estimates of fault slip rates.
We are also moving beyond purely kinematic models and developing thin-plate
elasto-plastic models of long-term lithosphere deformation in which faults slide
in response to far-field plate driving forces, internal body forces due to
variations in gravitational potential energy, and basal tractions. Combining
these predictions of long-term motions with our interseismic deformation models
and GPS observations, we are trying to infer the relative contributions of the
various driving forces to lithosphere deformation.