* 0952529
* Supporting Students Attending the Second Annual North American School of Information Theory
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2010
* Dongning Guo, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* William H Tranter
* 08/31/2010
* USD 10,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;The Second Annual School of Information Theory to be held on August
9-13 at Northwestern University. Information theory provides the theoretical
foundations for modern communication systems. This rich foundation has enabled
dramatic performance improvements in both wire-line and wireless communication
systems. In recent years, there has been much interest in building on these
successes and extending information theoretic ideas to provide fundamental
insight into the design of increasingly complex networks that are of critical
importance both for military and civilian uses. Examples include communication
systems such as Mobile Ad hoc Networks (MANETs), wireless mesh networks and
sensor networks as well as biological and social systems. With the goal of
developing the next generation of information theorists, the first Annual School
of information theory was held on June 2-5, 2008 at Penn State University.
&lt;br/&gt;The school was very successful and provided nearly 100 graduate and
postdoctoral students with an excellent platform where they were exposed to the
state of the art in information theory. The Second Annual School of Information
Theory will build on this success by exposing students to leading research in
information theory through lectures by four leading figures in information
theory and also by providing students the opportunity to discuss their own work
and interact. This grant is providing travel support to make attending the
school an affordable opportunity for graduate students and post docs from across
the US.&lt;br/&gt;