* 0952396
* Crustal-Scale Geometry of Active Continental Normal Faults
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2015
* John Nabelek, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 07/31/2015
* USD 512,866.00

What is the geometry of faults and shear zones that accommodate continental
extension? This is a simple, yet unresolved question with important geodynamic
implications about the nature of extensional processes. In this seismological
experiment, the PIs will deploy very densely spaced EarthScope FlexArray
stations across an active normal fault to construct a receiver function image
that traces the fault through the entire crust.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geologic
mapping and active-source reflection seismics indicate the presence of different
modes of upper crustal extension that include high-angle planar faults, listric
faults and low-angle detachment faults. In pure shear extension, faults are
rooted in the mid-crust at subhorizontal decollements that mark the transition
from localized brittle deformation in the upper crust to pervasive ductile flow
in the lower crust and often faults are assumed to curve into them. The
discovery of low-angle detachment faults that brought metamorphic mid-crustal
rocks to the surface led to the very different simple shear model where
extension in the lower crust and upper mantle occurs along narrow ductile shear
zones. Slip along shallow dipping surfaces, however, has not been observed for
large earthquakes, which indicate planar, steeply dipping faults. Some large
earthquakes seem to rupture into the lower crust. This is intriguing because
rupture into the lower crust likely leaves a structural imprint. However, high-
resolution (high-frequency) reflection seismic surveys, which provide the most
detailed images of fault geometry, have only penetrated into the uppermost
crust. This may be due to loss of energy from random scatterers or that the
fault zone is not sharp enough to be imaged by high-frequency waves.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The centerpiece of this project is a one-year deployment
of a linear array of 33 three-component seismometers across an active, large-
throw normal fault -- the Pleasant Valley, NV, fault that ruptured in 1915 in a
magnitude 7-7.5 earthquake. The use of small station spacing and lower frequency
energy from natural sources will allow the PIs to produce a receiver function
image showing the fault geometry across the entire crust and address basic
questions about continental extension: 1) are faults in the brittle upper crust
planar or listric, 2) do faults extend into the lower crust as localized shear
zones or do they root in a mid-crustal decollement, and 3) is crustal-scale
faulting deflecting the Moho and affecting the upper
mantle?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Resolving the geometry of continental normal faults
is a globally relevant question with far reaching scientific and societal
consequences. Crustal-scale fault geometry is important to construct realistic
geodynamic models for continental extension. Fault geometry strongly affects
earthquake hazard and is particularly relevant for the densely populated eastern
and western Basin and Range boundaries (Salt Lake City, Reno) and globally for
places like Italy and the entire Aegean region.