* 0952946
* CAREER: The roles of ecology, behavior, and morphology in maintaining species boundaries- demonstrating evolutionary processes to high school students in Idaho.
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2009,07/31/2014
* Marjorie Matocq, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 07/31/2014
* USD 458,314.00

The conservation of biodiversity requires an understanding not only of the
factors that contribute to diversification and speciation but also of the
population dynamics that allow species to remain distinct from one another. The
PI will integrate a series of field and lab studies to identify how ecological,
behavioral, and morphological factors enable hybridization but prevent
widespread gene flow (introgression) between two species of woodrat, Neotoma
fuscipes and N. macrotis. Specifically, the PI will identify where the barriers
or filters to genetic introgression occur in the continuum of reproduction from
spatial opportunity for interaction, to mate choice, gamete transfer,
survivorship and reproductive success. The PI will incorporate aspects of this
research into a high school outreach program. This program will train local high
school biology teachers in molecular genetic techniques and collaborate with
them to present these techniques to their students and integrate these
activities into other components of the curriculum.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research and educational activities will train a continuum of
individuals in the scientific method with special emphasis on molecular genetics
and evolutionary processes. These individuals include high school students from
the local Shoshone-Bannock tribe, undergraduates, PhD students, and biology
teachers. The outreach program will be a model partnership between high schools
and universities, cost-efficiently exposing students to modern molecular
genetics and evolutionary research.&lt;br/&gt;