* 0952681
* CAREER:  Phase-Shift Microbubbles for Intravenous Oxygenation
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2010,10/31/2010
* Mark Borden, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Semahat S. Demir
* 10/31/2010
* USD 449,992.00

0952681 Borden

Biologically inspired colloids (biocolloids) are increasingly being employed to
detect and treat human disease, but the field lacks cohesion and integration
within university curricula. An integrative plan is proposed to build a career
on (i) research that develops potentially transformative biocolloid technology,
(ii) teaching that collects and disseminates principles in biocolloid
engineering and creates adaptive expertise within the research group, and (iii)
service that integrates local underrepresented and under-resourced youth
directly into the research and educational activities and provides an avenue for
professional development. The primary research goal is to develop biocolloids
(specifically microbubbles) as a method for intravenous delivery of oxygen
(IVO2), which would have an immediate and profound impact on the treatment of
patients presenting acute and sub-acute hypoxia, e.g., owing to airway
obstruction (20 million incidents/yr), cardiac arrest (1.3 million
incidents/yr), traumatic brain injury (1.4 million incidents/yr), or organ
transplantation (28,000 incidents/yr). IVO2 would supplement current treatment,
including ventilation and extracorporeal membrane oxygenation, by providing
lifesaving oxygen where these technologies are inadequate or injurious. IVO2 is
superior because it does not exacerbate airway problems or require blood to exit
and reenter the body. The approach taken here is to disperse oxygen gas into
trillions of micron-scale bubbles (small enough to traverse capillaries), each
stabilized by a nano-scale bioresorbable phospholipid shell and suspended in
saline. While efficient oxygen encapsulation and stability are paramount outside
the body, the microbubbles must rapidly disintegrate to release oxygen to
unsaturated hemoglobin and oxygen-starved tissue once injected into blood. To
address this paradox, the proposed microbubble design employs a monolayer shell
that undergoes a thermotropic phase transition as the suspension heats up to
body temperature. The rational design of temperature-sensitive IVO2 microbubbles
requires empirical data and modeling parameters relating shell composition to
biomedical performance. Aim 1 focuses on the experimental exploration of
microbubble shell phase behavior. Aim 2 parameterizes this physicochemical
knowledge into the model-based design of an IVO2 formulation. Aim 3 involves in
vitro testing and optimization to prove feasibility and provide feedback for
future design.

The primary deliverable of the education plan is a biocolloid engineering track
that serves graduate and undergraduate students and underrepresented and under-
resourced minority elementary and high school students in the surrounding
community. An approach is taken to integrate the research and education goals,
facilitate knowledge transfer and promote meta-cognitive skills. Ultimately, the
work seeks to promote higher education, develop critical thinking skills and
establish a robust philosophical approach to biocolloid design.

The intellectual merit of this work is that it will establish a framework for
optimizing phase-shift microbubbles by determining quantitative
interrelationships between composition, temperature and stability. The concept
of phase-shift microbubbles, in which a thermotropic transition in the lipid
shell induces rapid and irreversible dissolution of the oxygen core, is novel.
The work will reveal fundamental insights into lipid membrane behavior. The
proposed IVO2 technology is transformative and may improve the outcome of
critical care patients who require a rapid, direct infusion of oxygen.

The broader impact of this work is that it will advance a novel therapy for
acute hypoxemia while developing pedagogical tools for biocolloid engineering. A
novel course sequence, textbook and symposia series will be created to expose
undergraduate and graduate students to the science and application of
biocolloids. The work will impact science and engineering education beyond the
university through outreach activities geared to K-12 students. Talented and
motivated minorities will be recruited from these programs to participate in the
research and educational activities.