* 0952242
* Morphodynamics of Complex Meander Bends on Large Rivers
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2016
* James Best, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 03/31/2016
* USD 306,271.00

This project will combine state-of-the-art techniques in field measurement and
mathematical modeling of river processes to explore the interactions among flow,
sediment movement and channel change in complex meander bends along large
rivers. The research will address questions of how the complexity of bend shape
affects flow and sediment transport, how these effects vary with different flow
levels, and how these effects combine to determine long-term changes in the
shapes of large meander bends. The Wabash River on the border of Illinois and
Indiana, one of America's last virtually unregulated free-flowing meandering
rivers, will serve as the field site. The research will measure, using new
acoustic technologies, three-dimensional patterns of water movement, sediment
transport and changing riverbed morphology within meander bends of different
shape over a range of flow levels. Field measurements will be used to develop,
calibrate and test advanced computational models that will allow numerical
simulations of meander bend dynamics over a wider range of meander shapes and
flow levels than is possible in the field.

Meanders are one of the most recognizable and common features of river
landscapes, and have fascinated scientists, artists and writers for centuries.
The floodplains of large meandering rivers are also among the most populated
areas in the world, and management of human infrastructure in these locations is
often of critical importance. Additionally, rocks formed from the deposits of
meandering rivers may contain economically-important quantities of oil, gas,
water and minerals, and reconstruction of these past environments relies on
knowledge of processes in modern meandering rivers. At present, most knowledge
concerning patterns of flow, sediment movement and channel change in meandering
rivers stems from studies of small bends, in the laboratory and field, and bends
that have relatively simple shapes. The project will transform our understanding
of the form and dynamics of large, complex-shaped, river meanders and allow
testing of hypotheses concerning channel geometry that have been long-proposed
for smaller river meanders, but never tested in large river bends. The research
will quantify the three-dimensional movement of water, transport of sediment and
evolution of river bends in the large Wabash River (c. 250m wide, 10m deep), and
use this data to develop and test numerical models of meander bend flow and
erosion. This combined field-numerical approach will be of direct use in
explaining how complex river bends have evolved and how they may behave in the
future. This will have significant impact in many realms of social and applied
science concerned with the management of infrastructure and populations located
within the floodplains of large meandering rivers, and in future predictions of
bank erosion, channel migration and meander abandonment.