* 0952558
* CAREER:  Bio-inspired Controllable Tensegrity Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2016
* Cornel Sultan, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Atul Kelkar
* 08/31/2016
* USD 441,000.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project
is to develop new controllable tensegrity structures and motion control
strategies by leveraging biological discoveries. The new structures will
incorporate morphological and modeling innovations prompted by the benefits they
bring to tensegrity systems encountered in biology. For example the membrane and
intermediate filaments of the cytoskeleton are crucial in achieving structural
integrity and morphing shape capabilities as well as sensing, control, and
information transmitting functions of living cells. Likewise, internal cellular
elements working close to their integrity limits explain why cells can resist
extremely large forces. Therefore, membranes and intermediate filaments with
sensing and control capabilities will be added to current tensegrity structures
and the mathematical modeling assumptions will be relaxed to allow investigation
of tensegrity structures close to their mechanical integrity limits. Also many
living systems achieve fast and energy efficient motion control using elastic
elements for actuation and articulated skeletons that resemble tensegrity
structures. Based on the similarities between tensegrity and living structures,
this research will develop new motion control strategies that exploit intrinsic
properties of tensegrity structures such as prestressability and internal
mechanisms. The research objective will be achieved by combining techniques and
tools of graph theory, analytical mechanics, structural dynamics, control
theory, as well as symbolic and numerical computation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, the results of this research will answer crucial needs in science
and engineering. In biology and medicine they will serve to: a) advance the
fundamental understanding of the basic building block of living organisms, the
cell; b) comprehend the connection between heart disease and cell?s structure;
c) aid tissue and organ reconstruction research; d) explain how nature controls
motion is a fast and energy efficient manner. In engineering the mathematical
models and control strategies will be critical in validating tensegrity
applications such as space telescopes, antennas, robots, thus enabling the jump
from feasibility to implementation. In education the integrated research and
education program will: a) promote inter- and multi-disciplinary education using
tensegrity structures versatility; b) attract children to science using
tensegrity structures fascinating appearance and properties; c) enhance the
infrastructure for research and education by bringing together researchers from
different fields.