* 0952253
* Exploring electronic response properties of molecules and extended systems using theoretical methods
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/2010,04/30/2014
* Jochen Autschbach, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 04/30/2014
* USD 356,684.00

In this project supported by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms
Program of the Division of Chemistry, Professor Jochen Autschbach of the
University at Buffalo, State University of New York, and his research team will
develop theoretical models for the calculation of nuclear magnetic resonance
(NMR) spectra, and for circular dichroism (CD) spectra and optical rotatory
dispersion (ORD). This work will advance our understanding of structure-specific
NMR parameters, and the structural and electronic origins of the chiro-optical
response. In addition, the influence of the chemical and physical environment on
these molecular properties will be explored.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research
will not only advance our understanding of the relationship between molecular
structure and measured spectra, but also our general understanding of the
interaction of light and matter. Theoretical methods and software developed
during this investigation will be made available to the larger community of
scientists. In addition, this research project will be a vehicle for the
training of graduate and undergraduate students. The student experience will be
enhanced by the collaborative nature of the project; while the work within the
Autschbach group is computational, it will be done in the context of
collaborations with experimentalists from a variety of fields, including
materials science and catalysis.