* 0952873
* Emergence of Geometric Order and Cell Identity in the Cone Photoreceptor Mosaic
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2014
* David K Lubensky, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Ann Asson-Batres
* 03/31/2014
* USD 530,999.00

The orderly packing and precise arrangement of individual epithelial cells is
essential to the functioning of many biological tissues, including sensory
structures in animals such as photoreceptors in the retina of the eye and hair
cells in the auditory epithelium of the inner ear. Various biological and
physical influences can affect epithelial cell geometry, among them cell-cell
adhesion, cytoskeletal dynamics, and macroscopic mechanical stress, but the
changes in cell shape and position that generate planar geometric ordering are
still only partially understood. Ultimately, quantitative physical models will
be needed to unravel the dynamic regulatory behavior responsible for the regular
arrays of cells seen in many biological systems. &lt;br/&gt; The proposed
research will be accomplished by an interdisciplinary team that relies on ideas
and techniques from both statistical physics and developmental biology. The goal
is to generate mathematical models that can be tested directly with biological
experiments, and with these models to discover mechanisms that position cone
photoreceptors in a precise array in the zebrafish retina. The computational
models developed in this project will be the first to explore how differences in
cell-cell affinities combined with directed mechanical stresses can generate
longer-ranged order in an epithelium. These studies will also provide a unique
understanding of the biological and physical mechanisms underlying the planar
organization of vertebrate photoreceptors in the developing eye. &lt;br/&gt; A
research team diverse in gender, ethnicity, and scientific discipline will be
built through continuing involvement of the PI, Co-PI and postdoctoral
researcher in campus-based and external programs to promote diversity of
undergraduate and graduate science students. A course module on biological
modeling will be developed for graduate students, and new computational tools
for understanding the emergence of biological form will be made freely
available.