* 0952285
* Surface-wave Propagation Across North America:  New Methods, Observations and Models
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2014
* Goran Ekstrom, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 04/30/2014
* USD 386,778.00

The project is focused on investigating the propagation of fundamental-mode
surface waves across North America using data recorded on the EarthScope/USArray
Transportable Array employing a variety of methods of analysis. A goal of the
research is the development of comprehensive high-resolution maps of phase
velocity across North America to help constrain the deep structure of the
continent. The propagation of short- and intermediate-period surface waves
depends on the elastic structure of the crust and shallow mantle, and
observations of propagation characteristics of these waves are therefore useful
for constraining the state, composition and dynamics of this portion of the
Earth's interior. The Transportable Array of EarthScope/USArray is generating an
unprecedented data set for the seismological imaging of the North American crust
and mantle using surface waves, and the project aims to exploit these data using
three approaches. First, the project involves the collection of a new set of
observations of surface-wave polarization for earthquakes recorded on USArray
stations. Owing to the uniform calibration of USAarray station, and the state-
of-the-art technology used to orient USArray stations, this data set is ideally
suited for polarization studies. Second, a recently developed method of
analyzing cross spectra of ambient noise recorded on two seismic stations for
the determination of inter-station surface-wave dispersion is applied
systematically to USArray stations. The method, which is based on Aki's seminal
1957 paper, allows Love and Rayleigh wave phase velocities to be mapped
automatically across the footprint of USArray at a spatial resolution smaller
than 100 km, and at periods as short as 5 s. Third, the phase velocity maps
derived from short-period ambient noise and intermediate-period earthquake
signals are used, together, to determine the elastic structure of the crust and
uppermost mantle of the North American Continent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will lead to an improved characterization of surface-wave propagation
across North America and will facilitate more specific interpretation of the
composition and thermal state of the Earth's interior. Several documented data
sets that can be useful for other investigators wishing to constrain the elastic
structure beneath North America will result from the research.