* 0952281
* Love-Rayleigh Scattering and Regional Anisotropy in USArray
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2015
* Jeffrey Park, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 05/31/2015
* USD 209,824.00

Shear in the mantle associated with the motion of Earth's tectonic plates tends
to align minerals within large volumes of mantle rock. One of the most common
minerals in mantle rock is olivine, which is stiffer in some direction than in
others. The directional variation of stiffness is called anisotropy. The partial
alignment of olivine minerals in mantle rocks causes these rocks to be
anisotropic. Anisotropy expresses itself in the tendency for seismic wavespeed
to vary slightly on the direction of propagation, shear-waves to acquire
elliptical polarization, and for incoming seismic waves to scatter into other
seismic waves. Love wave are horizontally-polarized surface waves that scatter
to elliptically-polarized Rayleigh waves when they encounter regional
concentrations of anisotropy. These scattered waves, called Quasi-Love, or QL
waves, are useful for detecting shear near plate boundaries, where the strong
plates stretch the plastically-deformable mantle surrounding the plates as they
sink at oceanic trenches, spread at rift zones, or crumple where continents
collide. QL waves can be observed on individual seismograms, and complement
other types of seismic data. The investigators found QL scattering in and around
the Cascadia subduction zone at the NW border in seismic data from the land-
based USArray, a component of Earthscope. At the Cascadia plate boundary the
Juan de Fuca plate converges with the North American plate along the coast of
the Pacific Northwest, and sinks into the mantle beneath the line of Cascade
volcanoes. Offshore anisotropy beneath the Juan de Fuca plate appears to align
in agreement with coastal anisotropy estimated from other data. This suggests
that the mantle beneath the Juan de Fuca plate deforms from the lateral motion
of the plate, rather than from "slab rollback," that is, a progressive retreat
of the plate as it falls (of its own weight) into the plastically-deforming
mantle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers are extending their analysis to the
entire Cascadia subduction zone, stacking Quasi-Love scattered waves for
stations along great-circle paths that track the progress of individual surface
waves. The frequency dependence of the maximum scattering is sensitive to the
depth range of anisotropy. QL-scattering proximal to the Cascadia subduction
zone is significant, but lateral anisotropic gradients are present inland as
well. The researchers are extending the stacking procedure inland from Cascadia
to explore QL-crossing paths along the San Andreas system, the Basin and Range,
and the Yellowstone hot spot. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For detailed interpretation
of the data the researchers compute synthetic seismograms in simplified earth-
model geometries as a quick-interpretation tool, and explore 3-D structure in
anisotropy by adapting the SPECFEM-GLOBE seismic-wave simulator to explore the
effects of hypothetical anisotropic geometries. The researchers will produce
maps of the Western US, that highlight the locations where Love-to-Rayleigh
scattering is strong, what symmetry orientation (and therefore shear
orientation) appears to be consistent with the scattering, and whether the
anisotropic gradients are asthenospheric (i.e. dynamic), lithospheric (perhaps
fossil) or represent deeper flow in the upper mantle.