* 0952550
* CAREER:   The Molecular Basis of Persister Cell and Biofilm Formation by the E. Coli Protein MqsR
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2016
* Rebecca Page, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 03/31/2016
* USD 852,025.00

Intellectual Merit:

Research on biofilms, bacterial communities familiar to everyone as they coat
our teeth at night, has been ongoing for many years. However, even today, the
only certain way to remove biofilms is by mechanical force, i.e. a toothbrush.
While brushing our teeth is routine, removal of biofilms from ships, pipes and
medical devices, and other surfaces, is much more difficult and expensive. The
formation of biofilms is one of the major defense and survival mechanisms
utilized by bacteria. However, a detailed understanding of how biofilms assemble
and are regulated at a molecular level is only rudimentarily understood. The
formation of bacterial persisters, a genetically identical sub-population of
metabolically quiescent cells that express protein toxins and exhibit multidrug
tolerance, is at the core of biofilm formation. However, persistence is also one
of the most poorly understood mechanisms used by bacteria to survive
environmental stress. Recently, the Escherichia coli protein MqsR (B3022, YgiU)
was identified as a key persistence factor, as it is the most highly upregulated
gene in persisters. Because its sequence does not resemble that of any
characterized protein, its molecular function, i.e. how it is regulated at a
molecular level and especially how it drives the formation of the persister
phenotype, is currently unknown. Accordingly, the long-term objective of this
CAREER project is to elucidate the molecular mechanisms that lead to the
persister state, with a focus on understanding the protein activities that lead
to persister formation. In addition, a thorough understanding of how these
activities are regulated under normal and stressful conditions and how they can
be blocked for the development of novel agents that inhibit the formation of the
persister cell phenotype will be determined. Specifically, the following
questions will be answered: 1) What is the 3-dimensional structure, and thus the
function, of the MqsR toxin and how is its toxicity mitigated by its interaction
with MqsA (B3021, YgiT)? 2) How do MqsA and the MqsR:MqsA complex differentially
regulate E. coli gene transcription? and 3) How does MqsR toxicity lead to
biofilm and persister cell formation? Taken together, these studies will define
the molecular mechanism of MqsR and provide essential new insights into how MqsR
controls bacterial persistence and biofilm formation.

Broader impacts:

Biofilms, complex communities of bacteria that are highly resistant to
antimicrobials and cost the world economy billions of dollars every year, are
extraordinarily enriched in persister cells. A molecular understanding of the
function and regulation of the proteins that play a key role in persistence,
like MqsR, will provide novel targets needed for development of new chemical
agents that target biofilms. In this CAREER project, multiple research
disciplines, including structural biology, biochemistry, and genetics, will be
integrated to provide projects for both undergraduate and graduate students that
reveal the interdisciplinary nature of scientific research. The cornerstone of
the educational program is a multi-component Protein Science Workshop (PSW) that
will provide Community College of Rhode Island (CCRI) students with the
opportunity to expand their research experiences. It is composed of lectures and
laboratories at Brown University and RI-EPSCoR facilities and will expose the
CCRI students to state-of-the-art research and technologies. In addition, each
year, one CCRI student will be invited to carry-out their own independent
research project. The long-term goal of the collaboration with CCRI, the first
of its kind in Rhode Island, is to attract and develop a new generation of
scientists from the often forgotten pool of adult students who are returning to
school in order to obtain the knowledge and skills that will allow them to
pursue higher education and/or entry into the biotechnology workforce.