* 0952825
* CAREER: Real-time evolution in host-pathogen networks
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2010,05/31/2017
* Benjamin Kerr, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2017
* USD 827,417.00

From the advent of antibiotic resistant bacteria to host switching in viral
pathogens, many of the problems we face with infectious disease are evolutionary
in nature. Theoretical work suggests that pathogen infectivity and virulence
evolve in response to the manner in which hosts move and contact one another
(the ?social contact network?). However, there has been relatively little
experimental work to test these predictions. This project combines mathematical
and computational approaches with real-time microbial evolution to explore how
network structure influences host-pathogen evolution. The experimental approach
involves a model community comprised of bacteria (hosts) and their viruses
(pathogens). The microbes are embedded in subpopulation arrays and a high-
throughput robot is used to control movement between subpopulations. As the
subpopulation network structure is varied, the changes in both the pathogen and
its host are tracked in real time at genetic and physiological levels. The
primary investigator will focus on how the structure of the social network
influences the evolution of different components of the life cycle of the
pathogen (e.g., host entry and exit), the ?evolvability? of the pathogen (i.e.,
its proclivity for rapid trait change), and the evolution of the host in
response to the pathogen and vice versa.

The focus of this project is evolution. More generally, the subject of evolution
occupies a central pillar of modern biology. Nonetheless, there is widespread
public skepticism about evolution in the United States. This doubt is fueled, in
part, by basic misunderstanding of evolutionary principles. In the classroom,
this situation reflects a failure to communicate central aspects of evolutionary
theory, its scientific foundation, and its relevance for the public good. The
primary investigator will design and publicly disseminate a set of new real-time
evolution modules for use in undergraduate laboratory courses. The focus will be
disease evolution, using the innocuous microbial host-pathogen systems described
above. These modules will illustrate evolutionary processes through hands-on and
inquiry-based experiments. Additionally, the primary investigator will design a
year-long sequence in experimental evolution in collaboration with researchers
from other disciplines (including bioengineering, cancer research, genome
sciences, fisheries, and electrical engineering). In this sequence, students
will pose and test their own evolutionary hypotheses. In the process, students
will learn about the nature of scientific research and effective experimental
methodology. Both educational and research aims of this project will directly
involve graduate and undergraduate students and special efforts will be taken to
involve underrepresented groups.