* 0952249
* Collaborative Research: Understanding the Connections Between Strain Transients and Earthquake Swarms
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2010,02/28/2014
* Eliza Richardson, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 02/28/2014
* USD 118,700.00

The Plate Boundary Observatory instruments were installed to detect time periods
when the deformation of the Earth's crust speeds up or slows down. These
transient, predominately aseismic deformation episodes have now been recognized
worldwide using geodetic datasets from subduction zone thrust faults, volcanic
normal faults, and major strike slip faults. Recent studies have documented that
these strain transients often trigger swarms of small to moderate earthquakes.
So far, the small number of examples with truly high-quality constraints on the
space-time distribution of both the seismic and aseismic fault slip limits the
mechanical understanding of earthquake triggering by strain transients.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study combines geodetic inversions and earthquake
triggering studies to improve the mechanical models that connect strain
transients with increases in earthquake rate. Previous work shows that current
mechanical models do not quantitatively predict the stochastic properties of
earthquake swarms during transients. A GPS network filtering approach is being
employed to detect new strain transients in the Salton Trough in southern
California, the Cascadia subduction zone in Oregon and Washington, and the
Alaskan subduction zone. The seismicity associated with any detected transients
is then analyzed using a combination of stochastic and mechanical models of
earthquake triggering to estimate the temporal history of rate-changes
associated with individual transients. As the precision of these tests of
mechanical triggering models increases, so does our understanding of how
earthquake triggering works in different tectonic environments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When teachers become involved in scientific research, they
are better able to model the process of science for their own students; the
excitement of playing a role in scientific discovery translates directly to
enthusiasm in the classroom. Three teachers per year recruited from Penn State's
Master of Education in Earth Sciences program
(https://earth.e-education.psu.edu/) participate in a 10-week research effort in
which they are trained to analyze catalogs of earthquake swarms that are
temporally and spatially correlated to geodetically-detected strain transients.
This research effort and related instruction serves as the "capstone" for their
master's degree. They are working in teams to analyze swarms related to strain
transients as well as to develop teaching plans for disseminating the results of
their work to secondary students in their own schools. In addition, they are
creating learning objects from this work that will be made publicly available as
part of Penn State's Open Educational Resources initiative. Therefore, the
results of this project have the unprecedented potential to create both a new
science product of interest to EarthScope scientists, and new teaching and
learning objects for immediate use by secondary school teachers worldwide.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;