* 0952524
* EAGER:  Exploring Security Issues in Next-Generation Networking Infrastructure
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2011
* Tilman Wolf, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 12/31/2011
* USD 100,000.00

The Internet provides data communication that is essential for business,
personal communication, E-Government, and entertainment. Our society's reliance
on the broad availability of data communication networks makes these system a
critical part of today's infrastructure. The need to support emerging
technologies and networking paradigms has led to numerous ongoing efforts to
develop novel network architectures that can improve and replace existing
network systems. Many new network designs use a virtualized network
infrastructure on which networks with different protocol stacks can be
instantiated. To implement such dynamic deployment of data communication
networks, programmable routers with embedded packet processing systems are used.
The introduction of these new systems into the network opens the doors for new
cyber attacks that use the network or target the network itself.

This work will study the security issues that arise in this new virtualized and
programmable networking environment and develop techniques that can be used to
identify, mitigate, and possibly avoid attacks. The researchers will study how
attacks can be characterized in next-generation network and how novel anomaly
detection algorithms can be developed. The algorithms will use cooperation
between protocol layers and distributed detection mechanisms between nodes and
autonomous systems to achieve high detection capabilities that aid in defending
the network infrastructure. The ability of programmable nodes to aid in the
detection process will be leveraged.

The intellectual merit of this work lies in providing insights on
vulnerabilities and possible defenses in emerging network designs, which are
fundamentally different from today's Internet.

The broader impact of this work aims at providing the technology necessary to
protecting the next-generation Internet from cyber attacks.