* 0952579
* CAREER: Genetic Analysis of Epigenetic Gene Regulation in Maize.
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2010,02/29/2016
* Karen McGinnis, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* william eggleston
* 02/29/2016
* USD 1,070,921.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this NSF-CAREER project is the
regulation of gene expression in maize, an agriculturally important crop plant
in the United States. Gene expression is a regulated process that determines
which biochemical components are present and active at any particular time in a
living cell. Recently, biological science has been dramatically advanced by the
sequencing of the genomes of a wide range of organisms, including maize.
Although the gene sequences are essential to understanding the traits, growth,
and development of an organism, they represent only one type of heritable
information that influences the regulation of gene expression. The goal of this
project is to determine how gene expression is regulated by epigenetic factors;
that is, factors other than the actual sequence of genes. Examples are the
addition of methyl groups to the DNA in or near particular genes and the
association of regulatory regions of DNA with specific proteins, either of which
can be heritable information and can influence which genes are expressed. This
research will use genetic and genomic techniques to identify specific factors
required for epigenetic gene regulation of introduced and naturally occurring
genes in maize and will explore interspecies variation in epigenetic gene
regulation. Currently, relatively little is known about the importance of
epigenetic regulation to phenotypes and adaptation or about how such information
is passed from one generation to the next, so the project will also address
these important questions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The
principal investigator strives to improve scientific literacy beginning at the
precollege level and to inspire and advance young scientists by providing them
with positive research experiences through their direct involvement with
intellectually stimulating research projects. Maize provides an excellent system
through which to teach and learn genetics, presenting many opportunities to
observe examples of important genetic concepts. Every experiment in this project
will be conducted by postdoctoral, graduate, and undergraduate trainees.
Emphasis will be placed on excellence in preparation for scientific careers and
in mentoring young scientists for success. Additionally, the project will
provide information about the genetic regulation of transgenes in genetically
modified organisms and will improve the understanding of how gene expression is
regulated in an agronomically important crop plant. In the future, this basic
knowledge can be applied to trait and yield improvements in maize.