* 0952790
* Novel routes for nitrogen functionalization of organics with metallic Ag, Au and Cu: Fundamental principles on a molecular level
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2014
* Robert Madix, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 06/30/2014
* USD 580,673.00

The Chemical Catalysis Program supports Professor Robert J. Madix at Harvard
University for a research project that will develop the fundamental basis for
simple, novel heterogeneously catalyzed reactions for the transformation of
amides, imines, nitriles and aziridines over copper, silver and gold surfaces
through understanding of the kinetics and mechanism of the surface reactions of
nitrogen-containing molecules. The proposed studies are based on fundamental
principles of surface reactivity discovered and developed in previous NSF-
supported work. Amidization, iminization, nitrilation and aziridination
reactions facilitated by these group IB metals will be studied utilizing well
defined single crystal surfaces. This research will provide a molecularly based
understanding of the elementary reaction steps of these complex synthesis
reactions. They have the potential for transforming existing technologies into
more energy efficient and environmentally benign processes.

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis Program in the Chemistry Division at
the National Science Foundation, Dr. Madix will perform research that will have
a significant impact on important chemical transformations for the industrial
sector with significant outcomes of improved catalyst selectivity, reduced
waste, and potentially lower energy consumption. The proposed research is
important to the development of processes critical to maintaining leadership in
the multibillion dollar chemical industry in the United States and to the
reduction in energy use. Broader impacts of the research has as an outcome the
training and professional development of postdoctoral students and the training
of both women and minority students. Professor Madix will include undergraduates
in his research through the REU program at Harvard and will conduct coordinated
activities with local high schools to stimulate the interest of minority high
school students in physical science. Harvard University's existing partnerships
with both The Engineering School at the Hyde Park Educational Complex in Boston
and the Cambridge Rindge and Latin School will be utilized.