* 0952977
* CAREER: Extensible Personalization of Spatial and Spatio-temporal Database Management Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 03/15/2010,02/28/2017
* Mohamed Mokbel, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 02/28/2017
* USD 530,000.00

The goal of this research project is to allow database users to enjoy high
quality personalized answers for their spatial and spatio-temporal queries,
without sacrificing the query execution efficiency. As the concept of
personalization is subjective, there are plethora of approaches that define the
meaning and contents of a high quality personalized answer. This project does
not aim to provide more definitions of personalization, instead, it provides a
system-oriented approach that can accommodate most of the existing and future
definitions in one highly efficient database engine. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
achieve its goal, this project employs an extensible approach where core
database modules for personalized queries are realized only once inside the
database engine, and used many times in different ways to support a wide variety
of personalized queries. The project provides such extensible core modules
for:&lt;br/&gt;(a) single-table operations, e.g., selection and
aggregations,&lt;br/&gt;(b) multi-table operations, e.g., join, &lt;br/&gt;(c)
operations with adaptive cost that can only be computed online, and
&lt;br/&gt;(d) handling uncertain data. &lt;br/&gt;With these extensible
modules, registering a new personalization definition becomes as easy as
plugging few modules in an easy-to-use interface. Once plugged in, the new
personalized definition lives in the database engine, and enjoys the power of
the extensible modules for query processor, optimizer, and indexing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Such extensible approach is highly attractive to industry
as it gives minimal changes in the database engine to support wide variety of
personalized queries, as well as orders of magnitude performance over existing
approaches that are built on top of database systems. Besides its impact on
industry, this project will have significant broader impact across multiple
segments of society that include enhancing productivity, graduate and
undergraduate student education, outreach to K-12 students, curriculum
development, and tutorial presentations. Publications, technical reports, open-
source software, and experimental data from this research are disseminated via
the project web site (http://www.cs.umn.edu/~mokbel/career).