* 0952352
* Glaciers, Erosion, and Climate Change in the Himalaya Mountains
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2013
* Howard Conway, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 05/31/2013
* USD 224,979.00

Erosion plays an important role in the development of the Himalaya Mountains,
and is generally controlled by the interplay among tectonics, topography and
climate that govern mountain building. Little is known, however, about rates of
erosion at the heavily glaciarized crest of the range, and there is no consensus
on whether glaciers accelerate or impede erosion in the region. This project
will determine contemporary erosion rates for the Khumbu basin, at the foot of
Mt Everest, through a detailed examination of the fluxes of ice and rock debris
in this drainage basin. These fluxes will be determined on three time scales:
during the 2-year duration of this project, ~60 years and ~10,000 years.
Contemporary fluxes of ice and debris will be determined from analyses of
digital topography and satellite images, existing glaciological and
geomorphologic data, and field studies. These will reveal the debris advected
with the ice and accumulating in the lower reaches of the glacier, and the
debris that exits Khumbu Glacier through the proglacial stream. Mass balance and
runoff will be modeled through the last six decades using available global
climate data. Historical data documenting the glacier surface profile, surface
velocities and debris cover will also guide modeled estimates of debris and ice
fluxes through this period. Estimates will be made of the volume of the massive
debris edifice that formed in the lower Khumbu valley since the last major
glacial advance about 10,000 years ago to determine the volume of debris derived
from the upper Khumbu basin. This will be accomplished using satellite imagery,
digital elevation models, and available radar and gravity surveys. The erosion
rate averaged over this time span can be calculated from this debris volume by
accounting for the fraction of sediment evacuated fluvially during this period
on the basis of the measurements of contemporary sediment flux in the Khumbu
proglacial stream.

This study will advance knowledge of the interactions between snow and debris
that sustain massive low-latitude glaciers and shape high mountains. Glaciers
are common featues of mountain ranges around the world, and this study will
document their role in erosion and mobilization of sediment. This project wiil
also help evaluate two important issues: how climate change may affect glaciers
in the Himalaya and the probable consequences for the vast population dependent
on the major rivers that emanate from the glaciers in the Himalaya and Tibet.
These consequences include 1) an initial increase in runoff due to the
accelerated melting followed by diminishing supplies of fresh water from the
dwindling glaciers, and 2) an increasing threat of floods from ice-dammed lakes
formed by rapid glacier retreat.