* 0952482
* CAREER: Physics with CMS Detector
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2015
* Yuri Gershtein, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* James Shank
* 06/30/2015
* USD 515,170.00

The primary purpose of this CAREER award is to enhance, strengthen and broaden
the research program and the education and outreach activities of Professor
Gershtein at Rutgers University. It will partially support the salary and the
tuition of graduate students to work on the Compact Muon Solenoid (CMS)
experiment at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN. It will also support a
part time staff (undergraduate student) for the new outreach program he has
initiated at the University. His research at CMS is focused on the search for
the Higgs boson through its decay into two photons, its most likely discovery
mode at the LHC. He also proposes to use the techniques needed for the Higgs
discovery to search for signs of new physics, including manifestations of hidden
valleys, supersymmetry, and new strong dynamics. It is expected his experience
at D0 should enable him to take a leading role in such searches. In coordination
with the New Jersey Chapter of the American Association of Physics Teachers, he
is initiating a "Saturday Morning Physics" program of lectures at Rutgers
University on the cutting edge developments in science and technology. It will
target high school students from under-represented urban areas such as Camden,
Newark, New Brunswick, and Trenton, aiming to improve their perception of
science and inspire some to pursue careers in engineering or science. Students
who attend the lectures would be tracked in an attempt to understand whether
this increases the fraction that pursue science in college. An undergraduate
student will aid in this effort. In addition, he plans to hold seminars
following these lectures targeted to high school teachers. In order to better
evaluate and enhance the effectiveness of this program, and to help implement
the material into the actual lesson plans, the PI plans to closely involve high
school teachers and pre-service teachers. These lesson plans would be posted on
a web site - creating a resource for teachers not able to attend the
lecture/seminars. Working with the Graduate School of Education and the NJ
Department of Education a further goal is for teachers to earn developmental
credit for the lesson plans evolving from the lectures and other projects such
as QuarkNet activities.