* 0952600
* MSA Short Course: Theoretical and Computational Methods in Mineral Physics - Geophysical Applications
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2010
* Renata Wentzcovitch, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 09/30/2010
* USD 30,000.00

MSA Short Course: Theoretical and Computational Methods in Mineral
Physics:&lt;br/&gt;Geophysical Applications&lt;br/&gt;Organizers: Renata M.
Wentzcovitch (U. of Minnesota), Lars Stixrude (UCL-
London)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The awaard will help support the 'Short Course' for
the Mineralogical Society of America on computational mineral physics. The goal
of this course is to review the important techniques used in theoretical and/or
computational mineral physics today, along with exemplary applications that have
contributed to advance the field of high pressure mineral physics and
geophysics. The accompanying book to be published will be a comprehensive
overview of the current state of this field. This field has matured and several
approaches that have flourished within the last fifteen years are here to stay.
This course and book differ from the previous course and published Vol #42,
"Molecular Modeling Theory: Applications in the Geosciences" in many ways. The
emphasis of that course and issue was on geochemistry and molecules. This one is
on geophysics and condensed phases. The methods discussed in that issue are
prevalent in the chemistry community. The methods and applications we will
present in this issue were developed in the condensed matter and solid state
physics community. That course emphasized processes related to minerals
surfaces, interfaces, particularly chemical reactions. The outcome of that type
of research is of relevance to environmental and atmospheric sciences. The focus
will be high pressure, high temperature bulk properties, such as thermoelastic
and thermodynamic properties in single and multiphase aggregates. The outcome of
these studies is geared towards understanding planetary interiors,
interpretation of seismic observations, and providing essential constraints on
geodynamic simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The computational approaches
introduced in this course have contributed to the establishment of a field of
research that today rivals experiments: they are predictive. Their applications
are increasing at very rapid pace now, and the future of this research field is
bright. Experimentalists, seismologists, and geodynamicists should be informed
of the methods used and results they can produce. Students should be inspired by
the possibilities presented by the selected set of articles. The volume will
likely be well received by the materials physics, materials sciences, and
simulations communities as well, since mineral physics presents challenges not
always faced by these other fields. Mineral physics explores properties of
condensed systems in a wider range of pressures and temperatures. The
experiences of those active in mineral physics are invaluable and should be
communicated to researchers active in related fields.