* 0952134
* Biphasic Catalysis Using Soluble Polymer Supports
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2010,08/31/2014
* David Bergbreiter, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 08/31/2014
* USD 420,000.00

The Chemical Catalysis Program supports Professor David E. Bergbreiter at Texas
A&M University for a research project that will use phase-selectively soluble
polymer-bound catalysts in immiscible solvent mixtures to address important
challenges in synthesis and catalysis and will have an effect on the areas of
catalysis, synthesis, Green chemistry and polymer chemistry. The proposed
research will extend the PI's past discoveries on the use of polymer-bound
catalysts in homogeneous solutions to conduct reactions in oil-in-oil emulsions.
The catalyst immobilization chemistry proposed is based principally on the
properties of the soluble polymer support. Using chemistry developed in prior
work will allow the preparation of a variety of homogeneous catalysts, and phase
segregate and concentrate them in the discontinuous phase of oil-in-oil
emulsions. Transesterification catalysts, organometallic catalysts and
organocatalysts will all be studied. The reactions to be studied are
macrocyclizations using several different methods such as transesterification,
olefin metathesis, Baylis-Hilman reactions, and carboxylic acid additions to
epoxides.

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis Program in the Chemistry Division at
the National Science Foundation, Dr. Bergbreiter will perform research that will
not only apply to multiple types of macrocyclizations (lactones, epoxides,
Baylis-Hilmman), but also include careful and clever studies designed to
optimize reaction rates, catalyst recovery, and removal of catalysts from
products. Professor Bergbreiter?s work has also had an impact in the technology
arena where earlier work was the basis of a recently described process by DuPont
for a commercially viable route to clearcoats containing low volatile organic
compounds (VOC) for automotive finishing applications. Broader impacts of this
work include the training of undergraduate, PhD, and postdoctoral students.
Professor Bergbreiter has had success introducing undergraduates both from Texas
A&M and elsewhere to research. His research program is expected to continue to
involve a significant percentage of students from underrepresented groups. The
current program included 34% women and 38% students from underrepresented groups
among the undergraduates or graduate students who worked on the project. These
percentages will increase to 50% in the future by targeting schools in Texas
that serve underrepresented groups. International outreach will be achieved by
working with an undergraduate institution in Qatar, and with universities in
Japan and Thailand, which will broaden the cultural experiences of his students.