* 0952599
* RAPID: Fires in coastal California: Watershed and ecological responses to an acute environmental disturbance
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2012
* John Melack, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Richard S. Inouye
* 05/31/2012
* USD 150,000.00

Three major fires occurred in the foothills and mountains above the greater
Santa Barbara area in 2008 and 2009, all within watersheds with on-going,
multiyear measurements. Because high rainfall is expected during the El Nino
conditions forecasted for 2009-2010, burned ecosystems will show their greatest
responses this year and afford an excellent opportunity to examine the effects
of fire on terrestrial and stream ecosystems. Measurements will be made of
short-term changes in burned and unburned watersheds, comparing the influence of
fires on a variety of ecological and environmental responses including: stream
discharge and the export of sediment and nutrients, soil movement and
landslides, re-growth of vegetation at the watershed-scale using high resolution
remote sensing and at the transect-scale by direct measurements of re-sprouting
plants, and stream biota and ecosystem processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
Modeling will permit prediction of flooding, soil movements, and stream water
quality across a range of climatic conditions during post-fire periods. This
information will be of value to natural resource managers and public safety
officials. Participation in public meetings will further disseminate the
findings. In addition, three graduate and four undergraduate students will gain
invaluable experience in watershed ecology, hydrology and management.