* 0952716
* CAREER: MilliKelvin Magnetic Field-Angle-Resolved Probe of Quantum Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2015
* Johnpierre Paglione, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 04/30/2015
* USD 550,000.00

****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;The anisotropy of physical properties
is a key distinguishing feature of crystalline systems, is central to the nature
of fundamental interactions and their resultant phases, and is known to play a
key role in stabilizing many exotic phases of matter such as high-temperature
superconductivity. Motivated by the recent discovery of a new family of iron-
based superconductors with intriguing fundamental properties and much promise
for technological applications, this Faculty Early Career Award supports a
program with a goal of developing an experimental platform capable of probing
the symmetry and anisotropic nature of quantum materials by measuring heat
capacity and other thermal properties in large fully rotatable magnetic fields
and at temperatures approaching absolute zero. By providing a new experimental
tool previously unavailable to the U.S. condensed matter physics community,
several fundamental questions regarding the nature of high-temperature
superconductivity and other exotic states of matter can now be addressed. This
provides an opportunity for investigation of a wide range of materials of
interest to both fundamental and applied research in physics, chemistry,
materials science and other disciplines, and with promise for applications in
energy and health-related fields. An important component of this CAREER research
program is the integration of an extended education program that will include
the participation of both undergraduate students through co-operative work-study
programs and local-area high school students through Science Magnet Programs.
Also, an international junior researcher short-visit exchange program will be
organized to enhance the experience of undergraduate students, graduate students
and postdoctoral scholars working on collaborative
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;This Faculty
Early Career Award supports a project seeking to elucidate the fundamental
nature of unconventional superconductivity and the ground state properties of
quantum critical systems via experimentally accessible methods of quantum
tuning. The key approach is to develop an experimental platform capable of
probing the symmetry and anisotropic nature of quantum materials by performing
thermal transport and thermodynamic measurements down to milliKelvin
temperatures in a rotatable vector magnetic field environment. With precise
angular control of large, directional magnetic fields at low temperatures,
specific heat and thermal conductivity probes will be used to a) map the
symmetry of superconducting order parameters in iron-based and heavy-fermion
superconductors, and b) investigate the role of anisotropy in quantum critical
systems by measuring straightforward, interpretation-independent quantities to
test the basic nature of particle excitations. An important component of this
research program is the integration of an extended education program that will
include the participation of both undergraduate students through co-operative
work-study programs and local-area high school students through Science Magnet
Programs. Also, an international junior researcher short-visit exchange program
will be organized to enhance the experience of undergraduate students, graduate
students and postdoctoral scholars working on collaborative projects.