* 0952471
* Testing Structure/Function Relationships in an Ecological Context:  Integration of Biomechanics, Behavior and Performance during Aerial Predation in Dragonflies
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2013
* Stacey Combes, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 03/31/2013
* USD 285,500.00

PROJECT TITLE: Testing structure/function relationships in an ecological
context: Integration of biomechanics, behavior and performance during aerial
predation in dragonflies&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Stacey
Anne Combes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROJECT NUMBER: IOS
0952471&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to understand the diversity of animal body
forms found in nature, as well as the potential application of particular
features to man-made devices, it is essential to first clarify the relationship
between a given structure and the function(s) for which it has evolved. In
studies of animal locomotion, this relationship has typically been examined in
the context of a single, isolated function that is easy to elicit and measure,
such as forward locomotion at a steady speed, without any clear indication of
how important this function is for animals in the wild. A more complete
understanding of the role of particular body structures can be gained by
examining their effect on performance during complex, demanding locomotory
behaviors that are known to affect an animal's survival or reproductive success.
The current study will demonstrate this approach through integrated analyses of
the biomechanics, behavior and performance of dragonflies hunting aerial prey.
Studies will be conducted in a novel, outdoor artificial dragonfly habitat, in
which natural predatory behaviors can be elicited reliably from known
individuals, and filmed with a high-speed multi-camera system to reconstruct
three-dimensional body motions. This will be the first project to explore the
mechanical determinants of aerial predation, one of the most challenging and
complex behaviors performed by flying animals. Through a series of
manipulations, the work will provide a better understanding of the effects of
body mass distribution, wing flexibility, and wing damage on flight performance.
In addition, the project will train several undergraduate and high school
students in basic experimental and field techniques, while providing data on
prey capture rates and the effectiveness of wild dragonflies in controlling
mosquito populations.