* 0952342
* The Spontaneous Rate of Gene Duplication and Deletion in Caenorhabditis elegans.
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2014
* Vaishali Katju, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 02/28/2014
* USD 437,274.00

Gene duplications are the primary source of new genes and novel functions in
evolution and contribute to heritable diseases and cancer. Most of the recent
progress in elucidating the role of gene duplications in the history of life has
been the result of comparative analysis of sequenced genomes. Although these
studies can provide a rich record of the history of gene duplications and gene
loss, the early evolutionary dynamics and selection pressures on duplicated
genes remain poorly understood. In order to measure the genome-wide rate of
spontaneous gene duplications and deletions, this project uses Comparative
Genome Hybridization to detect spontaneous duplications and deletions in
experimental populations of the nematode worm Caenorhabditis elegans that have
been subjected to (i) mutation accumulation and (ii) adaptation. Gene
duplications and deletions will be independently verified by alternative
analytical methods. In addition, the effect of local DNA sequence context on
gene duplications and deletions will be investigated. Furthermore, the fitness
effects of gene duplications and deletions that are detected in the adapted
populations will be tested in competition experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
rate at which new genes appear in populations greatly influences their
population dynamics with important consequences for the evolutionary potential
of organisms, genetic variation and susceptibility to heritable diseases.
Moreover, these results should significantly further our understanding of how
new genes evolve. This project will train undergraduate and graduate students
and will emphasize significant participation of underrepresented minorities,
especially at the undergraduate level.