* 0952806
* Workshop: NSF/ARL Workshop on the Frontiers of Controls, Games and Network Science, Workshop will be held in UT Austin, TX on Feb. 19-21, 2010.
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2010
* Sanjay Shakkottai, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 09/30/2010
* USD 35,000.00

Objective: The Workshop on the Frontiers of Controls, Games and Network Science
will host participants from academia, industry and government. The aim is to
increase inter-community collaboration in the applications of emerging
analytical tools and techniques from controls, games and network science for
both commercial wireless networks and military
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Over the last few years, we
have observed the confluence of several technological and algorithmic advances
that promise tremendous impact on both commercial and military wireless
networks. These include the proliferation of data-enabled smart-phones, changes
in wireless spectrum policies, as well as fundamental advances in distributed
network control algorithms. At this juncture, it is important that the academic
community, government participants and industry participants effectively
interact in order to develop easily deployable network control algorithms that
are based on a sound theoretical basis. The workshop will consist of seminars
and discussions to foster long-term collaborations between the student, faculty,
government and industry participants. A poster session will encourage fruitful
exchange of ideas between the various participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: This workshop will introduce students to the state-of-the-art and
current trends in research and industry. Collaboration in this frontier area is
especially needed to ensure successful technology transfer from ideas to
practice, and this workshop will educate students and participants on the
critical problems in this space. A special emphasis will be placed on ensuring
strong participation by women and under-represented minority
students/participants.&lt;br/&gt;