* 0952187
* Interferometric Imaging of Deep Mantle Reflectors Beneath the Western United States
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2010,04/30/2012
* Michael Thorne, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 04/30/2012
* USD 154,360.00

Recent seismological investigations of the upper-mantle located directly beneath
the western United States have resolved a remarkable degree of structure and
heterogeneity. These efforts have revealed previously unknown structures, such
as large-scale mantle drips. How these upper-mantle structures are related to
structure and processes in the mid- and lower-mantle is currently unresolved. A
key step in deciphering this interaction between upper-mantle structures with
deeper mantle layers is to use high resolution mapping of seismic
discontinuities. In particular, discontinuities located approximately 400 to 700
km in depth (the mantle transition zone) are expected to be strongly affected by
their interaction with upper mantle structures and are key target areas being
investigated in this study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work has developed a new
technique based on seismic interferometry to investigate the nature of seismic
reflectors in the upper- to mid-mantle region. Seismic processing using an
interferometry approach has been extensively utilized in small-scale oil
exploration efforts in the last decade, yet has not been applied to deeper
targets as techniques of this kind require dense spacing of seismic recorders.
Prior to the significant increase in seismic instruments made possible by the
USArray project, this technique would not have been possible to
adapt.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Past efforts for looking at mantle discontinuity
structure have been focused on studying seismic wave reflections off of the
underside of seismic discontinuities. Many of these efforts have used underside
reflections from the seismic phase SS (termed SS-precursors). However, using SS-
precursors presents challenges in determining discontinuity depth, as knowledge
of the seismic wave velocity on both the source- and receiver-side of the SS
path is needed. The technique used in this study applies cross-correlation
interferometry to migrate the SS-precursor data with the direct S-wave arrival
passing through the discontinuity. This eliminates the need for detailed
velocity structure on both source- and receiver-paths and is not dependent on
any prior knowledge of where the seismic source is located. This technique
provides better spatial resolution on mantle discontinuity structure and is
elucidating the link between upper- and lower-mantle processes.