* 0952370
* Engineering Metal-Organic Framework Catalysts using Postsynthetic Modification
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2010,05/31/2013
* Seth Cohen, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 05/31/2013
* USD 440,000.00

The Chemical Catalysis Program supports Professor Seth M. Cohen at the
University of California- San Diego for a research project that will use post-
synthetic modification (PSM) to alter metal organic framework (MOF) materials to
introduce a range of functionalities without disrupting the overall structure
and porosity of the MOFs. Post-synthetic modification is emerging as a useful
tool to access functionalized MOFs that cannot be prepared directly. These
materials will be useful as both homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysts.
Although there are now quite a few examples of MOFs that have been used as
heterogeneous catalysts, the proposal correctly identifies catalysis as an area
of MOF chemistry that is under-developed. Preliminary studies show that chiral
substituents, organocatalytic groups (carboxylic acids, ureas), and metal-
binding groups can be readily introduced into MOFs by PSM. Early studies show
that these modified MOFs are useful for catalytic
reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the Chemical Catalysis
Program in the Chemistry Division at the National Science Foundation, Dr. Cohen
will perform research that contributes to metal-organic frameworks (MOFs)
becoming more widespread as a material of choice for energy, catalysis, and
biomedical applications. Based on these technological applications, and because
of the growing importance of postsynthetic modification (PSM) of MOFs, Professor
Cohen's work has garnered substantial attention from outside the immediate MOF
community. Most notably is a recent paper on the use of MOFs as solid-state
catalysts via PSM (Angew. Chem. 2009) that has gathered substantial attention in
the catalysis discipline. This proposal also includes a novel broader
impacts/teaching activity to develop internships and coursework in science
policy. A Science Policy Summer Program at the University of California Center
in Washington D.C. (called UC in DC) is being created. The PI is the Director of
this new program that involves training of physical, biological, mathematical,
and engineering science students in the importance of science in public policy.
The program will involve special activities such as seminars, tours, in addition
to coursework and science policy internships. This innovative program will
impact students across the University of California system, and help to create a
generation of scientists who better appreciate their role in society and in
government.