* 0952311
* Collaborative Research:  Effects of Fire and Subsequent Sediment Burial on Sulfur and Mercury Binding in Organic Matter of Forest Soils
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2010,01/31/2015
* Kathryn Nagy, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 01/31/2015
* USD 235,333.00

Intellectual merit: Mercury mobilized by forest fire is accumulating in aquatic
organisms in lakes and reservoirs in the Rocky Mountain region. Recent research
has focused on mercury emitted to the atmosphere during forest fires, but fire
also releases mercury to streams, lakes, and reservoirs. Soil organic matter
effectively sequesters most of the mercury deposited in forested watersheds, and
fire results in the destruction or erosion of most of the soil organic matter.
Fire also results in the development of anoxic, sulfate-reducing conditions in
the lakes and reservoirs receiving runoff from fire-disturbed watersheds, and
under these conditions, mercury is biologically converted to methylmercury, the
form that readily accumulates in aquatic organisms and concentrates up the food
chain. In this proposal, research is outlined to examine the effect of fire on
the ability of soil organic matter to strongly bind mercury and prevent
methylation and bioaccumulation. The research is driven by three
&lt;br/&gt;hypotheses addressing the transformations caused by fire in the
oxidation state of sulfur in soil organic matter and the effect of these changes
on mercury binding. The hypotheses are (1) that forest fire increases the
oxidation state of sulfur in soil organic matter, (2) that forest fire decreases
the strong mercury binding capacity of soil organic matter because of the
increase in the oxidation state of the sulfur, and (3) that sediment burial
restores, or increases, the strong mercury binding capacity of soil organic
matter because of incorporation of hydrogen sulfide in the lake and reservoir
sediments. Soil and lake/reservoir sediment sampling will be carried out in
watersheds affected by wildfire and prescribed burn. Mercury adsorption to and
desorption from the soils, sediments, and extracted organic matter, will be
examined using furnace heating to reproducibly assess the effect of heat on
sulfur oxidation and mercury binding. In addition, the sulfur and mercury in
these materials will be characterized with x?]ray absorption near edge structure
(XANES) and extended x?]ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS)
spectroscopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The broader impacts of this
proposal involve three unique features: (1) growth of the San Juan
Collaboratory, an initiative of the University of Colorado, Fort Lewis College,
the Mountain Studies Institute, and federal, regional, and state land management
agencies in the San Juan Mountains region, (2) recruitment of under-represented
graduate students through well-established and successful programs at the
University of Colorado and University of Illinois, and (3) establishment of the
Colorado Water Quality Outreach Center (CWQOC) at the University of Colorado.
The San Juan Collaboratory was recently formed to enhance and establish research
and educational programs for the southwestern Colorado area. The Colorado Water
Quality Outreach Center is being established with the support of the University
of Colorado Outreach Committee to provide a state-wide avenue for watershed
stakeholder groups and municipalities dealing with water quality problems to
seek assistance from faculty and students with water quality problems.