* 0952398
* EAGER: Sedimentologyand Tephrochronology of Caves in the Melinau Karst, Sarawak, Malaysia
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2010,05/31/2012
* Richard Hazlett, Claremont McKenna College
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 05/31/2012
* USD 51,751.00

Sedimentology and Tephrochronology of caves in the Melinau Karst, Sarawak,
Malaysia. Donald A. McFarlane, Claremont McKenna College EAR - 0952398

ABSTRACT Gunung Mulu National Park, Sarawak, Malaysia, was established in 1974
to protect its world-class subterranean environment, and recognized for World
Heritage status in 2000. Currently, this heritage incorporates some 295 kms of
mapped cave, including some of the largest passages and chambers in the World.
This proposal focuses on resolving the age and origin of a prominent volcanic
ash layer preserved in the sediment deposits of several Mulu caves, on using
that distinctive chrono-marker to understand the depositional history of the
caves, and on isolating a concurrent geochemical signature in Mulu speleothems.
PIs believe that the circumstantial evidence points to the ash layer being
formed by the Younger Toba eruption - a cataclysmic event originating in
northern Sumatra that is recognized as the most violent volcanic event in the
past million years of Earth history. If the Mulu ash does prove to come from
Toba, it will provide valuable new insights into the pattern of ash-fall and
hence it's probable impact on ecosystems and human populations in southeast
Asia. If the ash proves to originate elsewhere, then it must represent a
hitherto unrecognized eruption of great significance. In either case,
identifying a corresponding geochemical signature in a dated Mulu stalagmite may
lay the groundwork for developing paleo-eruption records from speleothems
Southeast Asia.