* 0952907
* CAREER: Risk Management via Stochastic Programming: Models, Computation, and Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2016
* James Luedtke, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 01/31/2016
* USD 400,000.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project
is to investigate new optimization models and algorithms that enable decision-
makers to manage risk when making complex decisions in the face of uncertainty.
Specific research activities include: explore new decomposition-based methods
for stochastic programs having constraints limiting the probability of a bad
outcome; study new stochastic dominance constrained models that allow decision-
makers to set a minimally acceptable risk profile in an adjustable manner; and
prove the usability and impact of these models by using them to solve problems
in application areas such as supply chain management, workforce staffing,
finance, and medical treatment planning. The overarching educational objective
of this CAREER project is to increase the population of individuals who use
quantitative tools to make decisions in the face of uncertainty. Specific
educational activities include: work with a campus precollege outreach
organization to incorporate optimization-related topics into their programs;
develop and teach a decision-making under uncertainty module for an introductory
engineering course; and design and implement a graduate course on optimization
under uncertainty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will lead to a new set of
computationally practical tools that decision-makers can use to find plans that
balance risk and efficiency. For example, these tools could be used by
businesses to meet customer service targets at lower cost, by government
agencies to choose cost-effective disease control policies, or by physicians to
design radiation treatment plans. The educational aspect of the proposal will
facilitate adoption of the methods by giving graduate students the skills needed
to apply them, and by exposing a wide range of undergraduate students to the use
of optimization. Precollege educational activities will promote diversity in the
mathematical sciences by reaching an economically diverse range of precollege
students across Wisconsin.