* 0952083
* CAREER: Nickel and Iron Complexes as Efficient and Selective Catalysts for Carbon Dioxide Reduction and Organic Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2015
* Hairong Guan, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 01/31/2015
* USD 658,365.00

Technical Abstract: This CAREER award by the Chemical Catalysis Program of the
Chemistry Division supports the work of Professor Hairong Guan of the University
of Cincinnati to study the kinetic and thermodynamic driving forces that control
the reactivities of metal-hydrogen and metal-heteroatom bonds of nickel and iron
complexes. This mechanistic information is used to design efficient and
selective catalysts for the reduction of carbon dioxide to methanol as well as
various other organic transformations. The proposed research may lead to the
development of homogeneous catalysis with non-precious metals and should provide
significant benefits for the energy and medicinal chemistry fields. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;In addition to training undergraduate and graduate students in the
areas of organometallic chemistry and homogeneous catalysis, Professor Guan
creates a high-achieving, learning environment for his students. His
participation in the University of Cincinnati Woman in Science and Engineering
Program and the American Chemical Society Project SEED Program helps in the
recruitment and retention of women and other underrepresented minorities in
science. The establishment of teaching and research collaborations with
primarily undergraduate institutions enhances the learning experiences for
students from the University of Cincinnati and collaborating colleges. The
engagement of local chemical companies in education and research activities
facilitates student career development and strengthens the workforce pipeline
for the chemical industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Abstract: This
CAREER award by the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division
supports the work of Professor Hairong Guan of the University of Cincinnati in
the study of new environmentally-friendly and sustainable catalytic reactions.
To meet the global energy and resource demand in a sustainable fashion, chemists
need to develop catalytic reactions that use less energy and more renewable or
readily-available materials. In the past few decades, research has focused on
the use of expensive and scarce metal-based catalysts (e.g., gold, platinum, and
palladium), while inexpensive metals, such as nickel and iron, received much
less attention. This project examines the factors that influence the reactivity
of these more abundant metals with carbon dioxide. A variety of products that
are useful in energy, medicine and building materials are formed. The
investigation of new ways of using of carbon dioxide may help use to reduce
global warming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to training undergraduate and
graduate students, Professor Guan is active in the recruitment and retention of
women and other underrepresented minorities in science. He establishes
collaborations with primarily undergraduate institutions that enhance the
learning experiences of students from the University of Cincinnati and
collaborating colleges. He also invites local chemical companies to interact
with his students and this enables the students to gain industrial experience
firsthand.