* 0952564
* CAREER: Fundamental Studies of Condensation Phenomena on Heterogeneous and Hierarchical Nanoengineered Surfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2015
* Kripa Varanasi, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 01/31/2015
* USD 400,000.00

0952564

Varanasi

This CAREER project seeks to advance research and education programs in thermal-
fluid-surface interactions involving nanoengineered surfaces with an emphasis on
condensation phenomena. Using experimental and analytical approaches, the
research program seeks to understand how atomistic and nanoscale properties of
surfaces ultimately define macroscale heat and mass transport properties during
phase change. The studies could lead to new, nanoengineered surfaces that might
fundamentally alter condensation phenomena pertinent to various industries
including but not limited to energy, water, agriculture and transportation.

Intellectual Merit: Both the wettability and morphology of a surface play
dominant roles in phase change transport phenomena. This project address both
issues. First, the existing theories regarding intrinsic wettability and wetting
hysteresis are only useful to analyze wetting properties of a given surface.
They cannot answer the question of what fundamental material properties govern
the intrinsic wettability of a surface. As a result, material choice for active
surfaces is typically based on a trial-and-error approach. This project will
establish a fundamental understanding of the atomistic and electronic-structure
properties that govern intrinsic wettability and wetting hysteresis using both
quantum mechanical calculations and unique experimental techniques to enable
engineers to design new classes of durable materials with desired wetting
properties. Second, although wetting studies involving micro- and nanostructured
surfaces have been conducted for some time, investigation of condensation on
nanostructured surfaces is uncommon. Moreover, the influence of hierarchical
structures and wetting heterogeneities on condensation at the nanoscale has not
been explored. This project will lead to new surfaces that are designed to
control nucleation, growth, and dynamic wetting phenomena.

Broader Impacts: Phase change phenomena are ubiquitous in the energy and water
industries. These engineering systems have been designed using incremental
approaches that are bound by the fundamental constraint of the nature of the
thermal-fluid-surface interaction where the largest inefficiencies occur. This
research could eliminate these age-old constraints for transformational
efficiency gains in various industries. The educational and outreach activities
of the program will target participants at various levels: undergraduate
students, especially from underrepresented minorities and women, will be
actively engaged in research. Summer training workshops for K-12 teachers and
students will be provided. Graduate students will be an integral part of the
program. New discoveries will be disseminated through technical publication and
integrated into a new interdisciplinary course on nanoengineered surfaces.
Outreach to industry and technology transfer will be conducted through shorter,
fast-paced summer courses. These educational activities will be crucial in
equipping the next generation of scientists and engineers with expertise in the
combined areas of nanoengineering, surface science, and thermal-fluid science to
address global challenges involving energy, water, and agriculture.