* 0952608
* Catalytic Anhydride Desymmetrization as a Route to Polypropionate Synthons
* MPS,CHE
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2013
* Tomislav Rovis, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 03/31/2013
* USD 390,000.00

The central theme in the proposed research is to develop rapid access to
fragments of polyketide natural products, a family of targets that are five
times as likely to have biological activity as other natural product families.
Assembly of these stereochemically complex structures has previously taken place
using inherently iterative strategies that, by necessity, require many steps and
very skilled hands. The approach detailed herein differs in that this science
assembles significant subsections of these natural products from commercially
available starting materials using a Rh-catalyzed anhydride desymmetrization.
This one key step delivers 6-11 carbon sections of natural products, instead of
the more typical 2-4 carbon sections, while also controlling stereochemistry in
the process.

With the support of this award from the Chemical Synthesis Program, Professor
Tomislav Rovis of the Chemistry Department at Colorado State University will
develop rapid access to fragments of polyketide natural products. These
polyketides have diverse activity, including antibiotic, anticancer and
angiogenesis inhibition, therapeutics that are currently a significant challenge
in global health. The goal of this research program is to fill a deep apparent
hole in this area of science; that is, the ability to assemble very complex
structures of this family. The Rovis research group is uniquely qualified to do
this because of their prior contributions. Once the hole is filled, it will
enable organic and medicinal chemists, biochemists, biologists and
microbiologists to generate and screen the biological efficacy of subsections of
these complex molecules, privileged structures in medicinal chemistry. Beyond
the interdisciplinary impact and potential, there is also the broader impact in
educational benefit to undergraduates, graduates and postdoctoral fellows, whose
training and instruction in becoming independent scientists is facilitated.
Furthermore, these funds will also enable the participation of two members of
underrepresented groups in research (one woman and one Native American, both
graduate students).