* 0952395
* Mechanisms of spontaneous activity in embryonic hindbrain pacemaker neurons
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2010,10/31/2014
* Martha Bosma, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Asson-Batres
* 10/31/2014
* USD 528,873.00

In the developing brain, spontaneous activity (not driven by external input) is
critical for appropriate circuit formation. These experiments will investigate
the mechanisms by which serotonergic neurons in the embryonic mouse hindbrain
begin and cease expression of spontaneous activity. These neurons drive waves of
electrical activity across the entire hindbrain, which is important in
specifying axonal projections both of the serotonergic neurons, and in follower
neurons. Previous work has shown that pharmacological blockade of the serotonin
receptor prevents the onset of the spontaneous activity. The current goals,
using physiological and anatomical techniques, are elucidating the mechanism(s)
governing the onset of activity and the role of serotonin receptor signaling in
that onset. In addition, the mechanism(s) that dictate the retraction of
activity to the driver cells and cessation over 3 developmental days will be
determined. This work characterizes important processes in the regulation of
spontaneous activity which directs correct network formation. Thus, it examines
the basic mechanisms by which neurons find and maintain correct innervation
patterns during development. The lab has had many undergraduates and a number of
high school students participate in the research project, to the point of
publication. This includes a week-long workshop for disabled high school
students as part of a summer program, where the students are able to use
physiological techniques and observe spontaneous activity.