* 0952974
* CAREER:The Bioactive Hybrid Nanomatrix for Intervertebral Disk Regeneration
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2010,06/30/2016
* Ho-Wook Jun, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 06/30/2016
* USD 407,348.00

PI: Jun, Ho-Wook Proposal Number: 0952974

The main goal of this proposal is to develop a highly integrated research,
education, and outreach program around the development of bioactive hybrid
nanomatrices for intervertebral disk (IVD) regeneration. The proposed work is an
interdisciplinary project that integrates nanotechnology, materials sciences,
stem cell biology, and tissue engineering. Low back pain is one of the leading
causes of disability and mainly caused by the degeneration of IVD. Current
treatment options are limited because they can ease the pain but are unable to
completely restore normal functions or promote new tissue regeneration. Thus,
this CAREER proposal is transformative because it provides an innovative
strategy to regenerate IVD by tackling the current challenges of electrospun
nanofibers and self-assembled peptide amphiphiles (PAs) along with promoting
multi levels of education and outreach programs. Electrospinning has gained lots
of attention for various biomedical applications. However, the current major
challenges facing electrospun nanofiber scaffolds include the lack of
bioactivity on the nanofiber surface and the difficulties involved in trying to
fabricate porous three dimensional structures. Endowed bioactivity is needed to
control the cellular response to the biomaterial. The fabrication of a porous
three dimensional electrospun scaffold is vital for cell encapsulation and
infiltration because the current electrospun scaffolds are limited by their
dense sheet structure. The proposed strategy is designed to overcome both of
these challenges by developing bioactive hybrid nanomatrices that combine the
unique characteristics of electrospun poly(Ã¥-caprolactone) (PCL) nanofibers and
self-assembled peptide amphiphiles (PAs). The preliminary studies conducted
strongly support our hypothesis. In particular, the self-assembled PAs can endow
electrospun PCL nanofibers with bioactive properties, and a novel method is
under development to fabricate electrospun PCL nanofibers into three dimensional
porous structures. Therefore, the intellectual merit of this proposal is to
provide fundamental insight into designing nanostructured, IVD mimicking
scaffolds by combining electrospun nanofibers and self-assembled PAs. These
bioactive hybrid nanomatrices are expected to overcome the current challenges of
both electrospun nanofibers and PAs along with using their unique advantages.
The electrospun PCL nanofibers will be coated with self-assembled PAs, thus
endowing the PCL nanofibers with bioactive properties. These bioactive hybrid
nanofibers will be characterized, and optimal coating conditions will be
determined. Furthermore, the electrospun PCL nanofibers will be fabricated into
a porous three dimensional structure using the newly developed method and then
embedded in self-assembled PA gels to create bioactive hybrid nanomatrices.
These nanomatrices will provide encapsulated human mesenchymal stem cells
(hMSCs) with an ideal IVD mimicking environment via characteristic cell adhesive
ligands and tunable mechanical properties. Cellular responses to these different
environments will be evaluated in order to develop a comprehensive strategy for
IVD regeneration The proposed research will also have the broad impact across
multiple levels of education and outreach programs (graduate, undergraduate,
high, and middle school): a. thesis based research activities for graduate and
undergraduate students in nanostructured biomaterials and stem cell based tissue
regeneration; b. development of a new interdisciplinary curriculum by combining
lectures and hands-on laboratory activities; c. development of two new community
outreach programs for the promotion of leadership and career opportunities for
women and underrepresented minorities in middle school and high school; d.
development of a new outreach program targeting students with disabilities, and
e. development of industrial and international partnership for improving
multidisciplinary training and collaboration skills.