* 0952643
* CAREER: Experiencing the 5th Dimension, cis/trans and Z/E Isomerizations in Biomolecules
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2010,02/29/2016
* Marius Schmidt, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Continuing Grant
* ranajeet ghose
* 02/29/2016
* USD 898,817.00

Proteins are the catalysts of life. For such a catalyst to work, substantial
reorganization of the atomic structure of the catalyst itself is required. It
would be ideal to follow the catalytic reaction directly from the beginning to
the end by looking at all the structures on the atomic length scale and in real
time. Time-resolved crystallography is designed to achieve this. This technique
is able to record up to 10 billion X-ray structures per second. Time-resolved
crystallography is a true kinetic method. It investigates an ensemble of
molecules in four dimensions, 3 space dimensions and the time. In order to
determine a comprehensive kinetic mechanism, an additional parameter, the
temperature, will be varied. Crystallography becomes five-dimensional. This
project implements five-dimensional crystallography and uses it to investigate
two important biological reactions: the photo-cycle in photoactive yellow
protein and the photo-optical switching reaction in a biliprotein. Amongst other
things, these investigations will pave the way for example for a rational design
of optical switches with new colors that can be used for many applications in
biophysical research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding biological catalysis is
one of the most important fields in the life sciences. Time-resolved
crystallography unifies kinetic with structure determination. With the advent of
the world's strongest X-ray sources, the free electron lasers for hard X-rays,
five-dimensional crystallography can be brought to utmost perfection in terms of
speed and smallness of specimen. This will open new research opportunities. To
attract young academics, the PI will introduce macromolecular crystallography to
Milwaukee's high schools by training science teachers who work as mentees in the
PI's lab. A broad educational program in biophysics at the UW-Milwaukee will
attract bright undergraduate and graduate students to be included in ongoing
projects. Numerous trips to the world's strongest X-ray sources will give plenty
of hands-on opportunities. Results will be distributed through the PI's web page
so that anyone can experience the fifth dimension in crystallography.