* 0952641
* EAGER: Investigation of Environmental Effects on the Fatigue Degradation Properties in Metallic Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 12/15/2009,05/31/2011
* Olivier Pierron, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Alan J. Ardell
* 05/31/2011
* USD 104,276.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed research is to
gain a fundamental understanding on the fatigue degradation properties of
metallic nanostructures in non-inert environments. The specific research
objectives of the proposed research are to develop an experimental technique
using microelectromechanical system (MEMS) devices to accurately measure the
fatigue properties of nanostructures in non-inert environments and to
investigate the size and environmental effects on the stress-life fatigue curves
and fatigue crack growth rates in metallic nanostructures. The novelty of the
approach is to use electrical (resistance) measurements to infer structural
changes, such as cracking, without the need for in-situ SEM/TEM capability
(testing will instead take place in an environmental
chamber).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will address unexplored reliability issues regarding the use of
metallic nanostructures in nanoscale devices; such issues may ultimately limit
their successful commercialization. A thorough understanding of the degradation
properties and their dependence on size and environment is fundamental to ensure
proper structural reliability of devices fabricated with emerging
nanotechnologies. The educational broad impact of the proposed research lies in
the opportunities to promote motivation, learning and academic success of high
school students from underrepresented groups in the fields of Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM), and to develop the teaching
skills of high school teachers. The PI intends to develop, with high school
teachers, a summer enrichment program dedicated to the fracture of engineering
materials and targeted for high school students in grades 9 and 10.