* 0952493
* CAREER: CELL SEPARATION BY ROLLING ON ASYMMETRIC RECEPTOR PATTERNS
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2015
* Rohit Karnik, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Rosemarie D. Wesson
* 01/31/2015
* USD 400,000.00

0952493 Karnik

This NSF award by the Chemical and Biological Separations program supports work
by Professor Rohit Karnik to study the transport of cells rolling on asymmetric
receptor patterns for label-free separation of cells in microfluidic devices.
Analysis of cells based on surface receptors typically involves a multi-step
process requiring sample preparation, reagent storage, and use of laboratory
equipment. Conventional approaches are challenging to implement in point-of-care
settings and typically result in modification of the cells, which is undesirable
for therapeutic applications. A new approach to separation of cells involves
"steering" of cells that interact transiently with asymmetric receptor patterns.
Such interactions, where receptor-ligand bonds are continuously formed and
broken under the influence of fluid shear, occur in a physiological process
known as cell rolling that is exhibited by major cell types including
leukocytes, hematopoietic and mesenchymal stem and progenitor cells, and cancer
cells.

The research goal of this proposal is to elucidate 1) the transport of cells
rolling on asymmetric patterned receptors, 2) engineering principles for
designing surfaces with adequate specificity, and 3) the relationship between
cell-surface interactions and the resulting separation process. A combination of
experimental investigations and theoretical analysis will be used to study these
aspects and provide insight into parameters that govern the cell rolling and
separation. The PI has developed methods that allow for cell rolling and
separation experiments on precisely patterned receptors, and analytical models
that predict the effect of cellular and molecular parameters on cell rolling.
These tools will be used to elucidate how transport of cells on asymmetric
receptor patterns can be controlled by tuning the pattern geometry and fluid
shear, and through a combination of different receptors. This work has the
potential to define a new technique for separation and analysis of cells with
simplicity of operation that makes it suitable for point-of-care applications,
and opens possibilities for gentle separation of cells with implications for
therapeutics and personalized medicine.

The educational and outreach activities are designed with the goal of conveying
the excitement and relevance of micro- and nanoscale phenomena to students with
diverse backgrounds, with emphasis on the fact that micro- and nano-scale
phenomena have tangible effects that can be engineered for the benefit of
society. An educational module will be developed to expose women high school
students to micro and nano research through the Women's Technology Program at
MIT. Experimental modules will be designed and implemented in a laboratory
course to provide hands-on micro- and nanoengineering experience for senior
undergraduate and graduate students of Mechanical Engineering at MIT. To reach a
broader audience, these modules will be converted in a video format and
disseminated via the internet. Finally, ten high school students from Thayer
Academy will be given the opportunity to experience the academic research
environment through annual summer internships in the PI's laboratory.