* 0952106
* CAREER:  Kleinian, Arithmetic and Mapping Class Groups
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2015
* Juan Souto, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 04/30/2015
* USD 86,885.00

In this project the PI will study three particular classes of groups, namely
Kleinian groups, mapping class groups and lattices in higher rank Lie groups. In
spite of being quite different, these groups show remarkable similarities. This
may be explained by the rigidity properties of associated geometric objects such
as locally symmetric spaces, moduli space,... The goal of this project is to
study how the rigidity of these associated geometric objects is reflected in the
algebraic properties of the groups in question. More concretely, the PI will
study the relations between the number of generators of a Kleinian group and
geometric observables of the associated hyperbolic 3-manifold, such as the
volume or the spectrum of the Laplacian. In order to do so, it will be necessary
to develop some so-far unexplored aspects of the deformation theory of Kleinian
groups. The PI will also study to what extent the Margulis superrigidity theorem
holds for homomorphisms between mapping class groups. This problem will be
approached via combinatorial methods and also via the study of harmonic maps
between moduli spaces. Tools from dynamics will also be applied to study the
rigidity of certain actions of mapping class groups. Finally, the PI will study
the existence of minimal spines for locally symmetric spaces and their
geometric, homological and algebraic properties. In this case, the main tools
are going to be a combination of classical arguments in algebraic topology and
in the theory of algebraic groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A group is an
algebraic object of fundamental interest. Perhaps the most interesting groups
appear as symmetries of some geometric structure, such as a crystal, a physical
model, an object in space, etc... For instance, Kleinian groups play an
important role in the study of fractal objects. Arithmetic groups are groups of
matrices and hence have applications in all branches of mathematics. Finally,
the mapping class group, the group of symmetries of a surface, plays not only a
central role in mathematics, but is also important in for instance theoretical
physics. All three classes of groups are known to have useful rigidity
properties but it is unknown how this rigidity is effectively interlocked with
the algebraic properties of the groups. It is an integral part of this proposal
to obtain effective and, at least in principle, computable rigidity results.
Besides advancing the state of knowledge in an important area of mathematics,
educating graduate students to do independent research is one of the main goals
of this project. This will be greatly facilitated by the broad spectrum of tools
and methods that the PI intends to apply. This breadth will also facilitate the
disemination of the obtained results among the mathematical
community.&lt;br/&gt;