* 0952019
* Collaborative Research:  Coupled genetic, geochemical, and physical controls on arsenic mobilization
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2013
* Scott Fendorf, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2013
* USD 258,577.00

The hazards imposed by arsenic on human health are well recognized and nowhere
better exemplified than South/Southeast Asia where the consumption of arsenic
contaminated ground water has resulted high incidences of skin disorders and
various cancers. Arsenic is usually associated with iron oxide and other
minerals in sediments. However, in the absence of oxygen, microbes can carry out
iron and arsenic reduction reactions that result in arsenic release from
sediments and accumulation in ground water. The contribution of iron vs.
arsenate reduction to arsenic release, however, is unclear. Furthermore, our
understanding of arsenic fate and transport within soils and sediments is
limited by poorly understood biological and geochemical processes occurring
within complex ground water flow pathways. Therefore, the overarching goal of
this research is to determine how microbial metabolism impacts arsenic transport
in sediments and soils. Specifically, researchers will investigate the
expression of bacterial genes responsible for iron and arsenic reduction and
commensurate biogeochemical processes responsible for controlling the
partitioning and mobility of arsenic (along with their spatial distribution)
within model systems that simulate the physical complexity of natural soils and
sediments. The proposed research integrates biogeochemical and molecular genetic
approaches aimed at developing a mechanistic understanding of the impacts of
microbes on arsenic contamination of ground water. Because the nature of the
arsenic problem is rooted in geomicrobiology, the intellectual merit of the
proposed research is the generation of crucial information important to
understanding the mechanism(s) leading to arsenic release or retention in
sediments. The results will lead to a detailed conceptual model of how genetics
and geochemical processes impact microbe-mineral interactions and arsenic fate.
The broader impacts of the research will be to integrate research with teaching
activities and community outreach by participating in a laboratory research
mentorship program (called ACCESS) for community college students of under
represented groups and a high school science summer program called COSMOS.
Lastly, the collaboration will enhance and promote diversity through intercampus
mentorship of minority graduate students at both Stanford and UCSC.