* 0952257
* Pre-Earthscope Workshop Proposal:  Tectonic Targets for Earthscope in the Midcontinent
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2012
* Stephen Marshak, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 06/30/2012
* USD 29,500.00

This grant funds a workshop to develop EarthScope-related research projects
concerning the geologic character and tectonic evolution of the crust and mantle
beneath the central Midcontinent of the United States. The specific region of
focus includes two major continental blocks, the Ozark Plateau and the Illinois
Basin. Interactions at the workshop can foster partnerships among researchers
familiar with the geologic context of the target region (which encompasses
Illinois, Indiana, Missouri, and Kentucky), those familiar with existing
geophysical data sets covering the region, and those with experience in design
and implementation of geophysical experiments that can take advantage of the
instrumentation associated with EarthScope. Participants come from research
universities, state geological surveys, four-year colleges, and the U.S.
Geological Survey. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The region of interest is part of North
America's cratonic platform. A cratonic platform is long-lived continental
province in which a veneer of Paleozoic sedimentary rocks overlies metamorphic
and igneous rocks. (The Paleozoic rocks in the region are less than half a
billion years old, whereas the Precambrian rocks are 1 to 3 billion years old.)
The U.S. Midcontinent provides one of the most fascinating examples of cratonic-
platform lithosphere anywhere in the world. Specifically, this block includes a
major uplift (the Ozark Plateau) and a major basin (the Illinois Basin). The
contact between Paleozoic and Precambrian rocks on the crest of the Ozark
Plateau is 700 m above sea level, whereas the same contact at the base of the
Illinois Basin is about 7 km below sea level. Put another way, hidden beneath
the Midwestern cornfields of today, geologic movements have produced relief
comparable to that of mountain belts. The region of interest also includes the
northern end of the Mississippi Embayment (a region that remained anomalously
low during the past 100 million years), three major Precambrian sutures along
which new crust attached to North America, one of the world's largest granite
provinces, and the intersection of several significant fault-and-fold zones.
These zones possibly originated as rifts, due to stretching of the crust in the
Precambrian, and have remained weak and susceptible to displacements ever since.
As a result, the target region is one of the most seismically active regions of
cratonic platform lithosphere anywhere?numerous earthquakes have happened in the
central Midcontinent during historic time. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Study of the
target region can address issues of craton formation and evolution, intraplate
seismicity, and the formation of regional basins and domes. In cratonic
platforms, coherent and coupled motions have continued from the Precambrian to
the present. Surprisingly, decades after the advent of plate tectonics, there is
no universally accepted theory to explain controls on tectonism in cratonic
platforms, even though these regions account for over 25% of continental
lithosphere. The limitation on understanding comes largely from lack of data on
the deeper character of the crust and mantle beneath these regions. Such data
will become available through EarthScope-related measurements, so the unique
opportunity to organize a coordinated scientific agenda for studying a
particularly illustrative example of cratonic platform is not to be missed.
Improved understanding of this region of the United States is important for
understanding seismic hazard in populated areas away from plate boundaries, for
the evolution of reservoirs for energy resources and for carbon sequestration,
and for the development of a general understanding of the geological evolution
of continents. Since the midcontinent does not have abundant surface exposures
of geologic features, EarthScope related work in the midcontinent also provides
the opportunity to attract public interest in geologic processes and
phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;