* 0952371
* (CINHEKS) What ever happened to the faculty?: Knowledge transfer and the academic workforce in the U.S.
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Gary Rhoades, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Richard Boone
* 08/31/2013
* USD 244,928.00

The proposal, ?What ever happened to the faculty? is one component of a
EUROCORES research collaborative with colleagues in five European countries and
Japan (?Change in Networks, Higher Education, and Knowledge Societies? CINHEKS).
CINHEKS addresses higher education?s role in knowledge transfer in different
regional, national, and institutional contexts, analyzing the intersections of
universities with the private sector economy and the attendant effects on the
structure of academic employment, and how globally higher education systems are
being modeled on the entrepreneurial American research university. The USA
project explores two empirical questions: (1) To what extent and how are faculty
members featured in public policy as intellectual capital, as key players in
educating students (human capital) and in knowledge transfer generally?; &amp;
(2) To what extent will the confluence of an economic recession and a new
political administration lead to the ascendance of a distinctive
knowledge/learning regime, versus to a modification but continuation of what has
been termed ?academic capitalism?? The data consist of archival/document
analysis of current and emergent policy texts and statements in: (a) federal and
state policy networks; &amp; (b) in institutional and professional networks of
six global and regional universities (and of managers, academics, and other
professions that work in but have networks beyond them).