* 0952116
* Collaborative Research: Investigating Human and Climate Influences on Delta Evolution Using Fluvial Discharge and Coastal Evolution Models
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2010,12/31/2013
* Albert Kettner, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Jessica Robin
* 12/31/2013
* USD 80,830.00

Influenced by both terrestrial and marine processes, deltas are critical
sedimentary landforms at the land-sea interface that provide records of past
environmental changes. Deltas worldwide are currently being severely altered by
human activities, in particular river damming, which has reduced the amount of
sediment reaching the coast. Although large dams are relatively recent
phenomena, human alteration of landscapes has been ongoing since the advent and
expansion of agriculture. Combining field data collection, fluvial modeling, and
coastal evolution modeling, this research will examine whether human activities
have significantly influenced the formation of the modern Ebro Delta, on the
Mediterranean coast of Spain. Specifically, it is hypothersized that the growth
of the Ebro Delta can be attributed to massive deforestation for agricultural
purposes initiated in Roman times. Field research will document the evolution of
the Ebro Delta over approximately the last 3,000 years by collecting and
analyzing sediment cores from along the delta plain. The climate-driven
hydrological model HydroTrend will be used to compute riverine sediment
discharge to the coast over this time period, incorporating changes to sediment
delivery that could be attributable to climatic changes and those that could be
caused by human alterations to the Ebro River watershed. A numerical model of
shoreline evolution capable of incorporating long timescales will be applied to
examine the causes of the delta's shape and to evaluate how changes to riverine
discharge would affect the coast after being reworked by waves. Coupling of the
fluvial and coastal numerical models serves an important goal as proof-of-
concept of the Community Surface Dynamics Modeling System
(CSDMS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the historic and future morphologic
change of deltas has become increasingly important as sea levels rise and
sediment loads feeding deltas continue to be sequestered behind dams in the
hinterland. Deltas are often densely populated and provide many importantt
natural resources to society, particularly along the rocky Spanish Mediterranean
coast with scant land near sea level. In regions that have been affected by
human civilization, deltas can serve as a record of climate and land-use changes
across large watersheds. The Ebro Delta, Spain, with its distinctive plan-view
shape, has experienced significant morphologic changes over the last two
millennia; changes that may be attributable to human activities in the Ebro
watershed. The results of this research will have wide applicability to
unraveling the history of deltas worldwide (e.g., Nile, Po, Danube, Indus,
Mississippi). If human activities are largely responsible for the shape of the
world's deltas, this would provide an important context for understanding how
humankind will manage these resources over the coming centuries, particularly as
climate changes and humans continue to alter these landforms.