* 0952470
* International Congress of Vertebrate Morphology
* BIO,IOS
* 10/15/2009,09/30/2011
* Marvalee Wake, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 09/30/2011
* USD 24,999.00

Congresses of Vertebrate Morphology are held every three years in order to allow
scientists who work on the morphology, sensu lato, of vertebrates to share
research and learn techniques, while perhaps gaining new insight into their own
systems. By bringing together leaders and innovators and students of
complimentary subdisciplines, new syntheses and integration are likely to occur.
Because of the participation of members of the Congress from many different
countries, perspectives about research itself, and the styles of conduct of the
scientific enterprise in different countries can be shared, increasing
understanding of the global enterprise. The 9th Congress will be held in Latin
America for the first time, and will facilitate greater participation of
colleagues from that part of the world, and new international collaborations may
well develop.

The Congress will involve established researchers as well as younger scholars.
The plenary lectures and the symposia are structured so that a great diversity
and broad scope of approaches, techniques, and taxa are considered. This will
encourage exciting discussion, collaborations and syntheses, and integration of
formerly separate subfields of biology and the physical sciences, as has
occurred in previous such congresses with the initiation of 'evo-devo'. In
addition we will provide to the membership a workshop that will introduce
organismal biologists to 3-D x-ray techniques. Thus the Congress will have
unique intellectual merit in providing excellent science to a wide range of
biologists and facilitating extensive discussion among international scientists.
Reports on the Congress and research discussions will be posted on the ISVM
website, which will be maintained long after the Congress ends in order to allow
communication.

Broader impacts - In addition to the broader impacts outlined above relating to
(1) integration and communication of research, (2) enhancement of research
infrastructure through the encouragement of partnerships and collaborations, and
(3) broad dissemination of research, we seek to broaden the participation
colleagues from many countries whose participation has been limited at previous
Congresses, and to encourage the involvement of young scholars from the US so
that their understanding of international science is enhanced. We specifically
encourage the participation of younger scholars, and of women, while welcoming
an internationally and experientially diverse group of participants, which will
expand the US science enterprise of the near future.