* 0952920
* CAREER:  Structural Studies of Ski2-like RNA Helicases
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2016
* Sean Johnson, Utah State University
* Continuing Grant
* william eggleston
* 03/31/2016
* USD 1,108,724.00

Intellectual Merit. RNA surveillance and decay pathways are essential for
maintaining proper cellular function and viability. Many of these RNA decay
pathways are mediated by Ski2-like RNA helicases, which account for 10% of all
RNA helicases. A complete mechanistic understanding of how these helicases
function to recognize and ensure appropriate decay of RNA substrates is
considerably limited due to a lack of detailed structural and biochemical data.
The goal of this project is to elucidate the molecular details of this important
class of enzymes through crystal structure determination, supported by
biochemical and biological analyses. An important focus of this project is the
Ski2-like Mtr4 protein, a highly conserved and essential eukaryotic protein that
plays a central role in nuclear RNA processing and decay. Mtr4 is required for
ribosomal RNA biogenesis, and also targets a wide array of RNAs for degradation
as part of the TRAMP (Trf4-Air2-Mtr4 polyadenylation) complex. A second target
is Ski2, the cytosolic counterpart of Mtr4, which mediates degradation of mRNA
transcripts. The specific components of this project include: determination of
high-resolution crystal structures; identification of important protein-RNA
interactions; and characterization of a novel arch domain that is unique to
Ski2-like helicases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The broader impacts
of this project include extensive training of undergraduate and graduate
students in structural biology. A new course in structural biology has been
developed which provides rigorous hands-on training in protein structure
determination. The departmental senior-level biochemistry laboratory course has
been redesigned to accommodate a new and growing biochemistry major. In an
effort to introduce research-based experiments into the laboratory course,
student groups will be assigned individual protein expression and purification
projects that will enter the pipeline for crystallization trials. High school
students will participate in a summer research experience to introduce
fundamental concepts of crystallization and structure determination. This broad
educational approach will give widespread exposure and direct access to the
rapidly expanding field of structural biology, which has historically been less
accessible to geographically remote/smaller institutions. The successful
implementation of a new program in structural biology at a smaller university
campus, with the full capacity to perform high-end crystallographic research,
provides a template that may be reproduced in similar
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Co-funded by Genes and Genome Systems in the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and by the Experimental Program
to Stimulate Competitive Research.