* 0952650
* CAREER: The Climatic Relevance of Pollen in the Atmosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2017
* Allison Steiner, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Ming Cai
* 07/31/2017
* USD 599,940.00

Atmospheric aerosols represent a key uncertainty in understanding the climate
system and climate change, and the contribution of primary biogenic aerosols is
not included in current global budgets. Recent work indicates that pollen, a
primary biogenic aerosol, can break up into fine particulate matter, act as
giant cloud condensation nuclei (CCN), and influence the formation of ice
nuclei. This project will address three scientific questions to quantify the
climatic relevance of pollen in the atmosphere: (1) What are the magnitude and
spatial distribution of pollen emissions from the biosphere? (2) What are the
processes that allow pollen to act as CCN and how likely are they to occur? (3)
What are the magnitude and spatial distribution of direct and first indirect
radiative forcing from pollen aerosols? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
develop and integrate a pollen aerosol emissions module in a regional climate
model, evaluate the ability of pollen to act as a CCN through experimental
studies, and assess the direct and indirect effects of pollen on regional
radiative forcing through decadal scale regional climate simulations. The
scientific outcomes will provide an estimate of the magnitude of the
contribution of pollen to the aerosol budget over fine spatial and temporal
scales and their ultimate impact on long-term climate.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts include the following: (1) An educational
program, the Green Roof Project, will establish two meteorological and pollen
monitoring stations at middle schools in Detroit public to introduce middle
school students to hypothesis development, data collection, and data analysis
and interpretation. Data from the Green Roof Project will inform the pollen
emissions model development. (2) Integration of the Green Roof Project and
research on biosphere-atmosphere interactions with the University of Michigan
graduate and undergraduate education, and (3) International education through a
partnership with the International Centre for Theoretical Physics to train
scientists from developing nations on the role of biosphere-atmosphere
interactions. This project will benefit society by assessing the contribution of
primary biogenic aerosols like pollen to climate variability, the impact of
landscape change on air quality, and the role of pollen emissions and transport
in asthma and public health.