* 0952354
* Landscapes in the Anthropocene:  Exploring the Human Connections
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2011
* Ellen Wohl, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 04/30/2011
* USD 54,058.00

The workshop, "Landscapes in the Anthropocene: Exploring the Human Connections,"
will be held 4-6 March, 2010 at the University of Oregon. The workshop will
provide an important venue for intellectual cross-fertilization among scientists
from disparate disciplines who otherwise would have little opportunity to
interact. It will also provide a mechanism to bridge the real and perceived gaps
that exist across the natural and social-scientific divide. Overcoming such
barriers will build the community necessary to forge scientific advances, to
anticipate and mitigate the human-induced changes to Earth's surface, as well as
to factor the changes that have already occurred into human decision processes.
The proposed workshop will develop knew knowledge of integrated human-landscape
systems, and will build capacity to predict the future of Earths surface under
human influence. Two days of activities, comprising short research
presentations, discussion, and breakout sessions, are planned to meet several
specific objectives: identify key research questions and integrative linkages
for cross-disciplinary research, examine theoretical and methodological
approaches among disciplines, assess data availability and needs, and explore
models and tools toward predicting complex human-landscape systems. The outcomes
will include a white paper to be submitted to NSF, and summaries of the workshop
to be potentially published in disciplinary and interdisciplinary newsletters,
as well as in outlets for the public. The workshop is also expected to produce a
multi-authored manuscript, in addition to specific integrated research projects
that will be ready for launch by collaborative teams.

It has become increasingly clear over the past several years that humans and the
surface of the Earth are intertwined in a complex manner. Decisions that people
make about building cities, damming rivers, and exploiting natural resources
cause fundamental changes in the surrounding environment. In like manner,
natural disasters, rising sea levels, and climate change have acute and chronic
influences on the human economic and social fabric. This project will bring
together researchers from the physical and social sciences to collaborate on
methods for addressing these important issues, and prepare plans that will pave
the way for future progess.

