* 0952273
* EAGER: CA-RAM: Enabling Fast and Versatile Packet Processing for Future Large-Scale Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Sangyeun Cho, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2011
* USD 150,000.00

This exploratory research addresses the increasingly more critical performance,
power, and functional requirements of search operations in key inter-networking
devices like routers and firewalls. This project will investigate a specialized
yet flexible search substrate called CA-RAM (Content Addressable Random Access
Memory) that possesses great promise for high search performance at low power
consumption. CA-RAM is based on the hashing theory and techniques. By decoupling
dense memory array from compute components, CA-RAM achieves high storage density
and configurability. This project will focus on how CA-RAM can effectively
tackle all major packet processing applications, including packet forwarding,
packet filtering, and deep packet inspection, in a scalable and complexity-
effective manner. The project will also look at how new emerging memory and chip
integration technologies can be used in CA-RAM to further demonstrate the
effectiveness of the proposed approach. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: This research has the potential for breakthroughs in the design of future
inter-networking devices. The expected contributions include a directed
exploration of the CA-RAM designs. Additionally, the researchers will gain an
understanding of how the emerging 3-D chip integration and Phase-Change Memory
technologies will further enhance the capabilities of CA-RAM and the packet
processing devices built with CA-RAM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This
research will impact the design practices of inter-networking devices, a
critical and essential infrastructure for our society. This project will help
sustain the historical scaling rate of the network and Internet performance. The
enhanced Internet will foster new exciting applications and services in global
communications, commerce and entertainment, as well as cultural and technical
advances. The researchers will document the approaches and findings in detail,
and publish them in a timely manner.&lt;br/&gt;