* 0952862
* Collaborative Research: Semantics and Pragmatics of Projective Meaning across Languages
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2010,02/28/2013
* David Beaver, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 02/28/2013
* USD 104,558.00

The term "projection" describes cases where some element of meaning unexpectedly
escapes from the scope of another expression, such as a negation or conditional.
For example, "John didn't see his sister" is typically understood as denying
that there was an event of John seeing his sister, but not as denying that John
has a sister -- even though syntactically the expression "his sister" is under
the scope of the negation. An enormous range of expressions yield projection,
including presupposition triggers, conventional implicature triggers,
approximatives, and some inferences associated with Gricean implicatures. This
project will carry out the first systematic empirical and theoretical analysis
of the full range of projective meanings, to establish why projection occurs,
and how subclasses of projective meaning differ. To this end, it will develop
templates for diagnostic tests that can be used to study properties of
projective meanings cross-linguistically, with theoretically naive consultants.
The researchers will conduct detailed investigations of projective meanings in
English and Paraguayan Guarani, and disseminate the techniques to fieldworkers
studying other languages, through publications and workshops.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modern linguistic semantics centers around Fregean
compositionality, the way in which the meanings of parts are combined to give
the meanings of larger expressions. While there has been great progress in
compositional semantics, projective meaning does not obey ordinary compositional
rules. Until now, there has been no uniform account of why projective meanings
behave differently from ordinary content. This project seeks to explain
projection, based on the working hypothesis that aspects of meaning project if
and only if they are not at-issue. The notion of at-issueness is a pragmatic
one, based on what questions are under discussion in a discourse. Thus the
project will place a relatively little-studied pragmatic notion at the heart of
work on linguistic meaning. A first area where the innovations in the project
are of broad significance is in its cross-linguistic focus: a theory of human
language cannot be based on one language alone, and the project will apply its
empirical techniques cross-linguistically. Beyond linguistic semantics, the
issues studied are fundamental to Philosophy of Language, since the work subtly
redraws the boundary between Semantics and Pragmatics. Further the project is of
practical significance in the field of Natural Language Processing
(specifically, the subfield of Computational Semantics). Text processing
systems, e.g. computer systems for automatically answering a user's questions,
must take account of inferences which arise independently of standard
composition. A question answering system which does not take account of what is
projected will not be able to identify what the user already knows, and will not
be able to identify what question needs to be answered.