* 0952337
* CAREER: Multiscale Simulations of Chloride Transport Proteins by Combined Quantum and Classic Mechanical Approaches
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2015
* Hai Lin, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 12/31/2015
* USD 625,000.00

Hai Lin of the University of Colorado at Denver is supported by a CAREER award
from the Theory, Models and Computational Methods program to carry out
multiscale simulations of chloride transport proteins by combined quantum and
classical mechanical approaches. The Molecular and Cell Biology division also
contributes to this award in a co-funding arrangement. The research focuses on
understanding the gating, selectivity and permeation of the Cl- and Cl-/H+
exchangers. In particular, Lin and coworkers are investigating how quantum
effects, such as charge transfer and tunneling, tune the mechanism and the
underlying dynamics of ion translocation. In order to perform these
calculations, they are further developing the open boundary QM/MM method. Unlike
conventional QM/MM methods, the open boundary method permits the quantum and
classical subsystems to exchange atoms and charges on the fly in dynamic
simulations, making it very suitable for the study of ion
transport.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ClC chloride transport proteins have been
found to be associated with a variety of critical physiological and cellular
processes such as neuroexcitation, cell-volume regulation, organic solute
transport and muscle contraction. Defects in these channels lead to a variety of
hereditary diseases