* 0952460
* CAREER: Changing the Landscape: Towards the Development of a Physics Identity in High School
* EHR,DRL
* 07/01/2010,04/30/2014
* Zahra Hazari, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Julio Lopez-Ferrao
* 04/30/2014
* USD 488,567.00

The purpose of this study is to contribute to the understanding of how high
school physics can have a maximum positive impact on students' self-perceptions,
thus noticeably impacting their outcomes in this subject matter. Its focus is on
the development of a positive physics identity (students' perceptions of
themselves in relation to this field in terms of competence, performance,
persistence, interest, and recognition by others) among high school students,
particularly females, as a means to increase their academic performance.

Preliminary data analysis from an ongoing NSF-funded project (GSE/RES 0624444)
suggests a strong correlation between the physics identity construct (e.g., Do
you see yourself as a physics person?) and the study's proposed physics identity
measures (i.e., performance, competence, recognition, and interest). Although
most students, especially females, conveyed depressed attitudes toward
themselves as physics learners, as well as toward the discipline, those who
expressed favorable perceptions toward physics learning identified a set of
activities that appear to affect the development of a positive physics identity:
(a) focus on conceptual understanding, (b) frequency of laboratory activities
that address their beliefs, (c) frequency of opportunities to share and
interact, (d) teacher encouragement, and (e) holding discussions on current
relevant science topics.

The PI hypothesizes that students in general, and females in particular, develop
depressed attitudes toward physics, and negative perceptions of themselves as
physics learners due to the lack of personally meaningful learning experiences.
Thus, she submits the following research questions: (1) What high school physics
teaching practices predict physics identity development?; (2) How do these
strategies influence physics identity development, especially mediated by
perceptions of their performance, competence, recognition, and interest?; (3)
What is the long-term impact of these experiences on physics identity as
students traverse their undergraduate careers?; and (4) What is the most
appropriate pedagogical plan for high school physics teachers to ensure adequate
development of positive physics identity?

The study's proposed methods consist of case studies, a longitudinal study,
development of a pedagogical plan, and the implementation of this plan.
Classroom case studies of successful teachers draw on the previously referred
survey of which 348 (90 females) finished high school physics with a self-rating
as a physics person (5 on a 0-5 scale), including positive perceptions of
instructional and leaning experiences. The longitudinal study aims at
understanding the long-term impact of specific pedagogical practices on
students' physics identity,including 15 students (8 females) who will be tracked
over 3 to 4 years through surveys and interviews at the end of each academic
year. Development of the pedagogical plan will include 15 sample lesson plans
with detailed activities that connect physics content to real-world contexts,
counter stereotypes about physics, analysis of underrepresentation in physics,
and physics identity formative assessments. The plan will be tested through a
quasi-experimental study with four teachers using the same physics course with
at least two groups. Each teacher will implement the plan in one of the groups;
the other group will be used as control. Of the 180 physics classes,
approximately 15 (one every two weeks) will use the education plan. A physics
identity scale will be administered at the beginning and end of each course.
Classroom observations will be conducted while the plan is implemented.