* 0952840
* Embryonic regulation of the endocrine environment via the sulfotransferase-sulfatase pathway in an oviparous vertebrate
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2010,06/30/2014
* Rachel Bowden, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 06/30/2014
* USD 292,535.00

Endocrine signaling during embryonic development regulates many physiological
processes and can produce long-term effects that may persist throughout the
lifetime of an organism. For example, the embryo may be exposed to steroid
hormones produced by the mother. In mammals, including humans, the placenta
produces enzymes that metabolize, and render inactive, maternal steroids before
they reach the developing embryo. Thus, the embryo is buffered from the
potentially detrimental effects of maternal steroids. In species that lay eggs,
embryos are exposed to maternal steroids present in the yolk when the egg is
laid. This project examines how maternal steroids move from the yolk to the
embryo in turtles. In addition, a variety of molecular and biochemical
techniques will be employed to characterize how these maternal steroids are
metabolized during embryonic development. The proposed research will enhance our
understanding of how embryos regulate their endocrine environment. Importantly,
many of the same metabolic enzymes examined in this proposal are also
responsible for metabolizing exogenous chemicals such as plasticizers and
pesticides. Characterizing these enzymes will enable researchers to investigate
whether these foreign chemicals may disrupt steroid metabolism to produce
detrimental effects. Compared to those from live-bearing species, embryos from
egg-laying species provide a powerful system in which to study how various
factors influence embryonic steroid metabolism because they develop outside of
the maternal environment and can be readily manipulated. All experiments in this
proposal will provide training opportunities to both graduate and undergraduate
students, as well as a post-doctoral researcher.