* 0952234
* Identification of Postseismic Transients in PBO GPS Time-Series
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2014
* Andrew Freed, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 03/31/2014
* USD 151,190.00

The success of PBO's mission to infer long-term steady-state surface velocities
depends critically on the ability of geodesists to identify and remove all non-
steady-state contributions to GPS time series. Without this ability, steady-
state velocities will be misidentified, leading to a misinterpretation of long-
term strain rates and stress accumulation and an undermining of our
understanding of the tectonics of North America. Of all non-steady-state
contributions to GPS time series, postseismic relaxation of the lower crust and
upper mantle has the potential for the greatest long-term influence on the
broadest regions. In this project, viscoelastic finite element models are being
developed to identify for removal from PBO GPS displacement time series,
postseismic transients associated with all large (M greater than or equal to 7)
earthquakes in the past several hundred years in the southwestern US and Alaska.
The most important aspect of this analysis is finding a constitutive
relationship between strain rate and stress that can appropriately characterize
nonlinear viscoelastic strength as a function of tectonic environment (stress,
temperature, water). This is especially true in consideration of nonlinear
changes in viscosity associated with stress, which leads to a viscosity
structure that varies spatially and temporally after an earthquake, and an
initial transient response to stress changes that are much weaker than steady-
state flow. To this end a new transient/steady-state power law is being
introduced that combines the biviscous characterization of a Burgers model with
the temperature and stress-dependent nature of a laboratory derived power law.
The main objectives of this work are to: (1) calibrate this new
transient/steady-state power-law to characterize the response of lower crustal
and upper mantle flow through the earthquake cycle in the western US and
mainland Alaska, and (2) use the flow law to calculate postseismic relaxation
components in PBO GPS displacement time series associated with all large (M
greater than or equal to 7) earthquakes in the past 100-200 years in these
regions. These regions were chosen because they contain the bulk of the PBO
network and they have experienced a significant number of M greater than or
equal to 7 earthquakes. Secondary objectives include the determination of
whether a single flow law can be used to describe the rheological strength of
both the western US and Alaska margins, which will tell us something about the
homogeneity versus heterogeneity of rheological properties at plate margins, and
the development of a general understanding of the spatial and temporal influence
of postseismic relaxation as a function of earthquake magnitude, which will
provide insight into which historical earthquakes are continuing to influence
the contemporary velocity field, and the likely duration of influence from more
recent events. The analysis is being conducted using the finite element program
ABAQUS, which enables the development of the required complex meshes and the
incorporation of the new transient/steady-state power law. This project has the
potential to improve the accuracy of one of the central missions of PBO: to
infer long-term steady-state surface velocities and strain rates. Thus, it has
the potential to influence a very broad number of research projects throughout
the Earthscope community -- any project that utilizes GPS time series.