* 0952279
* NSF Travel Grant Support for IEEE International Conference on Computer Communications and Network 2010 Conference
* CSE,CCF
* 11/01/2009,10/31/2010
* Yan Luo, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* William H Tranter
* 10/31/2010
* USD 15,000.00

The 19th IEEE International Conference on Computer Communications and Networks
(ICCCN 2010) will be held in ETH Zurich, Switzerland in August, 2010
(http://icccn.org/icccn10/). This proposal requests $15,000 in funding to assist
10-15 United States-based graduate students to attend ICCCN 2010.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;ICCCN is one of the leading
international conferences for presenting novel ideas and fundamental advances in
the fields of computer communications and networks. ICCCN serves to foster
communication among researchers and practitioners with a common interest in
improving communications and networking through scientific and technological
innovation. Technical co-sponsorship is provided by the IEEE Communications
Society. In 2009, the number of submissions in response to the CFP was over 400;
only 104 regular papers were selected by the Technical Program Committee for
presentation at the conference. In 2009, the conference program includes 11
technical tracks, a number of keynote and distinguished speakers and panels.
Besides, there are 7 workshops on cutting edge topics. ICCCN 2010 will include
similar technical tracks and workshops and continue the tradition of presenting
the Best Paper Award. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;Participation in conferences such as IEEE ICCCN is an extremely
important part of the graduate students? research and career development,
providing the opportunity for them to present their own work, attend panel and
keynote speech sessions, interact with peers and more senior researchers, and
expose themselves to leading edge work in the field of computer communication
and networks. The support requested in this proposal will enable more
participation of the US-based graduate students who would otherwise be unable to
attend ICCCN 2010. &lt;br/&gt;