* 0952001
* Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement Grants: Cognitive Mechanisms in Sociolinguistic Variation and Language Attitude
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2013
* David Corina, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 03/31/2013
* USD 11,995.00

Models of language processing have primarily focused on word and sentence-level
processing. When issues of social context have been considered, they have
traditionally been argued to occur after sentence meaning has been computed.
However, recent research suggests that larger contextual factors, such as world-
knowledge and speaker-knowledge, are integrated during sentence interpretation
by the same cognitive processes that support lexical-semantic integration. What
remains relatively unknown and unexplored is how sociolinguistic variation is
perceived during on-line speech processing. This study uses multiple
methodologies to investigate language attitude and its relationship to language
processing. The present study measures changes in brain activity using
electrophysiological scalp recordings (i.e. event-related potentials) to assess
the real-time integration of sentences that differ along well-defined
sociolinguistic variables. In addition, the researchers make use of a novel
behavioral technique -- the implicit attitude test -- to characterize the
implicit attitudes and social meanings associated with specific sociolinguistic
variables. Finally, direct field recording of participants is used to measure
the degree of sociolinguistic variation evident in our participants' speech.
Multiple linear regression models will be fitted to the data to elucidate the
relationship between individual patterns of production and language attitude
with electrophysiological measures of language perception. In this work they
seek to understand the cognitive processes that support the perception of
sociolinguistic variation during on-line language processing and the degree to
which implicit sociolinguistic knowledge and native patterns of variation
contribute to the processing of this variation. In our increasingly
multicultural and multilingual world, an understanding of how we perceive
language, dialects, and linguistic variation and the relationship these features
have to language attitude, plays an increasingly important role in shaping
social behavior and policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In human communication, in
addition to the words we utter, how we choose to say something often carries
social significance and meaning. For example, a speaker may report to his boss:
"Last weekend I went hunting and fishing" while the same speaker talking amongst
peers might say: "Las' weeken' I went huntin' an' fishin'." In informal
conversational registers, speakers will more often delete word final t/d and
drop their g's from progressive verbs than in more formal speech. Importantly,
the manner in which an utterance is spoken and the frequency of sociolinguistic
variables can influence how the speaker is perceived (e.g., educated vs.
uneducated; aloof vs. friendly). Linguists have identified the systematic
social, stylistic, and linguistic constraints that modulate the production of
sociolinguistic variation. These include linguistic factors, such as lexical
class and phonological environment, as well as external factors, such as gender,
race, and socioeconomic status. Although there is a relative wealth of data on
variation in language production, studies on variation perception have been much
more limited. As speech perception is a fundamental aspect of human
communication, the study of how individuals perceive, process, and represent
linguistic variation is of inherent scientific interest. The study of variation
perception can provide valuable evidence of how language intersects with
attitude in shaping social stereotypes, prejudice, and behavior. The way we
perceive variation and the social attitudes it engenders affects every one of
us, from the recent child immigrant to the aspiring politician. As such, the
study of variation perception and language attitude has important implications
for education, law, and public policy.