* 0952640
* CAREER: Towards Exterminating Stealthy Rootkits - A Systematic Immunization Approach
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2010,01/31/2015
* Xuxian Jiang, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 01/31/2015
* USD 424,168.00

The rampant growth of stealthy rootkits poses a serious security
&lt;br/&gt;threat to cyberspace. Specifically, with the capability of directly
&lt;br/&gt;subverting the software root of trust of a computer system, a rootkit
&lt;br/&gt;can surreptitiously take over the control of the system and maintain
&lt;br/&gt;a hidden presence thereafter. To effectively defend against them,
&lt;br/&gt;researchers have explored various anti-rootkit solutions.
Unfortunately, &lt;br/&gt;to our disadvantage, the state-of-the-art defense is
mainly reactive &lt;br/&gt;and cannot meet the challenges in the arms-race
against them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is developing a systematic
immunization approach to &lt;br/&gt;proactively prevent and exterminate rootkit
attacks. This goal is &lt;br/&gt;being achieved in three key steps. First, we
are developing a fundamental &lt;br/&gt;immunization capability self-nonself
discrimination to reliably discern &lt;br/&gt;and prevent malicious rootkit code
execution. Second, we are investigating &lt;br/&gt;a kernel shepherding
technique to enforce kernel control-flow integrity. &lt;br/&gt;Third, we are
designing and implementing a high-assurance hypervisor &lt;br/&gt;with a minimal
trusted computing base to establish and sustain the &lt;br/&gt;root-of-trust of
the entire computer system. We expect the results &lt;br/&gt;from this research
will substantially elevate our defense capability &lt;br/&gt;against elusive
rootkits as well as more generic malware. We will &lt;br/&gt;disseminate our
results by releasing the tools developed as well as &lt;br/&gt;associated
education materials appropriate for undergraduate and &lt;br/&gt;graduate
courses and IT staff training in industry and government &lt;br/&gt;agencies.