* 0952794
* CAREER: Structure-Property Relation Studies in Functional Metal-Oxide Thin Films and Photon Effects
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2010,07/31/2015
* Shriram Ramanathan, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2015
* USD 400,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION&lt;br/&gt;Renewable energy technologies are slated to
be an important part of our future energy sources. Oxide materials in particular
may play an important role in enabling clean energy sources such as solid oxide
fuel cells; and hydrogen production by water splitting. The project seeks to
explore novel approaches to synthesize energy materials utilizing the technique
of photo-excitation. This approach enables compositional control in near-surface
regions in solids at atomic scale by uniquely modifying the thermodynamics and
kinetics of oxygen incorporation. The ability to synthesize advanced ceramic
materials whose functional properties can be designed with atomic precision will
be of importance to advancing energy technologies. The research will also enable
education of students in frontier areas of renewable energy
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS&lt;br/&gt;An outstanding
question in metal-oxide ceramic thin films is the role of near-surface point
defects and compositional modulations in determining functional properties.
Defects can affect electrostatic potentials as well as influence the nature of
carrier conduction. The grant aims to investigate how photo-excitation can be
used as a novel approach to control composition and structure of ultra-thin
oxide films. It will also examine the elementary mechanisms affecting oxygen
incorporation into oxides under photo-excitation. These issues will be explored
by a combination of experimental approaches that aim to distinguish chemical
from photo-electric effects. Using representative oxide materials, research will
be carried out to understand how one may synthesize oxide ceramics with
controllable surface composition and structure, which in turn affects functional
properties ranging from ionic conduction to phase transitions. The grant will
further enable graduate and undergraduate student education and hands-on
research experience in state-of-the-art instrumentation in frontier areas of
materials science and renewable energy that are important to society.