* 0952229
* Collaborative Research: Climatic and biotic controls on Late Quaternary erosion in the Oregon Coast Range
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2010,09/30/2014
* Darryl Granger, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 09/30/2014
* USD 71,216.00

Geomorphic processes that sculpt landscapes and constitute natural hazards vary
with climatic fluctuations that have characterized the last several million
years of Earth history. While some climate-driven erosional processes, such as
glaciers, leave a profound topographic imprint, others are more difficult to
decipher. Changes in vegetation, for example, should affect the frequency and
magnitude of landslides and the vigor of soil production and transport on
hillslopes, yet there is sparse information regarding landscape response to late
Quaternary variations in vegetation. By coupling records of paleo-erosion and
paleo-ecology from a landslide-dammed lake in the Oregon Coast Range, this
research will document how late Quaternary vegetation changes translated into
landscape modification. The study will extend and augment a previously published
paleoenvironmental record showing that the structure and composition of forests
in the study area have changed dramatically over the last 40,000+ years. By
analyzing paleo-erosion rates using cosmogenic radionuclides from additional
lake sediment cores, the study will determine whether increases in the density
and size of trees tend to increase or decrease rates of sediment transport and
erosion. Although trees and understory vegetation are important for anchoring
soil and suppressing erosion over human timescales, bioturbation is thought to
be a major driver of landscape change when integrated through time. As such, the
net geomorphic effect of a change from meadow-dominated, parkland forests to
closed, coniferous forests is difficult to predict with the current knowledge
base. The project results will address first-order linkages between climate and
geomorphic processes and test emerging numerical models that assess how
landscapes evolve in response to millenial-scale climate and vegetation changes.

The research project seeks to document and quantify how changes in climate and
vegetation over the last 40,000 years have affected rates of erosion in a steep,
forested landscape. The anticipated outcomes are important for predicting how
future climate change will influence landscape dynamics as well as interpreting
human-induced changes, such as those associated with timber harvesting. Although
numerous numerical models exist to predict landscape adjustment to climate
change, the governing equations are poorly understood and in particular, the
role of vegetation requires significant quantitative advancement. By exploiting
a detailed sedimentary record preserved in a lake from a mountainous
environment, the results will reveal how ecosystems and landscapes may have co-
evolved to generate the current terrain. The results should also reveal whether
'events' or periods of rapid surface change have occurred in recent geological
history in response to climate or vegetation change.