* 0952867
* CAREER:  Towards a Formal Theory of Wireless Networking
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2016
* Alejandro Ribeiro, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* richard brown
* 08/31/2016
* USD 400,000.00

The last decades of the 20th century witnessed the emergence of networks that
have become ever more pervasive and important. At the start of the 21st century
developing a scientific understanding of networks remains an unresolved
intellectual endeavor. Part of this effort is the understanding of wireless
communication networks on a fundamental level pursued in this project. The
research formulates optimization problems that model wireless networks in a
variety of settings and translates properties of the former into characteristics
of the latter. For doing so, the investigators rely on the fact that randomness,
in the form of fading, yields seemingly more complex problems that nonetheless
have a more tractable structure. This richer structure is studied to: (i)
Determine architectural properties of wireless networks. (ii) Design algorithms
to find optimal operating points for different types of physical layers. (iii)
Develop strategies to learn fading distributions. (iv) Consider tradeoffs
associated with acquisition of channel state
information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The education agenda revolves around the
excitement, challenge and discipline gaps. The excitement gap is about the
excitement people feels about science and technology versus the lack of interest
to pursue careers in science and technology. The challenge gap refers to the
ongoing trend to reduce the complexity of material covered in courses. The
discipline gap alludes to the compartmental experience offered to students and
the reality of an increasingly hazy separation between disciplines. The
education plan contributes to the closing of these gaps through the development
of an undergraduate level course on stochastic processes and a graduate level
course on optimal design of wireless networks. Both of these courses are
designed to be challenging, exciting and multidisciplinary.