* 0952574
* EAGER: Ultra-wideband mmWave Radar and Imaging Sensors based on Compressive Sensing
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Harish Krishnaswamy, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Andreas Weisshaar
* 08/31/2010
* USD 57,005.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The objective of this research is to investigate novel architectures for the
realization of ultra-low-power, integrated, pulse-based, ultra-wideband radar
and imaging sensors. The approach is to exploit compressive sensing for high-
speed baseband processing to simultaneously achieve high dynamic range while
consuming ultra-low power.

Ultra-wideband, pulse-based radar and imaging sensors require high-speed
baseband processing. Compressive-sensing-based architectures take advantage of
the presence of inherent structure in the received radar signal, specifically
its time-domain sparsity, to significantly reduce the required sampling rate
(and hence, power consumption) while preserving the information contained in the
signal. The intellectual merit of the proposed research is to devise and
investigate the feasibility of compressive-sensing-based ultra-wideband radar
and imaging architectures through theoretical and simulation-based studies of
the robustness of compressive sensing to practical issues such as noise,
interference, presence of insufficient sparsity, and circuit imperfections such
as clock jitter. These studies will be linked to measurements performed with
prototype radars constructed with off-the-shelf components.

The broader impact of the proposed research is in its ability to transform the
current vision of ambient intelligence. The low-power and low-cost nature of
silicon-based ultra-wideband radar and imaging sensors utilizing compressive
sensing potentially enables ubiquitous deployment of massive sensor networks,
which can have a dramatic impact on the quality of day-to-day life. The proposed
research also bridges the disciplines of integrated analog- and digital-circuit
design, signal processing and applied mathematics. This proposal will support
the education and training of a graduate student researcher, who will develop
skills in all these fields.