* 0952299
* Mechanism of TonB Action in Membrane Transport
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2010,01/31/2013
* Kenneth Ritchie, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 01/31/2013
* USD 615,000.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will study the mechanism
by which microorganisms actively accumulate metals, against their concentration
gradient, through the cell envelope. The ability of microbes to acquire iron is
an important aspect of microbial biochemistry and physiology, and TonB is a
Gram-negative bacterial cell envelope protein that is needed for the function of
iron transporter proteins. It is proposed to transfer energy from the
cytoplasmic membrane of the cell through the periplasm to the outer membrane.
These studies will use genetic engineering, chemical modification, fluorescence
spectroscopy, and microscopy to elucidate the biochemical functions of TonB. We
will determine if TonB normally bridges between the inner and outer membranes of
bacterial cells, by interaction with the peptidoglycan layer underlying the
outer membrane, and we will assess the importance of this association to iron
acquisition by Escherichia coli. Comparative measurements of the strength of
interactions that occur between TonB and peptidoglycan, and between TonB and
FepA (an iron transporter), will illuminate the nature of their functional
interaction during the uptake of solutes. Secondly, the experiments will
evaluate a proposed rotatory mechanism of TonB action, using fluorescence
spectroscopic studies, and characterize the rate of lateral diffusion of TonB in
the bacterial membranes. These experiments will test existing theories of TonB-
and energy-dependent outer membrane transport, and provide biophysical data that
allows insight into long-sought mechanisms of bacterial cell envelope
physiology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
understanding of the mechanism of this prototypic outer membrane transport
system has wide ranging implications, because transporters of this class
function in all Gram-negative bacteria. Furthermore, the membrane system under
investigation is itself unprecedented, because it involves active transport
across a membrane that cannot sustain an ion gradient. The project involves and
develops methodologies that permit direct observation of membrane transport
reactions in living cells, and these procedures advance the study of membrane
biochemistry. It will accomplish its goals with new biochemical and
spectroscopic techniques, while integrating the teaching and training of student
researchers within its overall scientific objectives. This project will train
undergraduate students, graduate students, and a postdoctoral researcher in
membrane biochemistry, including novel theories and new biophysical
methodologies associated with analysis of bacterial membrane transport. As an
integral feature of this project intended to promote scientific education and
training, students will receive instruction in molecular biological and
biochemical techniques, membrane biochemistry and fluorescence spectroscopy,
that they will then use in their assigned independent research. The participants
include individuals at the University of Oklahoma and Purdue University, from a
broad spectrum of ethnic and cultural backgrounds. The PI is committed to
broadening research opportunities for under-represented groups, and he will make
efforts to communicate the fundamental research findings to audiences outside
the field of membrane biochemistry, including the medical community, and high
school students and teachers throughout Oklahoma.