* 0952792
* RAPID:  Regional and landscape initiatives at Harvard Forest LTER
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* David Foster, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 08/31/2011
* USD 136,510.00

The Harvard Forest LTER studies how forests in New England respond to natural
and human disturbance and environmental change at spatial scales ranging from
individual sites to the entire region. The proposed work will focus on two
specific aspects of this larger mandate. First, researchers will investigate the
causes and consequences of the unexpected and widespread death of oak trees on
the southern New England coast. This work will be integrated with ongoing
studies of similar decline in hemlock and beech trees across New England and
will address the scientific and management challenges associated with the
decline or loss of important ecological species. Second, a wireless (radio)
network will be installed on the Prospect Hill Tract at the Harvard Forest. The
wireless network will make it possible to collect data in real time from a wide
range of scientific projects in the forest so that equipment may be monitored
and controlled remotely and so that selected data may be posted online as it is
collected.

At a regional scale, the decline or loss of species caused by multiple stresses,
including invasive pests and disease, climate change, and urban and suburban
development, is a growing problem for scientists, policy makers, and land
managers across the nation. The proposed work will shed light on the mechanisms
and impacts of such events for critical tree species. At the landscape scale,
recent advances in sensor, network, and wireless technologies now make it
possible to conduct measurements over broad areas and at high sampling rates in
a way that was unthinkable just a few years ago. The proposed wireless network
at Harvard Forest will support a wide range of new studies, in effect creating
an 'outdoor laboratory and classroom' for researchers and students at Harvard
Forest, in the LTER Network, and in the larger scientific and educational
community.