* 0952631
* CAREER:  Graphics:  Gaze Manipulation
* CSE,IIS
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2016
* Reynold Bailey, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 03/31/2016
* USD 581,267.00

This research continues and extends work on subtle gaze direction - a novel
technique that combines real-time eye- tracking with image-space modulation to
direct a viewer's gaze about a digital image. This proposed project aims to
pursue research in subtle gaze direction for dynamic scenes. This is a natural
extension of viewers gaze pattern for static scenes. The work will seek
improvement in search task performance. Advances in this area are important for
many applications from locating anomalies in medical images to identifying
camouflaged targets in a scene. The approach will use automatic feature
detection algorithms. The project will also address issues relevant to improving
information recall. This will involve studies to determine the impact of subtle
gaze direction on spatial information recall for images and spatial-temporal
information recall for dynamic scenes. The work will also explore gaze direction
in the presence of more overt stimuli. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is
designed to enable high quality interdisciplinary research that links technology
design with health-based applications. The topics addressed are highly
interdisciplinary and will require interaction with faculty and mentors from a
number of disciplinary areas. The program will create new opportunities for
undergraduates to study health and human behavior using the technology. The PI
will pursue two curriculum development projects that are closely related to this
research endeavor aimed at computer science and non- computer science majors.
The courses are continually refined by inclusion of state-of-the- art computer
graphics research and techniques. The Principal Investigator also plans to
develop a new course on applied perception in graphics and visualization. In
both cases, students are exposed to a broad topical area that draws upon human
vision, computer graphics and visualization. The courses are expected to attract
students from Rochester Institute of Technology's many programs in imaging
related science.