* 0952047
* Collaborative Research: Simultaneous Inversions of GPS Time Series for Kinematics and Transients in Cascadia
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2010,10/31/2010
* Robert McCaffrey, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 10/31/2010
* USD 136,050.00

In recent years continuously operating GPS sites have been established in many
parts of the world, including Earthscope's Plate Boundary Observatory network in
the western US. Prior to that, most GPS observations were made in survey-mode,
where campaigns were used to occupy the marks on a yearly or multi-year basis.
This project is to explore how to extract long-term plate kinematics and time-
dependent deformation information from both continuous and survey-mode GPS data.
The science target is to learn about the spatial and temporal relationship
between slow slip and non-volcanic tremor throughout Cascadia. The continuous
networks of PBO and PANGA are being used to test whether or not slow slip
beneath Cascadia coincides spatially and temporally with non-volcanic tremor.
Southern Cascadia has a very different pattern of slow-slip than northern
Cascadia where slow-slip events are very regular and similar in size. Non-
volcanic tremor suggests that there may be some, but different, patterns in
southern Cascadia but tremor does not constrain the sizes of the slow slip
events. Utilizing the time series directly in the analyses and applying new GPS
processing techniques will enhance the signal-to-noise ratio of the vertical
component which is critical in estimating the up-dip extent of slow slip on the
Cascadia interface. One goal is to test whether or not non-volcanic tremor (NVT)
coincides with slow slip. Since NVT is easier to observe than slow slip for
small events, their coincidence will help delineate the portions of faults that
slip slowly. The work will place important bounds on the up-dip limit of slow
slip at Cascadia and hence whether or not slow slip extends into the locked
portions of the megathrust. The research will further our understanding of slow-
slip events and how they should be presented to the public. The simple question
of whether they increase or decrease the earthquake hazard is not yet answered
but is of obvious importance.