* 0952786
* CAREER:  Advancing Accessible Computing with Tools for Ability-Based Design
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2016
* Jacob Wobbrock, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 05/31/2016
* USD 509,359.00

Today's commodity software is ignorant of users' motor abilities. This places
the burden of adaptation on people rather than on technology, and forces users
either to struggle with off-the-shelf input devices or to procure specialized
assistive devices that are expensive, hard to acquire, and infused with social
stigmas. Recent approaches like universal design, inclusive design, and design
for all acknowledge this problem, but promote an unachievable "one size fits
all" ideal. Universal solutions are not the answer! Rather, the answer is the
opposite, that is to say highly individualized user interfaces aware of and
adapted to users' motor abilities. Such interfaces can enable people to use
cheap readily-available everyday input devices like mice, touch pads, and
trackballs when controlling desktop software. Creating software that matches
users' abilities is the focus of the PI's concept of ability-based design, and
this research extends the PI's prior work on ability-based design with new
software tools for advancing this nascent methodology. These tools will focus on
measuring and modeling target acquisition and text entry, two fundamentals of
computer input that demand fine motor control, making them key challenges for
people with motor impairments. The work will consist of multiple stages. The PI
will investigate standard and custom psychomotor movement models for people with
motor impairments. He will create and validate a Mouse Perturber tool that
injects kinetic noise into an unimpaired movement stream to create simulated
motor-impaired performance, making early-stage testing of ability-based
prototypes easier. And he will create an Input Observer tool that can rigorously
quantify users' performance "in the wild," which requires the inferring of
intention outside directed laboratory tasks. He will then develop CAMA, a tool
for motor-ability assessment that uses off-the-shelf input devices, and TASK, a
tool for quickly creating task models from real user interfaces. Finally, he
will integrate CAMA and TASK into a package for assistive technology providers
to perform assessment, prediction, and the creation of accessible "proxy
targets." Project outcomes will include a scientific investigation of standard
and custom psychomotor movement models for people with motor disabilities,
discovery of how to rigorously measure target acquisition and text entry
behavior outside the lab, the invention and validation of a simulation tool for
motor-impaired performance, and the creation, validation, and deployment of a
low-cost computer-based motor-ability assessment tool for use in a University of
Washington assistive technology clinic.

Broader Impacts: This research will enable people with certain types of
disabilities to enjoy more usable software matched to their abilities. It will
also lead to a new design methodology predicated on a shift in focus from
disability to ability, along with four downloadable software tools for improving
laboratory, field, and clinical human motor performance evaluations. As an
integral part of this research, the PI plans to organize an undergraduate summer
workshop that brings informatics and computer science students together with
computer users with disabilities to collectively brainstorm new access
solutions. He will also develop an educational unit for middle and high school
science classes that enables young students to experience simulated disabilities
and learn about the roles of scientists and engineers in creating a barrier-free
society.