* 0952021
* CAREER:  The Virtual Heart - Exploring the Structure-function Relationship in Electroactive Cardiac Tissue
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2015
* Ellen Kuhl, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Siegmund
* 01/31/2015
* USD 400,000.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award
is to create the Virtual Heart, an interactive, hierarchical finite element
simulation tool to explore the structure-function relationship in healthy and
diseased hearts. The human heart is a fascinating organ that pumps more than
6000 liters of blood through our body every day. Beating more than a billion
times during an average lifetime, it provides a steady supply of oxygen and
nutrition to all our tissues and organs. Not surprisingly, cardiac dysfunction
may have devastating physiological consequences. Our goal is to establish
experiments, models, and simulation tools to characterize the electro-active
response of cardiac tissue. The Virtual Heart will provide substantial
contributions including enhanced insight into excitation-contraction coupling on
the cellular level, continuum models for electro-active materials on the organ
level, and multi-scale approaches to link both scales. Our project will
establish an entirely new way of thinking in cardiovascular medicine, inspired
by predictive, patient-specific, simulation-based interventional planning.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Heart disease is the primary cause of death in
industrialized nations, claiming more than 16 million lives worldwide each year.
Despite tremendous scientific improvements, cardiovascular disease remains one
of the most common, costly, disabling, and deadly medical conditions, generating
and annual health care cost in excess of $430 billion. Providing new
technologies to understand cardiac disease, this project will have direct
social, economical, and educational impact. Socially, it will enhance medical
care, lower mortality, and improve life and longevity. Economically, it may
optimize medical treatment to significantly reduce health care costs.
Educationally, through a planned museum exhibit, we will increase public
awareness of risk factors that promote cardiac disease.