* 0952711
* CAREER:  Enabling Technologies for Beyond 1 Tb/s per Wavelength Optical Transport
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2015
* Ivan Djordjevic, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2015
* USD 399,546.00

Today's photonic infrastructure, whose foundations were established several
decades ago, gradually extends from global backbone to access networks and
beyond. Recent studies indicate that each household in North America should be
connected by at least 100 Mb/s, which cannot be accommodated by the last
century's technology. The 100 Gb/s Ethernet is currently under standardization,
and according to industry experts 1 Tb/s Ethernet should be standardized by the
year 2012-2013. Migrating to higher transmission rates comes along with certain
challenges such as degradation in the signal quality due to different linear and
nonlinear channel impairments and increased installation costs. The limitations
of photonics-enabled networks also result from the heterogeneity of the
infrastructure and consequential bottlenecks at different boundaries and
interfaces. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This multidisciplinary research grant studies
different approaches to overcome the limitations of heterogeneous optical
networks and enable serial 1 Tb/s optical transport, while employing the
components operating at lower speeds. In this approach, modulation, coding and
multiplexing are performed in a unified fashion so that, effectively, the
transmission, signal processing, detection and decoding are done at much lower
symbol rates. At these lower rates, dealing with nonlinear and linear effects is
manageable while the aggregate data rate is maintained at 1 Tb/s and above. The
primary research objectives of this grant can be summarized as follows: (i)
development of different coded modulation schemes, employing both single-carrier
and multicarrier, to enable 1 Tb/s per wavelength optical transport and for
simultaneous mitigation of channel impairments over various types of optical
links; (ii) hardware FPGA/ASIC implementation of coded modulation schemes; and
(iii) validation of the proposed methodology through proof-of-concept
implementation studies.