* 0952866
* CAREER: Transcending the Thermal Management Challenges of Tera-Scale Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2016
* Sherief Reda, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 01/31/2016
* USD 442,980.00

Elevated temperature is a major problem for the reliability, performance, power
consumption, and packaging costs of integrated electronic devices. Temperature
is a main physical barrier limiting the performance benefits of future
technologies that promise tera-scale integration. To meet the thermal management
challenges of future many-core processors, this research program envisions a new
class of intelligent dynamic thermal management systems that explore the vast
search space of possible control parameter settings and decide the optimal
temperature and performance targets. This research program also investigates new
cooling system designs that enable the thermal management system to target
directly hot spots at the micro scale. Directly targeting hot spots alleviates
the thermal constraints on performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research program will lead to transformative solutions and tools that
address the fundamental thermal management challenges of computing systems and
ensure their scalability. The proposed program will lead to the training of a
diverse workforce of undergraduate and graduate students to be well prepared to
deal with tomorrow?s thermal management challenges. The educational component of
this program includes (1) research experiences for undergraduates; (2)
integrated approach to entrepreneurship education with research; (3) hands-on
training through the development of educational laboratories based on a state-
of-the-art infrared camera; and (4) continuous education through the development
of high-quality educational materials and an interactive technical Web site.