* 0952661
* CAREER: Teaching Practices That Support Fraction-Based Algorithmic Thinking
* EHR,DRL
* 08/15/2010,07/31/2016
* Debra Johanning, University of Toledo
* Continuing Grant
* Karen King
* 07/31/2016
* USD 598,862.00

The research and educational activities of this project focus on advancing the
field in the area of fraction operation algorithm development. The goal of the
research is to identify core mathematical teaching practices that engage and
support students in algorithmic thinking associated with fraction operations.
The project has four objectives: (1) understand and document local instructional
theories and routines of practice exemplary teachers use as they engage students
in algorithmic thinking for fraction operations; (2) develop a prototypical
model of core routines of practice generated from exemplary teachers that
support students as they engage in algorithmic thinking for fraction operations;
(3) design, pilot and study the usability of the prototypical model as a
professional development tool with typical teachers as they engage students in
algorithmic thinking for fraction operations; and (4) identify specific core
routines of practice that are shown to be productive for use with typical
teachers and explore ways of disseminating them at a larger scale.

Phase One involves collaborative work with and intensive observational study of
the practice of four exemplary teachers while they teach a common unit on
fraction operations. Individual teacher case and cross-case examination will
focus on mathematical development, use of representational modes, aspects of
purposefulness in the teachers' practice, and discursive considerations and
positioning of the learner. The identified local instructional theories and
routines of practice that emerge will lead to the development of a prototypical
model of teaching practice that engages students in algorithmic thinking for
fraction operations. The prototypical model will frame the development of
activities and tools to be piloted and studied with 15 typical middle grade
teachers from urban and suburban districts in Phase Two. A study group focused
professional development setting will be used to implement, study, and refine
frameworks, activities and tools.

The product of this work will be written educational materials that can be used
by other teacher educators to support the general population of teachers in this
domain. These materials will identify core routines of practice associated with
algorithmic thinking for fraction operations and offer activities and tools to
support their development in practice. The domain of rational number has been
identified as the most challenging and the most essential topic in elementary
and middle school mathematics needed to succeed in higher mathematics and
science. Moving forward in this area is critical in the successful preparation
of students for STEM careers.