* 0952848
* Defining, Measuring, and Investigating what Role Neutral Affective States play in Judgment, Motivation, and Regulation
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2010,08/31/2013
* Karen Gasper, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Rosanna Guadagno
* 08/31/2013
* USD 191,494.00

People know that their feelings influence their thoughts, decisions, and
actions. In fact, people may try to put themselves into a more neutral affective
state in order to avoid any undue affective biases. But do neutral affective
states really exist? And if so, does putting oneself into a neutral state help
reduce affective biases? This project examines these important and potentially
paradigm-shifting questions as it seeks to determine whether neutral affect may
actually create rather than eliminate affective influences. Across 5
experiments, the investigator considers whether neutral affect is a feeling of
indifference about the environment, as well as how best to measure it.

This research investigates three key concerns about neutral affect and tests the
innovative proposition that neutral affect may actually create affective
influences, thereby altering judgment, shaping motivation, and requiring
affective regulation. In the past, researchers in this area have clearly focused
on valenced states, with neutral mood serving primarily as a valence control
condition. The current work breaks with this tradition by focusing on the
informational value that can be associated with neutral moods. In so doing, this
research will use the tools typical of previous studies of valenced states to
show that "indifference" information is conveyed by neutral states. This work
can potentially contribute to a better understanding of ways to overcome
indifference, and ultimately help to shed light on techniques that would advance
discovery and promote learning. In addition, members of underrepresented groups
will be included in this project as research participants and as research
assistants.