* 0952829
* RAPID: 2009 Dry-Season Ablation on Kilimanjaro Glaciers:  a Measurement and Dating Opportunity
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Douglas Hardy, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* David J. Verardo
* 08/31/2010
* USD 48,011.00

This award, under the auspices of the NSF program for Rapid Response Research
(RAPID) grants, uses funds to conduct field work at the site of the Mt.
Kilimanjaro glacier to better understand the ablation (loss) of glacial ice. The
glacier atop Mt. Kilimanjaro has been cited by climatologists as a bellwether
from the Tropics of accelerating global climatic warming.

A series of ice cores were drilled through Kilimanjaro's glaciers in 2000, when
aerial photographs were obtained and an automated weather station (AWS) began
operating on the Northern Ice Field (NIF). The ice cores indicate that the NIF
has persisted throughout the Holocene, and that it contains a record of
environmental conditions spanning nearly 12,000 years. In October 2007, as the
most positive mass balance year of the decade was ending (i.e., snowiest), air
photos were flown again. These revealed that 26 percent of the area covered by
ice in 2000 was gone, with a 39% area decrease in the only glacier wholly within
the summit crater (Furtw√§ngler).

By October 2009, two years after the second set of air photos, ice loss from
horizontal glacier surfaces is expected to equal or exceed that lost through the
first ~8 years. The Kilimanjaro glacier has been losing ice nearly continuously
since June 2008 due to a prolonged interval with little snowfall and
increasingly low albedo (reflectivity) of the ice surface. It is hypothesized by
the researcher that ablation will likely accelerate until at least October 2009.

Consequently, it is timely to collect samples and make measurements to place the
loss of the glacier in the context of natural and anthropogenic change. To test
his theory, the researcher will conduct a series of experiments and install
monitoring equipment over a period of 6-7 days at the summit of Kilimanjaro in
September 2009. This timing precedes the next wet season and is the most
effective and safest time for fieldwork.

The proposal meets the requirements of the RAPID program because it identifies
an important science question (i.e., anonymously rapid loss of ice) that must be
addressed in a timely manner (i.e., during the brief interlude between wet and
dry seasons on the mountain).

It is anticipated that the data resulting from this project will contribute to a
better understanding of both paleoclimate and modern climate variability in
Africa and will help decrease uncertainty about the glacier-climate relationship
on this well-known mountain.