* 0952166
* Collaborative Research: Geodetic Constraints on the Kinematics of the Colorado Plateau and its Western and Southern Margin
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2016
* Susan Eriksson, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 06/30/2016
* USD 285,504.00

Collaborative Research: Geodetic Constraints on the Kinematics of the Colorado
Plateau and its Western and Southern Margin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Colorado
Plateau, southwestern United States, has played an important role in the
geologic evolution of the Pacific-North America plate boundary zone. Unlike most
other parts of the western U.S., the Colorado Plateau has remained largely
intact during most of its geologic history. Indeed, the area shows little to
none active earthquake faults. However, earthquakes do happen within the
Colorado Plateau, and some very large ones have occurred in southern Arizona and
northern Mexico.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses precise GPS measurements
to establish how the crust of the Colorado Plateau moves relative to stable
North America. Interpretation of the horizontal velocities tells the
investigators whether the area moves as a coherent block or is internally
deforming. In case of the former little earthquake activity is expected, and in
case of the latter the seismic hazard in the region may be higher than currently
thought. The deformation implied by the GPS data and earthquake data is compared
in order to assess whether the earthquake activity can be related to the
deformation measured in this project or whether they are due to other processes,
such as gravitational collapse. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To perform the
measurements, 33 new GPS stations are installed in Arizona, southern Utah and
southeastern Nevada. These stations complement and densify the long-running
continuous GPS stations of NSF EarthScope's Plate Boundary Observatory. The
additional stations are needed to create well-constrained models to describe the
region's present-day tectonics. With a well-constrained model of the deformation
can the origin of the motion and deformation of the Colorado Plateau be
investigated. Some of the models that are considered include a rigid motion of
the plateau causing opening of the Rio Grande Rift, crustal extension
encroaching into the plateau due to evolving mantle processes, and the effect of
Pacific plate motion on the deformation of the southern Basin and
Range.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many of the new GPS stations are installed in
National Parks and Monuments, as well as in State Parks. The investigators
provide educational material to inform the parks on the active tectonics of the
region and the aim of the project. The goal of these outreach activities is to
educate the parks' visitors that the geologic wonderland they are in is actively
changing due to geologic processes. Measurements are made for four years and the
project involves training of a graduate student. The outcome of this project may
be used in a reassessment of the seismic hazard in the region?s urban centers.