* 0952768
* CAREER: Photochromic Photooxidants - developing electron deficient photochromes to gate sensitivity toward photoinduced charge transfer
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/2010,04/30/2016
* Jason Gillmore, Hope College
* Standard Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 04/30/2016
* USD 549,000.00

With this CAREER Award, the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms Program
supports Professor Jason G. Gillmore of Hope College in a project directed
toward the development of electron deficient photochromic molecules that can be
used as oxidizing agents in their long-wavelength absorbing photochemically
excited state. The project will involve undergraduate researchers in the design
of the modified photochromes, their synthesis, and their basic photochemical and
electrochemical characterization. The effectiveness of the photochromes in
several cationic polymerization and small molecule isomerization reactions will
be investigated. The goal is to generate a library of photochromatic materials
with varying excited state reduction potentials. This primarily experimental
project will also include a computational component. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research by Professor Gillmore develops gated photoinduced charge transfer by
synthesizing photochromes that isomerize between short- and long wavelength
absorbing states. Broader impacts could lead to applications in photoinitiation
of polymerization, data storage, and increased control of chemical reactions.
Another important impact of this research will be the exposure of students to
topics including electron transfer, ion radical reactive intermediates,
photochemistry, cyclic voltammetry, polymerization, materials science, and
computational chemistry. Professor Gillmore will implement a full Peer-Led Team
Learning program into the organic lecture curriculum. The PI will also hold
regional workshops for postdoctoral students who are considering teaching
careers at undergraduate institutions.