* 0952218
* CAREER:  Dynamics of Fluid-Structure-Control Interaction in Rotating Aerodynamic Bodies
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2010,09/30/2016
* Fernando Ponta, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 09/30/2016
* USD 400,000.00

ABSTRACT

Studying the nonlinear dynamics of fluid structure interaction provides insights
into a widespread physical topic which makes appearances in many scientific
disciplines and several branches of Engineering. These phenomena manifest
themselves at a wide range of scales and present excellent opportunities for
scientific discovery with a richness of technical application. In cases like a
rotor blade or an insect wing, where a body is subject to a complex motion due
to the intrinsic operation of a certain mechanism or the dynamics of its control
system, the scientific challenge is still greater.

The objective of the research is to provide a better understanding of the
underlying physics in slender body aeroelastic dynamics through improved
mathematical computational models of the multiphysics process. The program is
divided into three overlapping phases each of them building upon previous work
the PI has published. The first phase focuses on a new series of adaptive
algorithms, based on the hybrid (or vorticity-velocity) formulation of the
Navier?Stokes equations. The kinematic Laplacian equation (KLE) technique will
be used to create a complete decoupling of the two hybrid variables in a
vorticity in time/velocity in space split approach. The resulting global scheme
is intrinsically compatible with non-linear adaptive ODE algorithms, providing a
way in which the submodels for the different problems involved (flow, structure,
control system dynamics, etc.) may be treated individually as modules that
interface with the main ODE routine. This allows for the simultaneous analysis
of the aeroelastic problem together with any innovative control strategy into a
single computationally efficient self adaptive algorithm. The second phase
consists of qualitative studies on vortex-shedding and wake dynamics behind
oscillating bodies, which play a critical role in the aeroelastic problem. In
the third phase, quantitative studies on prototypes of innovative wind turbine
blades, and their associated control strategies, will be conducted.

Intellectual Merit:

The intellectual merit of this work is the advancement of computational
mathematical models for the com- plex multiphysics problems involving fluid
structure control interaction that are present in many engineering designs,
providing also a fundamental tool for a better understanding of the underlying
physics. The experimental analysis of these coupled multiphysics problems is
extremely difficult. In some cases (like wind turbine blades), huge size
differences complicate extrapolation of experimental data from the wind tunnel
to the prototype scale. In others (like the lifting surfaces used in Micro Air
Vehicle applications inspired in the flapping-wing biological mechanisms
observed in bird and insect flight), the sheer task of placing sensors on a
small scale mechanism in complex rototranslational motion becomes almost
insurmountable. If successful, the innovative mathematical models developed here
will improve the efficiency and flexibility of the computational implementation
and provide a way to tackle these difficulties.

Broader Impacts:

This work will promote teaching and learning at undergraduate and graduate
levels, motivating engineering students to lead research at the frontiers of
applied mathematics and computational mechanics. Besides their intrinsic
scientific value as computational mathematics tools, the algorithms proposed
here have a clear relevance to applications in many disciplines. In particular,
the analysis of wind turbine blades constitutes a challenging problem in an
emergent technological field of strategic relevance. Current blade technology
based on composite laminates is labor intensive, requires a highly qualified
workforce, and poses huge challenges in terms of transport logistics and crane
capacity. It creates a critical bottleneck that hampers a rapid expansion of
wind energy in the US. This work would have transformative effects in the
development of wind turbine blade technology through synergistic activities in
collaboration with high tech companies located in the region and with Sandia
National Labs. Besides contributing to boost the local economy, these activities
would help students to gain experience from an industrial research setting. This
work intrinsically broadens the participation of underrepresented groups in
research: both the PI and one PhD student involved are Hispanic, and the other
PhD student is a woman. As part of the educational plan, a set of courses in
renewable energies and sustainability will be taught in Spanish. Building upon
previous PI's experience, and developed in collaboration with colleagues from
the modern languages area, this aims to teach technical Spanish to English
speaking engineering students at graduate and undergraduate level, providing a
communicational bridge towards the Hispanic community. Expanded nationwide
through Michigan Tech's Distance Learning Program, it would contribute to the
rapid expansion of the sustainable energy workforce.