* 0952604
* EAGER:  Code-Improving Transformations for Branch Prediction
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2009,02/29/2012
* Daniel Jimenez, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 02/29/2012
* USD 100,000.00

Microprocessors use branch predictors to predict the near-term behavior of a
program so that work on future instructions may begin early, reducing the amount
of time a program takes to run. Each incorrect prediction wastes time and
energy. Thus, branch predictors must be highly accurate, and a small improvement
in accuracy can give a large benefit for performance. Branch predictor accuracy
can be significantly affected by choices made in the compiler that translates
high-level programs to machine-language. However, current compilers do not take
into account many of the ways in which their choices during translation may have
an impact on branch prediction. In this project, technologies are developed for
improving program performance and reducing energy consumption based on improved
branch prediction through compiler techniques. Specifically, the impact of code
placement on branch predictors is studied and new code-improving transformations
are developed that improve branch predictor accuracy. The studies are carried
out on real systems including Intel and AMD microprocessors. The impact of the
new code-improving transformations is measured using performance monitoring
software to determine the magnitude of the improvement. This work will result in
improved performance and energy-efficiency for programs running on modern
microprocessors.