* 0952532
* CAREER: A novel nonlinear microscopy system and its application to characterization of biological media.
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2010,10/31/2013
* Feruz Ganikhanov, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Joyce Fernandes
* 10/31/2013
* USD 419,218.00

Raman-based microspectroscopy uses molecular low-frequency vibrational or
rotational modes for the identification and imaging of systems. Despite intense
efforts, the utility of Raman based microspectroscopy has been limited by
limited detection sensitivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objective of the
project is to develop a laser-based instrument capable of detecting and tracking
major biological cell constituents. The instrument design will yield a portable
and fully integrated laser instrument that is optimized to break existing
detection sensitivity limits, thereby favoring use by a broad range of
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The resulting device will open the way to
wider applications of Raman based characterization techniques in biological
media. Potential applications include the study of fundamental processes such as
cell division, differentiation, or apoptosis (death), which are accompanied by a
significant spatial reorganization of the cell constituents.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Education program is based on efficient integration of
applied and fundamental research for the training of undergraduate and graduate
students. The plan offers several separate and unique projects for graduate
students, which are challenging in both technical and scientific aspects and can
constitute a core for the original scientific research required for a PhD
degree. The program specifies sub-projects for undergraduate students majoring
in the fields of science and engineering who are interested in interdisciplinary
research experiences while having the opportunity to interact with professionals
within academia and industry. The program offers a plan of close collaboration
with different university schools and departments which will impact the research
efforts of those outside the Physics Department while facilitating collaborative
research between the University's research groups and Centers. Other
contribution to teaching include improvement to the existing graduate level,
Optical Properties of Solids, course, development of a new graduate course
(Quantum Electronics) and adding new laboratory modules to the existing
undergraduate level, Advanced Physics Laboratory, course.&lt;br/&gt; Outreach
activity includes participation in the statewide Summer Undergraduate Research
Experience (SURE) program and organizing and hosting a summer research camp for
high school students from underrepresented and minority groups.&lt;br/&gt;More
information can be found at http://physics.wvu.edu/people/feruz_ganikhanov