* 0952692
* CAREER:  Foundations and Extensions of Public Key Cryptography
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2010,02/29/2016
* Brent Waters, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Nina Amla
* 02/29/2016
* USD 446,600.00

Increasingly, both personal and enterprise data are being stored at third-party
locations, outside of the data owner's control. A company might directly
outsource its data storage by using a backup service such as Amazon's S3
application. In other cases, outsourcing is a by-product of a larger service;
for example, several corporations use Salesforce to manage their customer
relations and sales data. Outsourcing data storage offers several benefits:
storage costs can be amortized by a third-party over several customers, a third
party can store data at different geographic locations for robustness, and
integration with larger application services becomes easier. One can imagine a
not too distant future where most computation and storage is realized in a
network "cloud". In order to protect data stored at third party services we will
need to encrypt it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unfortunately, traditional encryption
systems are insufficient for these applications. Solving this problem requires
an entirely new way of encrypting data. To see this, recall that in traditional
public key encryption a party encrypts data to a single known user. While this
functionality is useful for applications such as encrypted email and
establishing secure web sessions, it lacks the expressiveness needed for more
advanced data sharing. In enterprise settings, a party will want to share data
with groups of users based on their credentials. Often a party sharing data will
not know which individual users will need to have access to it; moreover, some
users will not even exist in the system at the time the data is encrypted. For
example, a traveling sales representative might want to encrypt records so that
any current or future manager in the personal electronics division can access
them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is laying the foundations for
an entirely different vision for encryption called Functional Encryption.
Instead of encrypting to individual users, in a functional encryption system,
one can embed any access predicate f() into the ciphertext itself. Functional
encryption simultaneously renders completely general functionality and its data
access is self-enforcing --- requiring no trusted mediator. The PI aims to
create a system where the encrypting party can specify any access predicate over
a recipient's credentials (i.e. f can be any Turing Machine). Functional
encryption for any predicate opens up a world of possibilities for data sharing;
one could encrypt an image such that the access function f encoded an image
recognition program allowing only people in the picture to view
it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to broadening our view of public key
cryptography, the PI will explore fundamental problems in public key encryption.
One direction is to attempt to build chosen ciphertext secure encryption from
standard public key encryption. Finally, the PI will explore the foundations of
building public key cryptography.