* 0952800
* Collaborative Research: Causes and Mechanisms of Focused Exhumation Along the Denali Fault, Eastern Alaska Range
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2010,01/31/2013
* Paul Fitzgerald, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 01/31/2013
* USD 139,856.00

The 1,200 km long Alaskan Denali Fault system is a major intra-continental
right-lateral strike-slip fault system. Since the 2002 Denali earthquake
(magnitude 7.9), which initiated along a previously undescribed thrust fault in
the eastern Alaska Range, scientists have increasingly focused on how much slip
and convergence occurs along this fault system, and where deformation is being
accommodated. Mountainous terrain and basins have formed along the Denali fault
and the locations and age of formation of these features can be used to
constrain the distribution of crustal deformation through time. The eastern
Alaska Range, the topographic signature of the eastern Denali Fault, rises
dramatically from the tundra (about 200 meters) to sharp glaciated peaks (about
4,000 meters), forming a narrow but high-relief region immediately north of the
fault. As the fault continues west, the topography drops significantly, then
rises again to form the central Alaska Range, home to Mt. McKinley and Denali
National Park. Uplift of the Alaska Range is related to plate tectonic processes
associated with subduction and accretion along Alaska's southern margin, but why
the uplift is focused along the fault in the eastern Alaska Range is not clear.
This research project seeks to understand the thermal history of rocks in the
eastern Alaska Range and hence place constraints on regional patterns of
exhumation and uplift through time. This will allow evaluation of the relative
importance of near-field boundary conditions versus far-field driving forces.
The research team is conducting a high-resolution multi-technique
thermochronological approach combined with macro-and microstructural work along
the eastern Denali Fault. This approach will document variations in exhumation
rates during the last 30 million years to understand exhumation patterns in the
mountains. Structural studies are focused on the regions with the most extreme
exhumation, both in terms of rate and total amount, to understand what controls
these patterns. Linking the structural history to exhumation rates will permit
the temporal and spatial influence of geodynamic drivers such as changes in
Pacific versus North America plate motion, dip of the subducting slab, and the
collision of buoyant Yakutat block at the eastern edge of the subduction zone to
be evaluated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study has relevance to fundamental
problems of major strike-slip fault systems, including what causes localized
exhumation and how strike-slip deformation is transferred into the lower crust.
Results will contribute to earthquake hazard prediction in this region by
constraining locations of high neotectonic deformation, variations in Denali
fault geometry and identification of reverse faults. A better understanding of
contributing factors for seismic behavior along the Denali Fault will benefit
seismic hazard maps. The Trans-Alaska oil pipeline and future 26 billion dollar
Alaska gas pipeline cross the eastern Alaska Range and Denali fault. The
pipeline is designed to withstand strike-slip motion, but if the there is a
significant dip-slip component the effects could be disastrous.