* 0952082
* CAREER:    Computational Modeling of Biological Nanomachines - Protein Unfolding and Translocation by Clp ATPases
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2010,02/29/2016
* George Stan, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 02/29/2016
* USD 672,037.00

Protein degradation and disassembly of aggregates are critical quality control
mechanisms for the maintenance of vital cellular functions. Powerful ring-shaped
components of Clp macromolecular machines mediate these actions by using a
protein threading mechanism, which consists of recognition, unfolding, and
translocation of substrates through a central channel. Understanding the
mechanism of these biological nanomachines, that carry out crucial cellular
functions, represents an important challenge for modern biological studies. The
objective of this CAREER project is to elucidate, using computer simulations,
kinetic and thermodynamic requirements for protein unfolding and the operational
principles of substrate translocation by the Clp nanomachines. These studies
will pinpoint the effect of periodic forces on substrate protein unfolding and
translocation and the details of interactions between substrates and Clp
responsible for these actions. This project will advance understanding of other
protein degradation machines and fundamental principles that govern protein
unfolding and translocation.

This CAREER project combines interdisciplinary research in computational
biophysical chemistry with education and training of undergraduate and graduate
students in this field. The educational infrastructure at the University of
Cincinnati will be enhanced by establishing a computational biophysical
chemistry course taught using problem-based learning and active student
participation approaches. The PI will collaborate with Central State University
and Fisk University to increase the participation of underrepresented minorities
in computational sciences. The scope of these collaborations is to enhance the
physical chemistry curriculum and to introduce molecular modeling courses at
these universities. The PI will provide research experience opportunities for
students at these universities.