* 0952950
* CAREER: Enhancing Quality through Probabilistic On-Chip Test
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2010,10/31/2010
* Jennifer Dworak, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 10/31/2010
* USD 77,196.00

Future integrated circuits will contain tens, hundreds, or possibly even a
thousand cores per chip. However, the scaling techniques that will make this
possible also make the underlying circuit fabric less reliable-leading to
increased wearout and defects that cannot be detected at manufacturing. In
response, the PI proposes fundamental research for generating new test sets on-
chip to identify failing cores. The tests will be created "on-the-fly" and
dynamically targeted to the most critical areas of a core. Some key portions of
the proposed research involve the creation and verification of hardware monitors
for determining which faults are most important for the user's applications, the
diagnostic use of online error detection hardware to pinpoint locations that
caused previous failures, and the analysis and development of protocols to
efficiently create and transport tests in a network-on-chip
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The great performance advantages of future
multi-core devices will remain unrealized if the reliability of those devices
cannot be trusted. The proposed research investigates critical tools for
promoting that reliability. The integrated education plan provides research
opportunities for students at multiple levels?from high school to graduate
school?including students from underrepresented groups. In addition to
recruiting undergraduates from Brown, the PI plans to work with the CRA-W DREU
(Distributed Research Experiences for Undergraduates) program to host visiting
female undergraduates for summer research. The PI will also recruit high school
students from the Providence Public Schools, many of whom are members of
underrepresented groups, for summer research through the Brown GK-12 program.