* 0952952
* CAREER: Robust Production Systems: Theory and Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2010,10/31/2010
* Jingshan Li, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Russell Barton
* 10/31/2010
* USD 400,000.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project
is to study robust production systems the performance of which is resilient with
respect to variations in manufacturing environment. Specifically, the theory of
robustness for production systems will be established, the results derived will
be validated and applied on the factory floor. The robustness of production
systems can be characterized with respect to the following three perspectives,
related to both steady state and transient performance measures: machines, human
factors, and products. Each of these perspectives will be studied in the
framework of serial lines and assembly systems. The approach will be based on
analytical investigations and simulations of Markov and general random processes
that describe the production systems at hand. Conditions under which the system
operates robustly will be derived based on the analysis of system performance.
In addition, an educational program will be established through a new
curriculum, student supervising and industrial training, professional education,
and international collaboration, all integrated with the research program.

If successful, the results of this research will lead to establishment of a
theoretical foundation to address one of the key challenges in modern
manufacturing systems. It will enable us to study the robustness of production
systems to achieve best productivity, quality and flexibility, and open up a new
direction devoted to robustness in manufacturing systems research. It will
provide engineers and managers of manufacturing enterprises with quantitative
and qualitative tools and principles for design and operation of robust
production systems. The methodology will also be transferable to study supply
chains, health care systems, communication and information networks, as well as
other systems.