* 0952251
* CAREER: Explicit class field theory, Stark's conjectures, and families of modular forms
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2016
* Samit Dasgupta, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2016
* USD 471,283.00

This project proposes to study the explicit construction of class fields by
proving explicit formulas for Gross-Stark units. This will build on recent work
of the principal investigator in collaboration with Henri Darmon and Robert
Pollack, in which the weak Gross-Stark conjecture was proven under certain
assumptions. It will also incorporate previous work of the principal
investigator in which an exact formula for Gross-Stark units was conjectured.
Furthermore, this project proposes to develop a unified theory of locally
constructed "Darmon style" cohomology classes by linking Darmon's integration
theory with the p-adic Langlands program. Connections to other outstanding
conjectures concerning trivial zeroes of p-adic L-functions will be studied.

This project aims to help foster an increased community of interaction and
collaboration between the University of California, Santa Cruz, Stanford
University, and the American Institute of Mathematics. This increased
interaction will be highlighted by regularly held mini-conferences on the topics
of Number Theory and Arithmetic Algebraic Geometry. Furthermore, a postdoc will
be hired at UCSC to help foster the research environment, and in particular to
interact with students on research topics. As part of this proposal, the PI
plans to continue expository writing aimed at communicating high level
mathematics to a student audience. Kronecker's "dream of youth" was to
explicitly construct all the abelian extensions of quadratic imaginary fields.
Hilbert presented the problem for general number fields as the 12th problem in
his famous list. The search for an explicit class field theory has motivated
many great advances in number theory. Its prime successes include the Kronecker-
Weber theorem and the theory of complex multiplication. This project hopes to
extend the understanding of explicit class field theory beyond the setting of
complex multiplication. The main technique is to study the connection between
units in number fields and special values of zeta-functions. This connection is
a central motivating theme in number theory.