* 0952298
* Coprecipitation of Pb and As in apatite and applications to environmental remediation
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2010,07/31/2015
* John Rakovan, Miami University
* Continuing Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2015
* USD 250,065.00

The crystal chemistries of apatite group minerals (a.k.a. apatites) have been
widely investigated. They can accommodate numerous substitutions, including
cations, polyanions, and monoanions. Thus, they play a significant role in many
geochemical and environmental processes such as elemental cycling, availability
of nutrients, and contaminant transport and fate. Formation of apatites has been
studied as a means for contaminant remediation, especially for heavy metals such
as Pb, Zn, Cd, Cu, and Ni, through sequestration by sorption or coprecipitation,
and has been shown to be effective due to its high affinity for these metals and
its low solubility under earth?s surface conditions. Thus, once co-precipitated
in the highly stable apatite structure metals are no longer easily dispersible
or bioavailable. However, there is still a great deal to be learned about the
sequestration of other metals and the effect of combined metal uptake.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One metal of enormous environmental significance and with
great potential to be remediated through apatite sequestration is As. However,
there are a limited number of studies focused on coprecipitation of As in
apatite and the properties of solid solutions involving this metal. Furthermore,
Pb and As often occur together in the environment due to natural processes (e.g.
weathering of ore deposits) and human activities (e.g. smelting), and even less
work on the simultaneous coprecipitation of Pb and As in apatite exists, despite
the fact that natural Pb-As apatites occur (mimetite, clinomimetite).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal focuses on I) synthesis and elucidation of
the chemical and physical properties of apatite group minerals in the Ca-Pb-
PO4-AsO4-OH-Cl system for evaluation of their application to simultaneous As and
Pb remediation and II) testing the application of Ca-PO4 solutions for
sequestration of As, and combined As and Pb, through apatite precipitation in
contaminated sediments. PI will investigate the extent of possible solid
solutions, the kinetics of crystallization reactions, the possible pathways of
formation, the structure and crystal chemistry, and the thermodynamics of
synthesis reaction products. He will conduct a site-specific case study at a
former smelting facility with known As and Pb contamination of local sediments.
Engineered contaminated sediments will also be investigated to help elucidate
reactions taking place in the natural samples. The results of this study will
greatly increase our knowledge of the fundamental mineralogy of some of the
least understood apatite group minerals with wide geologic implications, for
example the study of ore deposit petrogenesis, and the general geochemical
cycling of As and Pb. Furthermore, the results may lead to the effective
application of these minerals to environmental remediation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this proposal are many. The work
has broad environmental implications (heavy-metal sequestration and
stabilization) that are of immense importance to society. It may also lead to a
more cost effective remediation technology for As and Pb. The proposed research
will include the participation and education of undergraduate and graduate
students. Outreach and education of the general public, specifically targeting
the amateur scientist and mineral enthusiast communities, will be facilitated
through talks at museums and amateur societies, and publications in journals for
a diverse non-professional audience.