* 0952439
* CAREER:Correlated Exciton Fluctuations in Natural and Artificial Light Harvesting Antennae
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2016
* Andrew Moran, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 06/30/2016
* USD 627,000.00

In this project supported by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms
Program of the Division of Chemistry, Professor Andrew Moran and his research
group at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill will study how large
assemblies of molecules absorb light, and transfer the energy from one part of
the assembly to another. They will focus specifically on the role of spatially
correlated nuclear motion in light harvesting mechanisms. The study will obtain
information about atomic and molecular motions on very short time scales using a
femtosecond laser technique called two-dimensional photon echo spectroscopy
(2D-PES). In addition, Prof. Moran and his team will develop a new technique
called intraband electronic coherence spectroscopy (IECS), which will provide
more detailed information about the mechanisms controlling energy transfer
processes. The systems to be studied include light harvesting phycobilisomes,
which are protein structures in cyanobacteria, as well as artificial cyanine dye
aggregates, whose readily controlled shapes make them excellent models for
exploring structure-function relationships. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
project will advance our fundamental understanding of photochemical processes,
and also have implications for the biological sciences (e.g., photosynthesis)
and sustainable energy technology. The research program will be fertile ground
for undergraduate and graduate students. Many of the optical components used in
the experiments are/will be built by graduate students. This hands-on experience
represents a unique opportunity for chemists to obtain an interdisciplinary
expertise in advanced methods of ultrafast science. Undergraduates will
contribute by preparing the nanostructured aggregates that will be studied using
2D-PES and IECS. As part of the Project Seed Program, high school students will
participate in the research program. For example, they will use computer
simulations to design pigment complexes and simulate their absorption spectra.
In addition, Prof. Moran and his team will conduct laboratory demonstrations for
a Pre-College program administered by the School of Education at the University
of North Carolina. The goal of the Pre-College program is to broaden the pool of
students pursuing mathematics and science based majors and careers.