* 0952247
* From Peaks to Prairie: Two Natural Experiments in Decadal Landscape Evolution
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2014
* Gregory Tucker, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 04/30/2014
* USD 299,722.00

Erosion and sedimentation constantly re-shape the Earth's surface. Over geologic
time, these processes wear down mountains and move vast quantities of broken
rock to the sea. On human time scales, the rates are often so slow as to be
barely perceptible. But when disturbance strikes a landscape such as in the form
of wildfire, flooding, earthquakes, livestock overgrazing,or climate change, the
pace of erosion and sediment transport can be altered dramatically. Geologists
and engineers have long sought to develop mathematical models of landscape
evolution that can predict how a given landscape will response to disturbance.
Such models are crucial to understanding how the geological cycle operates and,
on shorter time scales, for predicting how landscapes are likely to react to
environmental changes. However, these models need to be tested rigorously
against actual field data. This project will measure historical and contemporary
erosion and sedimentation at two sites in Colorado to provide case studies with
which to test models. The first site, located on the High Plains east of Denver,
has shown unusually rapid gully growth during the 20th century. The history of
the channel network will be reconstructed using a combination of historic aerial
photographs, measurements of the volume of sediment trapped behind earthen dams
built in the early 1960s, dating of sediments within the valleys, and measuring
the concentration in soils of exotic radionuclides that were released by Cold-
War era nuclear weapons testing. In addition, the new technology of high-
precision ground-based laser scanning will provide images at unprecedented
resolution of the year-by-year growth of channel heads. The second site lies in
a drainage basin in the Colorado Rockies where intense wildfire followed by
heavy rainfall in 1996 triggered dramatic erosion and sedimentation. Repeated
field measurements following the fire provide a detailed record of dramatic
changes in the watershed area. These original measurements will be supplemented
with airborne and ground-based laser-derived maps of the terrain. Data from both
sites will be used to test one of the leading computer models of landscape
response. The databases will provide a resource for the scientific community now
and into the future as models continue to become more sophisticated.

Erosion and sedimentation are natural processes that have helped shape our
planet throughout its existence, and they have direct and wide-ranging impacts
on society. The constant flow of sediment from mountains to the sea fills in
hydropower reservoirs, decreasing their generating capacity and operational
lifespan. Sedimentation within river channels can increase flood risk to
surrounding communities, while incision along streams and gully networks can
damage roadways and other infrastructure and reduce the quality of agricultural
land. Changes in the amount or size of sediment carried by streams will alter
the health of river ecosystems. Erosion can even exhume buried hazardous wastes,
releasing them to stream networks where they can contaminate water supplies. All
of these processes are often affected by human development. For this reason,
computational models of landscape response to both natural and human disturbance
are needed to support careful planning that mitigates the potential effects of
future changes in land use and climate. This project supports the continued
development and refinement of these models and will result in field-based tests
that will contribute to sustainable living in an ever-changing landscape.