* 0952391
* Nonlinear Ultrasonic Techniques for Nondestructive Evaluation and Fatigue Life Prediction
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2009,04/30/2011
* jianmin qu, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 04/30/2011
* USD 157,500.00

Failure of engineering materials under cyclic loading typically consists of
three stages, crack incubation, crack growth and fracture. In the crack
incubation stage, the material has no detectable cracks so that fatigue damage
cannot be quantified in this stage by existing nondestructive testing methods.
Unfortunately, in many cases of practical interest, the incubation stage may
take up as much as 80% of the total fatigue life of the material. It is
therefore critically important to develop new techniques that are capable of
quantifying the degree of fatigue damage in the crack incubation stage. To meet
such a challenge, this project is to develop a methodology based on nonlinear
ultrasound that is capable of nondestructively quantifying early fatigue damage
in metallic materials, thus predicting fatigue life. Specifically, the project
will (1) develop a physics-based model that relates quantitatively the amplitude
of the second order harmonic to the fatigue-induced cumulative plastic strain in
the material, and (2) develop innovative and robust measuring techniques to
accurately measure the second order harmonic generated by fatigue damage in the
crack incubation stage. &lt;br/&gt;The methodology developed in this project
will enable us to acquire and use information about civil and mechanical
structures to improve their safety, reliability, cost and
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;