* 0952624
* CAREER: Computational studies of the structure and biological activity of amyloid forming peptides
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2016
* Jie Zheng, University of Akron
* Continuing Grant
* Nora Savage
* 07/31/2016
* USD 422,460.00

0952624&lt;br/&gt;Zheng&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Amyloid peptides have a strong
membrane associated ability that can induce cytotoxicity to neurons by altering
membrane integrity and permeability. Accumulating evidences suggest that (i)
soluble, low molecular weight amyloid oligomers are major toxic species and (ii)
the cytotoxicity leading to the cell death could be mediated by direct
interactions between amyloid oligomers and cell membrane. However, the molecular
mechanism underlying peptide-mediated lysis, i.e. whether these peptides form
pores or induce membrane defects, remains unclear at the atomic level. The lack
of detailed oligomer structures and the involvement of complex natural cell
membrane have hampered efforts to establish a direct correlation between
oligomer structural transition from the aqueous to the membrane environment and
their biological activity in cell membranes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: The most important goal of this project is to establish the generality of
the mechanism of toxicity caused by amyloid peptides, with particular attention
to two types of amyloid peptides (Aâ from Alzheimer disease vs. K3 of
â2-microglobulin from hemodialysis) and two membrane interaction models (reside
on the membrane vs. embed in the membrane), using a four step computational
strategy coupled with different computational approaches. The specific aims of
this proposal are: (i) to predict amyloid oligomers using an in house peptide
packing program, (ii) to identify stable amyloid oligomers in solution, (iii) to
determine toxic membrane bound oligomers and their related mechanism of membrane
disruption, and (iv) to design mutants and ligands to disrupt the formation of
stable toxic oligomers. The proposed synergistic four step computational
strategy can be also applied to study other protein misfolding diseases such as
Parkinson's and Prion diseases. Funding of this proposal will allow PI's group
to extend current simulation works to capture amyloid oligomers using well
controlled self-assembled monolayers and to develop polymer based inhibitors to
prevent oligomer formation in experiments. In a broader context, knowing the
detailed structures of amyloid oligomers and understanding their molecular
behavior with lipids will (i) advance our fundamental understanding of amyloid
toxicity mechanism and (ii) rationally design drugs for inhibiting amyloid
formation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broad Impact: The PI is collaborating with
various experimental and theoretical groups in academia and national
laboratories on this anti amyloid project. Through this research, a molecular
level understanding of the relationship between structure, stability, and
biological activity of misfolded protein aggregates and cell membranes can be
obtained, which is vital in the development of therapeutic strategies against
neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's, Parkinson's, and diabetes II,
benefiting both scientific community and entire society. The project will also
educate graduate, undergraduate, and precollege students, particularly those
from underrepresented groups, to the concepts and simulation tools for studying
protein aggregates. The discoveries and methods from this proposal will be
incorporated into a new course of Molecular Modeling and Simulation of
Biomolecular Systems and an existing undergraduate thermodynamics course. The
knowledge derived from the proposal will be disseminated through publications,
presentations, workshops, courses, internships, and other outreach activities.