* 0952896
* CAREER: Computing for Advanced Identity Representation
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2010,01/31/2011
* D. Fox Harrell, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 01/31/2011
* USD 113,074.00

The Advanced Identity Representation (AIR) Project is a new transdisciplinary
approach to the problem of designing identity technologies to enable imaginative
self-representations and to counter social stigmas by implementing dynamic
social identity models grounded in computing and cognitive science. The AIR
Project seeks to: (1) Develop models of social computational identity (e.g.,
virtual characters, avatars, and social networking profiles) to enable user
representations that dynamically change in response to context and use, and can
minimize implicit stigma built into underlying infrastructure, (2) Implement an
identity modeling toolkit for constructing empowering, cross-application self-
representations (crucially, both back-end semantic data structures and graphical
representations), (3) Use the AIR toolkit to build integrated social networking
and narrative/game applications, and empirically assess the quality and nature
of user representations constructed in contrast with the quality and nature of
current systems.

The AIR Toolkit entails developing new components as follows: Front End/Graphics
(for avatars/characters): (1) Support for implementing modular graphical user
representations annotated with semantic identity metadata; (2) Functions for
transforming modular graphical user-representations dynamically; Back End
Semantics (for social networking profiles and simulating identity phenomena):
(3) Support for implementation of Identity Semantic Structures (knowledge bases
to represent aspects of identity meaning in the application); (4) Functions for
generating, transforming, and performing inferences on Identity Semantic
Structures; and (5) Customizable data fields for multimedia information
profiles.

Broadening diversity of participation is intrinsic to the AIR Project, both in
the educational components of this project, and in the technical research
itself. Humans have the ability to creatively present themselves in dynamic,
fluidly nuanced ways, seamlessly varying body language, discourse, fashion, and
more, with astounding sensitivity to context. They also adapt their self-
presentations in response to expected behaviors and appearances, as well as to
social prejudices, biases, and stigmas. Already, everyday users represent
themselves in digital media, yet enabling real world identity dynamics within
computational structure is a challenging problem that this research will
address. The AIR Project represents a human-centered ethos that extends to
education in the classroom, curriculum, mentoring, and outreach. Pilot
evaluation work will include participants from diverse demographics and
institutions. Theories will be developed in the lab and then deployed in
teaching. Technical results will provide a platform that will aid in mentoring
new graduate students. Most importantly, the AIR Project serves society-at-large
by developing technology to enable real-world empowerment and diversity.