* 0952064
* Mantle Anisotropic Structure and Dynamics Beneath the Western United States: Constraints from Shear-wave Splitting Analysis
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2013
* Stephen Gao, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 03/31/2013
* USD 185,885.00

One of the major discoveries in the geological science made over the past 50
years is that the crustal and the upper-most mantle of the Earth are divided
into tens of 'pieces', or tectonic plates. Movement of the plates against one
another is responsible for the formation of ocean basins, mountain ranges,
rifted valleys, volcanoes, and earthquakes. In spite of numerous studies,
however, the forces that are driving the movement of the plates remain
unresolved. The ongoing project is designed to provide critical information on
the driving mechanism of plate motion, by measuring the strength and direction
of the fabrics formed by the movement of the plates. A database of thousands of
shear-wave splitting parameters, which are measures of deformation in the
lithosphere and flow in the underlain asthenosphere, is being established as an
updated version of an existing shear-wave splitting database (NA-SWS-1.1 which
can be accessed at http://www.mst.edu/~liukh/SWS) that the PI established for
North America. The new database, like its first version, will be made public as
soon as possible over the course of the project. The researchers involved in the
current project are collecting geological and geophysical information to
interpret the shear-wave splitting observations. Major scientific issues to be
addressed by the proposed study include whether the western US is underlain
pervasively by two-layer anisotropy, why the Colorado Plateau and adjacent areas
show complex anisotropy, and what are the characteristics of mantle structure
and dynamics beneath the transitional zone between the tectonically active
western US and apparently inactive Great Plains.