* 0952345
* Collaborative Research: Superior Province Rifting Earthscope Experiment (SPREE)
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2016
* Donna Jurdy, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Margaret Benoit
* 07/31/2016
* USD 461,838.00

These investigators, along with graduate and undergraduate students, are
installing 83 broadband seismic stations from the EarthScope Flexible Array pool
to explore the deep structure of the Mid-Continent Rift System (MCRS). The MCRS
is the fossil remnant of an extensive rifting event that failed to split North
America during the Middle-Proterozoic era. This event left a large volume of
dense basalts and associated strong geophysical anomalies. By imaging the deep
structure beneath the rift, this seismic experiment investigates how such rifts
form and then die, rather than developing into oceanic spreading centers. The
seismic stations are located around, across, and along the failed rift, from the
Minnesota-Iowa border into Canada by Lake Superior. Imaging the deep seismic
structure of a central part of the MCRS will be undertaken with receiver
function migration, ambient noise analysis, teleseismic surface wave dispersion
analysis, regional S- and surface wave-train fitting, teleseismic arrival time
tomography, re-analysis of existing seismic reflection &amp; refraction data,
and SKS-splitting analysis. These analyses are combined into a multi-resolution,
three-dimensional image of the isotropic and anisotropic structure of the crust
and mantle beneath the MCRS and its surroundings. Results of these analyses will
illuminate the role of the mantle in the rifting process and its initiation and
cessation. The results will also enhance our understanding of mid-continental
earthquakes. This research project employs at least three graduate students,
also involves undergraduate students, and fosters collaboration between
researchers from Canada and the USA.