* 0952514
* CAREER:   Implicit Modeling of Nonpolar Solvation: Towards Reliable Atomistic Simulation of Intrinsically Disordered Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2010,02/29/2016
* Jianhan Chen, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 02/29/2016
* USD 672,426.00

Accurate atomistic simulation of large conformational changes of proteins
remains one of the greatest challenges in computational biology. Implicit
treatment of the solvent environment has recently emerged as the premier
alternative to traditional explicit solvent with a desired balance between
accuracy and speed. The objective of this CAREER project is to develop, optimize
and assess novel implicit treatments of nonpolar solvation to better balance
competing electrostatic and nonpolar interactions. The second objective is to
combine simulation and experiment to understand the structure, interaction and
control of intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs). IDPs are an important newly
recognized class of functional proteins that rely on a lack of stable structures
for function. The heterogeneous and dynamic nature of IDPs presents significant
challenges for detailed characterization with either experiment or simulation
alone. The PI will combine implicit solvent modeling, advanced sampling
techniques, and NMR experiment to address these challenges. A novel hypothesis
to be tested is that long- range electrostatic interactions can act concertedly
with fly-casting to facilitate efficient recognition of IDPs. New and
fundamental information will be obtained on the molecular principles of IDP
structure and interaction. A practical outcome of this project will be an
improved implicit solvent protein force field that can be broadly applied to
study protein structure, dynamics and interaction.

The new protein modeling tools will be directly incorporated into training and
educational activities including practical course units, training projects
involving undergraduate and high school students, and summer workshops for a
diverse selection of participants. Specifically, the PI will: 1) develop and
revamp undergraduate and graduate courses to increase interdisciplinary
awareness at an early stage of education and to provide basic training in
biomolecular simulation that is much needed at Kansas State University (KSU); 2)
continue to actively contribute to outreach programs at KSU including Women in
Engineering and Science Program, Developing Scholar Program and Bridges to the
Baccalaureate to increase the participation of women and other minorities in
science; 3) initiate annual two-day summer workshops to enhance the knowledge of
computational and structural biology for college and high school teachers.
Special emphasis will be placed on recruiting teachers from community colleges
in southern Kansas that have a large Hispanic student population and
traditionally show weakness in student preparation. These workshops will help
foster new collaborations in research and education with minority-severing
institutions.