* 0952718
* CAREER: Nonuniform-Magnetic-Field Control of Medical Microrobots
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2010,12/31/2016
* Jake Abbott, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Reid Simmons
* 12/31/2016
* USD 560,043.00

Magnetic microrobots that navigate the natural pathways of the body have the
potential to revolutionize minimally invasive medicine and biomedical research.
Current magnetic manipulation systems utilize massive magnets to produce a
uniform magnetic field over a relatively small area. Uniform magnetic fields are
used to simplify control, but this simplified control comes at a huge cost, and
it is difficult to scale up most laboratory field-generation systems to the size
required for clinical use. The use of nonuniform magnetic fields makes it
possible to place magnets nearer to the patient, which permits the use of
smaller, less-expensive magnets, while simultaneously improving actuatable
degrees of freedom and force levels that systems can render. The hypothesis
being tested is that using nonuniform magnetic fields to wirelessly control
medical microrobots results in superior systems?in terms of size, cost, and
performance?compared to using uniform fields. This research consists of two
thrusts: control of magnetically tipped continuum microrobots, which provide
distal dexterity in hard-to-reach locations, and control of fully untethered
magnetic helical microrobots, which swim and crawl through fluids, lumens, and
soft tissue using a method inspired by bacterial flagella. Understanding how to
use nonuniform magnetic fields for wireless control may be the key to
translating nearly every previously developed method for microrobot propulsion
into clinical practice. Magnetic microrobots may be the ideal platform from
which to deploy the numerous BioMEMS devices and magnetic sensors and actuators
that have been designed in recent years.