* 0952875
* CAREER: Probing the Limits of Affinity and Specificity in Apoptotic Protein Interactions
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2010,01/31/2016
* A James Link, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Rajakkannu Mutharasan
* 01/31/2016
* USD 412,283.00

0952875&lt;br/&gt;Link&lt;br/&gt;The research described in this proposal
promises to have far-reaching impacts in several fields including protein
engineering, protein-protein interactions, and organic chemistry. It is expected
that by engineering high affinity variants of the Bak peptide and testing their
function in vivo (Aim 1) they will gain insights into the role of affinity in
the determination of cell death. The isolation of specifically binding Bak
peptides (Aim 2) is an intellectually challenging protein engineering problem
and may provide insight into the differing functions of Bcl-xL and Bcl-2 in
vivo. Finally, the study on using click chemistry to stabilize helical peptides
is an innovative cross-disciplinary exercise that brings an organic chemistry
technique to bear on a problem in structural biology. The study of apoptotic
protein-protein interactions is important because of the impact of these
interactions on cell death, and more broadly on the treatment of disease. The
high affinity and high specificity Bak variants that will be isolated in Aims 1
and 2 of this proposal may have value as therapeutic molecules for the treatment
of cancer. The educational component of this proposal promises to raise public
awareness of biotechnology and bioengineering to large groups of students
starting at a young age and continuing through college. In addition several
innovations in undergraduate chemical engineering education to cater to and
enhance student interest in biotechnology and bioengineering are proposed.