* 0952264
* CAREER: Life history transitions among the Toba in northern Argentina
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2010,01/31/2015
* Claudia Valeggia, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 01/31/2015
* USD 515,921.00

Human life history is characterized by single births, large offspring, delayed
maturation, relatively short inter-birth intervals, and a long post-reproductive
lifespan. During human evolution, childhood and adolescence were added as new
life history phases to the characteristic life history of social mammals. The
transition from one life history phase to the next, e.g. from infancy to
childhood or from reproductive to post-reproductive life, represents a
physiological challenge that can be conceptualized as a trade-off. This project
evaluates the interaction among biocultural variables underlying key life
history transitions and identifies and describes the implicated trade-offs. The
project takes place in an indigenous community (the Toba) in the province of
Formosa, Argentina. Biological and ethnographic data are collected to evaluate
the somatic, developmental, cultural, and hormonal correlates of three life
history transitions: infancy-childhood, puberty, and menopause. Longitudinal
anthropometric and demographic data collected since 1997 are combined with new
quantitative and qualitative information to achieve the following objectives: 1)
extending the longitudinal database by collecting village-wide anthropometric
and life history event data annually for five years; 2) exploring the transition
from birth to complete weaning using data on children's growth trajectories,
development, nutrition, and health; 3) characterizing the pubertal transition in
girls by analyzing data on growth, maturation, health, and hormonal changes; and
4) characterizing the menopausal transition by analyzing data on anthropometric,
health, and hormonal changes at the end of women's reproductive life.
Ethnographic data will provide crucial information on the cultural meaning of
these transitions for the Toba and how this meaning interacts with biological
processes.

Results from this research will contribute directly to issues of evolutionary
development biology, the biodemography of aging, and clinical medicine, as it
relates specifically to patterns of child growth and women's aging. The project
also promotes education in science for U.S. and Argentine undergraduate and
graduate students, particularly women and minorities through direct
participation in research activities.