* 0952659
* CAREER:  Mapping sexual isolation and sexual selection in nature for a model vertebrate
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2010,05/31/2017
* Janette Boughman, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 05/31/2017
* USD 929,958.00

How does sexual selection act on genomes to create new species? Recent work
shows that sexual selection is a ubiquitous process creating new species, yet
almost nothing is known about how it creates reproductive isolation at the
genomic level. The proposed work focuses on mate choice in species of
stickleback fishes. Measures of sexual selection and sexual isolation from field
behavioral experiments will be combined with genetic mapping to identify the
parts of the genome that underlie male reproductive success and generate
isolation between species. Laboratory experiments will evaluate the role of
sensory bias for particular colors in generating sexual selection and
speciation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several of these fish species are endangered
due to hybridization following species introductions; this research addresses
urgent priorities for the stickleback recovery team and has broad implications
for understanding how environmental change threatens endangered species. The
educational plan addresses increasing public understanding of evolution through
public outreach and training for K-12 teachers. The researchers will develop
formal and informal educational materials based on real-world examples of
Evolution in Action to enhance public insight into how evolution generates new
species. The research will also train graduate and undergraduate students and a
postdoc in evolutionary genetics and behavioral research, and in public
outreach.