* 0952323
* Collaborative Research: Novel Bicarbonate Transporters in the Chlamydomonas CO2-Concentrating Mechanism
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2010,02/28/2014
* Martin Spalding, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michele McGuirl
* 02/28/2014
* USD 540,000.00

Intellectual Merit:

Algae play a major role in two areas of global concern, climate change and
renewable biofuels, are emerging as prime topics on the world stage. Algae of
all types account for approximately one-half of carbon dioxide (CO2) recycled
from the atmosphere and 'fixed' via photosynthesis into sugars, proteins, and
organic substances needed by all living organisms on earth, including humans.
Thus, algae are critical to maintaining low levels of atmospheric CO2, a potent
greenhouse gas. The fact that many fast growing, easy to culture algae also are
oil-rich has recently drawn the attention of scientists and engineers around the
globe to the possibility of using algae as an abundant, potentially inexpensive,
source of renewable and sustainable biofuels that will lessen the needs for
highly polluting, expensive and environmentally nonfriendly fossil fuels.
Research to be conducted collaboratively between the laboratories of Dr. Don
Weeks at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln and Dr. Martin Spalding at Iowa
State University is aimed at elucidating the mechanisms underlying the ability
of algae to serve as ?super sponges? of CO2 from the environment. The
Spalding/Weeks laboratories recently discovered two proteins, HLA3 and LCIA,
which provide the algal cell, Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, with the ability to
scavenge very low levels of inorganic carbon (CO2 and bicarbonate) from their
aquatic environment. Ongoing research sponsored by NSF will focus on the
molecular mechanisms by which these inorganic carbon transporters work, where in
the cell they are located and how these molecules interact with other components
of the cell to allow efficient CO2 uptake and utilization for photosynthesis. In
addition, the use of the newly discovered inorganic carbon transporters to
augment CO2 uptake and photosynthetic efficiency in algal cells involved in
biofuel production will be explored.

Broader Impacts:

This research will contribute significantly to the training of undergraduate and
graduate students and postdoctoral associates participating in the project at
both Iowa State University and at the University of Nebraska. It also will
contribute to broadening the education of high school and undergraduate students
and of high school biology teachers that will participate during summer
internships and camps. Because members of underrepresented groups (e.g., African
Americans, Hispanics, and Native Americans) are specifically recruited for the
high school and undergraduate internships, this research also will provide
opportunities for broadening educational experiences for these groups.
Postdoctoral associates and students trained in our projects will find ample
opportunities in academic and industrial positions focused on algal biology and
biotechnology and its application to critical societal needs.