* 0952736
* CAREER: Multiscale Structural and Dynamic Modeling of Kinesin-Microtubule Motor System
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2010,05/31/2017
* Wenjun Zheng, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 05/31/2017
* USD 610,702.00

Intellectual merit. Kinesins are a class of molecular motors that move along
microtubule tracks powered by the hydrolysis of adenosine triphosphate. They
have been extensively studied not only for their key roles in intracellular
transport, but also because they are the smallest known molecular motors. As
kinesin cycles through its biochemical states, it undergoes a series of
conformational transitions that lead to alternation between weak and strong
microtubule-binding affinity and directed movement along microtubule tracks. The
objective of this project is to investigate the key biochemical states and
conformational transitions of a minimal kinesin-microtubule complex by using
novel multiscale computer modeling techniques. This project will elucidate how
kinesin's biochemical activities are enabled by kinesin-microtubule binding and
intramolecular strain, and pinpoint the key amino acid residues that are
involved in kinesin function. In collaboration with four kinesin experts, the
modeling predictions will be tested by using state-of-the-art experimental
techniques (including electron microscopy, fluorescence polarization microscopy,
motility assay, mutagenesis, optical trap, and transient kinetic assay). This
project will offer the following scientific benefits: (1) It will facilitate the
mechanistic studies of other molecular motors related to kinesin (such as myosin
and dynein). (2) It will provide a powerful computational framework for
efficient and realistic modeling of conformational dynamics of a variety of
biomolecular systems. (3) It will promote fruitful interplay between
computational modeling and experimental investigation of biomolecular functions.

Broader impacts. This project will include the following educational and
outreach components: (1) cultivation of a new generation of computational
biophysicists through multidisciplinary trainings at the interface of physics,
biology and computing; (2) integration of this interdisciplinary research
project with the education of graduate and undergraduate students through the
development of an advanced course on "multiscale modeling of biomolecular
structures and dynamics", and the enhancement of introductory physics courses
with new materials relevant to students in biomedical majors; (3) outreach
programs for the training of high school students in computer programming and
its applications to biophysics; (4) dissemination of new computer modeling tools
and results to global researchers via a web server and an online database.