* 0952753
* CAREER: Bimetallic Pd and Ag Catalysts for Electrophilic Trifluoromethylation and Fluorination
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2010,02/29/2016
* Tobias Ritter, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 02/29/2016
* USD 550,000.00

With this CAREER Award, the Chemical Synthesis program is supporting the
research of Professor Tobias Ritter of Harvard University. Professor Ritter will
apply the knowledge of the structure and reactivity of binuclear transition
metal complexes to the development of catalytic carbon-fluorine bond formation.
First, an operationally simple synthetic methodology will be developed to effect
a silver-catalyzed fluorination of arylstannanes. Second, the silver-catalyzed
fluorination reaction will be extended to complex small molecules. Subsequently,
other oxidation reactions will be investigated that benefit from the redox
participation of two transition metals.

Professor Ritter's research could lead to efficient methods for the preparation
of fluorine containing organic molecules. These molecules are highly sought
after in the development of new pharmaceuticals and agrochemicals. In addition,
they are also needed in molecular imaging via positron-emission tomography.

Professor Ritter will also initiate educational projects that interweave
research and teaching. One project involves an outreach program targeting
schools that serve predominantly underrepresented groups. Professor Ritter will
travel to different schools as part of a panel of Harvard researchers that will
give a general introduction into different opportunities in Chemistry followed
by specific guidelines for applying to graduate schools. Another program will
focus on establishing early contact to local high school students in the Boston
area and educating them about chemistry and science in general.