* 0952766
* CAREER: Dynamics of Neural Circuits Governing Locomotory Decisions in C.elegans
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2016
* Sharad Ramanathan, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2016
* USD 799,998.00

In this project, using novel experimental technique and theoretical tools from
condensed matter physics, the PI will address the questions of how the dynamics
of neuronal circuits lead to behavior and how neuronal circuits make decisions.
The goal of the research is to study how information is coded in the dynamics of
a circuit of five pairs of interneurons and how this circuit controls the
locomotory behavior of the nematode C. elegans. The project will use confocal
fluorescence microscopy in conjunction with a novel system that the PI has
developed for an all-optical interrogation of neural circuits in vivo. The
results from quantitative experiments will be used to distinguish between models
of how information is coded in the activity of each of the ten neurons, measure
the bandwidth of the information channel from each of these neurons to the motor
output, model the dynamics of the interneuron circuit and determine if it can
make locomotory decisions and sustain spontaneous activity. The goal of the
educational part of the proposal is to improve the mathematical skills of
biology majoring students, inculcate quantitative thinking and promote research
at the interface of physics and biology. To do so, the PI will develop an
undergraduate course to teach mathematics to biologists, promote quantitative
research through undergraduate internships, graduate student and postdoctoral
fellow mentoring and help incorporate basic quantitative methods into biology
education at the high school level. The PI will devote resources to develop
material for both high school students and teachers to inform and excite them
about the opportunities in inter-disciplinary research and to help in teaching
mathematics using examples from biology.